==== GREENBOOK | 1988-09-20_FOMC19880920meeting.txt ====

Meeting of the  Federal Open Market  Committee

September  20,  1988

A meeting of the Federal  Open Market Committee  was  held in

the offices of the Board of Governors  of the Federal  Reserve  System in

Washington, D.C.,  on Tuesday, September  20,  1988,  at  9:00  a.m.

PRESENT:  Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Black
Forrestal
Heller
Hoskins
Johnson
Kelley
LaWare
Parry
Seger

Messrs.  Guffey,  Keehn, Melzer, and Morris, Alternate

Members of the  Federal  Open Market  Committee

Messrs.  Boehne,  Boykin, and Stern,  Presidents of  the

Federal  Reserve Banks  of  Philadelphia, Dallas,  and
Minneapolis,  respectively

Kohn,  Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Assistant  Secretary
Bradfield, General  Counsel
Prell,  Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Beebe,  Broaddus, Lindsey,

Siegman, Simpson,  and Ms. Tschinkel,
Associate  Economists

Mr. Sternlight, Manager  for  Domestic  Operations,

System Open Market Account

Mr. Cross, Manager for  Foreign Operations,

System Open Market Account

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of  Research and

Statistics,  Board of Governors

Mr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division of
International  Finance, Board of Governors

Mr. Stockton, Assistant Director, Division of  Research

and Statistics,  Board of  Governors

Mr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office of

Board Members, Board of Governors

Mr. Wajid, Assistant to Governor Heller, Office of

Board Members,  Board of Governors

Mr. Gillum, Economist,  Open Market Secretariat,  Division

of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors

Ms.  Low, Open Market Secretariat  Assistant, Division  of

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors

Messrs. Balbach,  Davis, Ms. Munnell, Messrs. Rolnick,

Rosenblum, and Scheld, Senior Vice  Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of St.  Louis,  Kansas  City,
Boston, Minneapolis,  Dallas, and Chicago,
respectively

Messrs. Akhtar, Meyer, and Sniderman, Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of New York,  Philadelphia,
and Cleveland, respectively

Mr. Vangel, Assistant Vice  President,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York

Transcript  of  Federal  Open Market  Committee Meeting
of  September  20,  1988

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Can we  have  a motion  to  approve  the

minutes  of  August  16th?

SPEAKER(?).  I'll  move  it.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Is  there  a second?

VICE  CHAIRMAN  CORRIGAN.  Second.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Without  objection, the  minutes  are

approved.  Similarly,  we  need  a motion to  accept  the  Report  of
Examination  of  the  System  Open Market  Account,  which was  distributed
in  late  August.

VICE  CHAIRMAN  CORRIGAN.  Move  it.

MR. KELLEY.  Second.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Without  objection.  Mr.  Cross,  will  you

bring us  up  to  date  on  operations  in  foreign  currency markets?

MR. CROSS.  [Statement--see  Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Any  questions  for Mr.  Cross?  If  not,  do

I have  a motion  to  approve  his  operations  during  the  month  since the
August  16th meeting?

SPEAKER(?).  So  moved.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Is  there  a second?

MR. JOHNSON.  Second.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Without  objection.  Mr.  Sternlight,
would you bring  us  up  to  date  on  domestic  open market  operations?

MR.  STERNLIGHT.  Yes,  thank you,  Mr.  Chairman.  [Statement--

see  Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Any  questions  for Mr.  Sternlight?  If
not,  I'll  entertain a motion  for  approval of  the  actions  of  the  Desk
since August  the  16th.

SPEAKER(?).  So  moved.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Without  objection.  Now we'll  go  to  the

economic  situation,  Mr.  Prell.

MR.  PRELL.  Thank  you.  [Statement--see  Appendix.]

MR.  PRELL.  I might  note that  this morning  the  Commerce
Department  released  revised  second-quarter GNP  figures  where the
second-quarter  growth  rate was  revised  down  from  3.3  to  3.0  percent.

9/20/88

That  would  still  leave,  after  the  drought  effects,  growth in  the
nonfarm  economy  in  excess  of  3-1/2  percent  in  the  first  half.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Thank you.  Questions  for  Mr.  Prell?

MR.  BLACK.  Mike,  could  you  give  us  some  of the  details  of

the  revision  in  GNP,  including the  deflator  and  the  fixed-weight
deflator.

MR.  PRELL.  Sure.  Both  the  deflator  and the  fixed-weight

price  index were  revised  upward.  The  fixed-weight  price  measure  was
raised from  a 4.7  percent  to  a 5.0  percent  increase.  The  deflator
largely  reflected  this;  it  was  up  from 5.1  to  5.5  percent.  It's  a
little  bit  of an  unfavorable mix  shift.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  What  was  the  composition  of the  change

in  the  fixed-weight?  What  additional  information did  they  have?

MR.  STOCKTON.  It  appears  that  most  of  the  upward  revision  of

the  fixed-weight  index  occurred in  the  service  category.  That's  an
area  where,  in  addition  to  using  some  information  from the  CPI,  they
also  bring to  bear  additional  information.  For  instance,  they use
wage  rates  of  hospital  workers to  help  estimate the  medical  care  costs
and  information they're  getting  from  the  banking  industry  to  estimate
banking margins.  So  they  do  get  some  additional  information  in
addition  to  the  CPI.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  That's  a  rather  large  increase  for  a

second  shot  at  the  fixed-weight.

MR. PRELL.  We  don't  have  the  full  detail  yet,  and we  haven't

had  a chance to  talk to  people  about  enough  of  the  details.  We're
flying  a bit  blind  at  this  point.

MR. BLACK.  Do  you know which  components  of GNP  were  revised

down?

MR. PRELL.  Yes.  There  were,  of  course,  small  revisions  in a

number  of  categories.  The  most  dramatic  revision  in  growth  rate  was
in  nonresidential  structures.  As  we  had  noted  in the  Greenbook, the
construction-put-in-place  showed  a  substantial revision  in  June.  So
this  isn't  a shock.  There was  a modest  upward  revision  in consumer
spending.  There was  a  small  change  in net  exports.  There  were  just
small  changes  sprinkled  around.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Mr.  Parry.

MR. PARRY.  I have  a  question about  your  forecast  of  net

exports.  There's  a very  substantial improvement  in  the  net  exports
over  the  period.  I get  the  impression  that  if  one  were  just  to  look
at  the  model  forecast,  assuming  a relatively moderate  decline  in  the
value  of  the  dollar, that  you wouldn't  get  that  significant  an
improvement.  Am I correct  in  assuming that  your  forecast  has  a  large
judgmental  component;  and  if  so,  is  that  sort  of  the  opposite  of what
we  saw  when the  dollar  was  going  down?  When  the  dollar  was  going
down,  the  model  predicted  a more  quick  response  in  terms  of  net
exports.  Now that  the  dollar has  gone  up,  are  we  assuming  that  has  a

9/20/88

delayed  response  as  well--in terms  of  slowing  the  improvement  in  net
exports?

MR. TRUMAN.  There's  only  two  things  to  say about  the  model

over  the  forecast  period.  One  is  that  in  talking  about  trade these
days,  we  have  found  that  you  have  to  sort  out  the  effects  of business
machinery  on both  the  import  and  export  sides.  On  the  export  side  in
the  model, we  may  be  slightly more--well,  actually,  not  even that  much
more--optimistic than  the  models  we use.  Taking  the  second  quarter  as
a base,  we  have  improvement  of $40  billion  in  the  volume  of  non-
agricultural,  non-business  machine  exports;  and  the  model  that  we  use
has  just  improvement of  $36  billion.  So,  the  order  of magnitude  is
quite  small  on  that  side  and  I think  it's  roughly  the  same  on  the  non-
petroleum volume.  It's  about  the  same  in  terms  of  the  changes  that we
produce.  The  other  thing that's  going  on  is  that,  starting  from the
second  quarter  of  1989,  you  get  improvement  on  the  volume  side  in  the
agricultural  exports--which  gives  you  a boost  in  this  period  when we
total  these figures.  That's  a special  factor.

MR.  PARRY.  So  you don't  know.

MR.  TRUMAN.  We  don't  have a  lot  of  optimism.  In  part,  the

optimism that  we  have  is  built  into  the  level  that  has  been  associated
with  the  first  half  of this  year.  We  have  to  acknowledge that  perhaps
the  first  half  has  performed better  than  the  models  would produce  for
the  year.  And  we  had  chosen  not to  take  [unintelligible].  In  that
sense  you have maybe  more  of  a catch  up  with  the  [unintelligible]  the
first  half  of  the  year.  To  say  one more  thing:  On  the  import  side,
we  have  increasingly  tried to  relate  business machinery, which  is
quantitatively  very  important  in  GNP  terms,  to  the  forecast  for
business  fixed  investment  in  general.  So  that's  driven  in  large  part
by  that  forecast  and  our  assessment  of  a large  portion  of  that
[unintelligible]  is  sort  of  how the  world markets  for  computers  seem
to  be  developing.  [unintelligible]

MR.  PARRY.  Yes,  thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Hoskins.

MR.  HOSKINS.  Let  me  just  follow up  on  Bob's  questions.

Since the  last  forecast  session, many  of  the major  economies  in the
world have  had  upward  revisions  in their  real  growth  forecast  for  the
rest  of  this  year  and  also  for  1989.  I'm wondering, how  do  you  factor
that  into  your  export  numbers?  Or did  you?

MR. TRUMAN.  Well,  we  didn't.  The  official  forecasts  have

been  revised  up;  they  lagged  way behind  the  data.  We  have  not  changed
our  forecast.  In  fact,  this  morning  the  Japanese  GNP  number  came  out
for  the  second  quarter,  which  shows  a decline  of  3.9  percent  at  an
annual  rate;  That  is  largely  statistical.  We  had  built  in  a decline
of  2 percent  at  an  annual  rate.  So  that's  a  [unintelligible].  Our
sense  is  that,  if  anything--although we  have  about  the  same  outlook
over  the  six  quarters  of  the  forecast--it  is  at  a materially  subdued
rate  relative  to  what  we've  seen.  And  that's  largely  because  we  have
a tighter  monetary  policy picture  for  most  of these  countries,  and
most  of  the  countries  are  moving in  the  direction  of  fiscal  restraint.
Germany, the  UK,  and  Japan  are  basically moving in  the  direction  of

9/20/88

fiscal  restraint  over the  forecast  period.  And  then  you have  that
tightening monetary  policy move.

MR.  HOSKINS.  Mike,  could you  refresh  me  on what  the  interest

rate  increase  is--the  assumption based  on your  forecast.

MR.  PRELL.  We  still  have the  federal  funds  rate  rising to
something  in the vicinity  of  9-1/2  percent  by  next  spring.  We  have
the  long  Treasury bond  rate  moving  a bit  above  10  percent.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Morris.

MR. MORRIS.  I have  a question  for Mr.  Truman.  I note that

you're  expecting  a better than  $25  billion  deterioration  in  net
investment  income  this  year  as  compared to  last  year.  But  you  show no
further  decline  in  1989.

MR. TRUMAN.  That's  largely  a function  of  the  capital  gains
effects.  You  had net  capital  gains  in  the current  accounts--I  don't
remember  these numbers,  but  on the  order  of  plus  $15  billion--last
year  because as  the dollar  declined  you  had  a favorable  valuation
effect  on  foreign  investments.  And  this  year,  with the  dollar
appreciation, we  are  estimating  a loss  of  $4 billion.  The  swing  is
essentially  $20  billion  in  capital  gains  for  this  year  versus  last
year.  And  that  swing  is  what  generates  the  investment  income.  Next
year,  with a much milder decline  of  the  dollar--although we  have  a
smaller  positive  factor--the  swing  is  not  nearly  so  important.  There
are  some  other  special  factors  this  year,  including the  fact  there  has
been  a tax  ruling  on  foreign  investments  in  the  United  States  that
requires  them to  report  them  as  income  deferred  tax liabilities.  That
will  generate  a reported increase  in  income  this  year,  and  that's
already  in  the  third  quarter.  And that  shows  up  as  an  outflow  last
year  and will  reverse  [unintelligible]  a bit  next  year  when you  get  a
positive  net effect.  And  that's the  main--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor  Seger.

MS.  SEGER.  I have basically  two  questions.  One  is,  if we

don't  get  the  dollar  coming  off from  existing  levels,  what  will  that
do  to  our  ability  to  produce  these  kinds  of  net  exports?

MR. TRUMAN.  You  said  there  were  two  questions.

MS.  SEGER.  Do you want  to  do  them one  at  a time  or  do you

want  to  do  several?

MR. TRUMAN.  The  decline  in  the  dollar  is  fairly  gradual  over

the  course  of  1989.  There's  very  little  effect--essentially  zero--in
terms  of the  forecast  of the  real  economy  coming  from that  factor.  It
will  begin to  have  an  effect  as  you go  off into  1990.  Even  the
forecast  of the  dollar  that we  have  using  conventional models.  You
can  have  essentially  an  improvement  in  the trade  balance  falling out
as  you  go  into  early  1990  if  you  just  stop  the  exchange  rate  where  it
would be  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  1989.  If  you  stopped  it  where  it  is
today,  we would  fall  out  earlier.  That's  something  in the  trade
balance  of around  $100  billion, depending  on what  happens  to  growth
differentials--if  things  turn  around  and  begin to  deteriorate,  or  if
our  growth is  approximately  the same  as  that  of the  rest  of the

9/20/88

industrial world.  But  the  forecast  itself is  not  heavily  dependent  in
this  time horizon  on  the course  of the  dollar.

MS.  SEGER.  Some  business  people  are  concerned about  their

ability  to  be  competitive  at  existing levels,  but  maybe  that's  not  a
predominant  view.  My  second  question is  one  involving  a statement  in
the  Greenbook that  staff  continue  to  believe  that  additional  pressure
in  financial markets  would  be  required to  slow the  expansion,  etc.
And  I guess  this  goes  to  Mike:  Do  you think you've  seen the  full
impact  of the tightening moves  that we've  had to  date?

MR.  PRELL.  No,  but  our  thought  is  that  even  after  we  have

absorbed  those, that  we  will  not  open  up  enough  slack,  so  to  speak,  or
reduce  the  pressures  on  the  economy  enough,  to  relieve  the
inflationary  pressures.  Therefore,  we  need  to  hold  growth below
potential  for  a period  of time.  What we  have  in  our  forecast  is  a
very  slight  shortfall  of  actual  growth  from potential  and  very  slight
easing  pressures  on  resources.  And we  think that,  given  the
underlying  tendencies  in  the  economy, we  are  going  to need  a bit more
restraint to  keep  things under  control  over  the  last  two  or  three
quarters  of  1989.

MS.  SEGER.  Thank you.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Governor  Angell.

MR. ANGELL.  Yes,  Mike,  I'd  like  a follow-up  question to

Governor  Seger's  questions.  Apparently,  you have  an  optimum growth
rate  in mind,  let's  say, over  the  next  four  quarters.  What  would  that
optimum  growth rate  be?

MR. PRELL.  I don't  know that we  have  an  optimum  growth  rate.

Basically, we  sense  that  the  pressures  on  resources  are  too  great  at
this  point  to  hold  the  inflation  rate  down  to  recent  levels.  And  we
feel  some  easing  [of  those pressures]  is  necessary.  We  believe  the
trend of  real  output  growth  is  somewhere  around  2-1/2  percent.
Therefore, we  believe that  we've  got  to  grow something  under that  in
order to  ease those  pressures.  We  recognize  the  uncertainties  about
where the  natural  rate  of unemployment  is,  if that's  the  operative
concept.  We  recognize  that the  composition  of activity  can  make a
difference  of--.  This  is  a rough  judgment,  ultimately;  I don't  want
to  get  too  precise  about  it,  but  basically we  think we  need  some
additional  restraint to  get  the  economy  below potential,  and we
believe  that  that  probably  is  necessary.

MR. ANGELL.  But,  Mike,  precision is  helpful  in

communication.  I can  take  the  time  to  pry the  number out  of you  by
asking you a series  of  questions,  but  it  would  save  some time  if you'd
simply tell  us.

MR.  PRELL.  I think  I cited  a number of  2-1/2  percent,

Governor Angell,  as  what  we  believed potential  GNP  growth is.
Therefore,  it  depends  how fast  you want  to  get  the  inflation  rate
down.  If--

MR. ANGELL.  What would  you think would  be the  optimum

adjustment  process?  I mean, do  you like  1-1/2  percent  better  than
2-1/2  percent?

9/20/88

MR.  PRELL.  Well,  you're  asking me  to  make  a policy  judgment,

a subjective  judgment  about  the  short-run  costs  and  benefits  of  a
policy  you have  in  mind.  What  we  have  tried to  make  is  a positive
statement:  That  if you want  to  avert  some  acceleration  of  inflation,
we  need  to  reduce  the  pressures  on  resources.  The  more  that  is  done,
the  greater  the  chances  are you will  see  no  acceleration at  all  in the
underlying  inflation  rate  next  year  and  that  you  will  be  able  to  tip
it  down  noticeably  in  1990.  I think  it  will  take more  than  we have
built  in here  to  make  a decided  move  towards  restoring a
disinflationary  trend by  1990.

MR.  ANGELL.  But,  Mike, there's  a policy  assumption  involved

in  the  interest  rate  forecast  and  I am  just  not  sure  whether you'd
prefer  1-1/2  percent  real  GNP  growth  or  a  1/2  percent  GNP  growth  or  a
negative  1/2  percent.  I'd  like  to  have  some  better  understanding  of
what  you think  it  would take  in  order  to  get  this  best  adjustment.

MR.  PRELL.  Again,  I don't  feel  I'm in  a position to  declare

the  best  adjustment.  I suspect,  going  around the  table here,  the
policymakers  would have  some  different  views  about  the  risks  they
would want  to take  and how  rapidly  they would want  to  move to  bring
down the  inflation  rate.  If  I were  to  aim at  the  kind  of  inflation
trajectory  that  you've  outlined--declines of  1 percent  a year  in  the
inflation rate--I  would  suggest that  you would  need  a  substantially
greater  tightening.  You would  need  to bring  growth  down  substantially
from what we  have  in  order  to  get  back  on that  track.  I don't  think
we're  on that  track  now, and  I think you'd need  substantially  greater
restraint--probably  close  to  or  even  into  recessionary  conditions--in
order  by  1990  to  have  an  inflation trend  down to  3 percent  at  an
annual  rate.

MR. ANGELL.  Thank you.  The  last  statement  finally  answered

the  question.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor  Johnson.

MR.  JOHNSON.  Mike,  what  did  you say  your  federal  funds  rate

forecast was?  Lee  asked,  and  I forgot.  Did  you  say  9-1/2  percent?

MR.  PRELL.  We're  looking for  around  9-1/2  percent.  Again,  I

don't want  to  be  too  precise.

MR.  JOHNSON.  Yes,  I know.

MR.  PRELL.  A  significant  increase  from where we  are.

MR.  JOHNSON.  And  you're  saying  about  a proportional move  up

in  the  long-run  rate  to  10  percent?

MR.  PRELL.  Just  about.

MR.  JOHNSON.  The  only  question  I have  about  that  is  that  we
haven't  seen  that  kind  of trend  with  our moves  on  the  funds  rate  this
year.  We've had  a 1-1/2  percentage  point  increase  in  the  funds  rate
and  actually a  sharp  flattening  of the  yield  curve.  Long  rates  stayed
about  where  they  were,  maybe  going up  some,  but  much  less  than
proportionally.  I think the  yield  curve has  flattened  from  about

9/20/88

2-1/2  percentage  points  down  to  less  than  1 percentage  point.  What  if
that  trend  continues?  What  would  the  forecast  say  if the  move  to
9-1/2  percent  on  the funds  rate  was  not  accompanied by  a proportional
move  in  the  long  bond?  What  kind  of differential  effects  would  that
have?

MR. PRELL.  As  you know,  some  of this  extreme  flattening  is  a

very  recent  phenomenon.  Earlier  in  the year,  you were  getting  more
substantial  increases  in  long  rates  as  short  rates  rose.  I guess
underlying this  projection,  at  least  in  my mind,  is  a sense  that the
markets  may  have  overdone  things  recently  and  that  part  of this may  be
the  lack  of  long  bond  authority  and  unusual  tightness  in the long  end
of the market  at  this  point.  But  we  do  have  what  would be  a fairly
substantial  rise  in  long  rates  along  with the  short  rate  increases  in
this  forecast,  partly  on  the  presumption  that  the  market  will  be
surprised  to  some  degree  by what  it  takes  in  order  to  damp
inflationary  pressures.  They  would  come  around more to  our view;
there's  a strict  internal  consistency  in  these forecasts.

MR. JOHNSON.  No,  that's  okay.

MR.  PRELL.  If the  rates  don't  rise--,  they might  not  rise

as  much  for  a number of  reasons.  One  could be  a change in
inflationary  expectations.  We  may have  had  some  of  that  recently,
where  the  apparent willingness  of the  Fed  to  move  earlier  than  some
would  have thought  may  have  helped to  hold  down  long-range  inflation
expectations.  To  the  extent  that  that's  going  on,  you're  perhaps  not
getting  a significant  real  rate  effect  and  thus  the  damping  influence
on  demand.  If  events  transpire  that  cause  real  rates  not  to  rise  as
much  as  we  would  anticipate  in this  forecast,  then  we might  have  a
different  outcome  where  investment  demand may be  sustained  a bit more
than  we have  [in  the  forecast].  There  are  innumerable  scenarios  that
one  could  draw where the  movement  in  long  rates  would  have  different
implications.

MR. JOHNSON.  I understand.  What  I'm  saying  is,  let's  assume
it's  inflationary  expectations  being  adjusted,  and  that's  why the  long
rates  haven't  gone  up.  Say  that  continues  to be  the  case,  but  the
funds  rate  goes  up  to  9-1/2  percent without  much  change  in  the  long
bond  due  to  improvement  in  inflationary  expectations  or  something like
that.  What would  be the  differential  impacts  of that?

MR. PRELL.  You're  saying that  if  the flattening  occurs

entirely because  of  reduced  inflation  expectations--

MR.  JOHNSON.  Okay,  entirely,  let's  say,  to debate  the

extreme.

MR.  PRELL.  It  would  depend  in  the  short  run  in  part  on

whether  it  was  a change  in  the  long-run  perception  of what
inflationary trends would  be  and  in  part  on  whether  it  was  a
reflection of  a sense  that  the  economy  might  be headed toward
recession.  Clearly,  in  other historical  experience we've  seen  a
marked flattening  of  the yield  curve  just before  downturns  in  the
economy.  If  we were  to  move  up  short  rates  as  much  as  we're  talking
about  here  and  the  long  rate  didn't  rise  at  all--that would  be  a very
steep  downward  slope.  And  I suspect  it  would  only occur  in

9/20/88

circumstances  where  people would  perceive that  there was  a significant
likelihood  of  a near-term weakening  in the  economy.

MR. JOHNSON.  Your view  is,  though,  that  these  expectations

will  be  revised  in  the  near  future  and  that  the  long  bond will  move
back up?

MR.  PRELL.  That's basically  what  we're  assuming.  It's  very

difficult  to  psych  out  the market  at  this  point.  One  can come  up  with
a number of  alternative hypotheses  about  why the  market has  behaved  in
just  the way it  has  recently--in  interpreting recent  news  and  so  on.
Another  factor  is  the  dollar  situation,  in terms  of  our  longer-run
external  position and  what  we  think ultimately we  need to  correct
that.  That's  probably a factor  that's  going  to  be  less  favorable  as
we move  along  in the  projection period.  And,  as  I suggested, we're
presuming that  the  market will  perceive that  a greater  degree  of
restraint  is  necessary  to  rein  in  inflationary pressures  than  perhaps
it  currently  is.  They  will  come  around to  [unintelligible].

MR. JOHNSON.  And if  that's the  case,  then  the  long  bond

would  be  surprised  into  further  upward moves.

MR.  PRELL.  Right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Boehne.

MR.  BOEHNE.  Mike,  you've made  I think  a rather  persuasive

case  both in  your written  comments  and your  oral  comments this  morning
that  we  will  need  some  additional  restraint  to  hold  aggregate  demand
to  the  level  that's more  consistent with  reducing  inflationary
pressures.  I wonder  if  I could  get  you to  put  yourself  on the  other
side  of  that  question.  I wonder  if you could help  a slow mind  this
morning and  articulate  the  case  that maybe  we won't  need  the  kind  of
restraint  that  you're talking  about  to  get  the job  done.  In  other
words,  I wonder  if you  could  admit to  where  the  cracks  might be  in
your  argument  and  the  things  that might  happen that  would  say that
while we  might  need  a touch more  restraint,  maybe we've  done  much of
the  job  that  we need  to  do.

MR.  PRELL.  I hope  I wasn't  too  persuasive  because  there  is  a

range  of uncertainty  about  our  forecast.  For  example,  one  of those
areas  of uncertainty  obviously  is  the  sensitivity  of  investment  demand
to  what has  already  occurred  in  interest  rate movements  and  the
dollar.  There's  been  some  perception  already that  the  future
competitiveness  of  some U.S.  industry will  be  less  than  people  thought
previously;  perhaps  the momentum  of investment might  not  be  as  strong
as  we  have  in  this  forecast.  Fiscal  policy we  have  interpreted  as
providing  a degree  of  restraint  on  aggregate  demand.  That  is  always
difficult to  interpret  and  it's  conceivable that  our  underlying
policy-action  assumptions  could  turn  out  to  be  wrong.  And we  could
have  a greater  degree  of  restraint  being  applied,  damping activity
more  than  [unintelligible].  Consumer  spending  has  fairly consistently
surprised  us  in  this  expansion by  its  strength,  and  as  this  has
occurred,  consumer  debt  levels have  risen.  We've  outlined  for  you
what  we  think the  cash  flow consequences  are  of  rising  rates  on
households.  We  feel  this  isn't  a big  problem, but  again one  would
have  to  admit  the  possibilty  of  some  surprise there.  The  oil  price
situation is  something  imponderable  and  that's  a very difficult

9/20/88

situation to  sort  out,  because  it  has  underlying aggregate  demand
effects  if we were  to  get  a change in  the  price  from  our  assumption.
I feel  reasonably  comfortable with the  inventory  situation, but  there
too,  there  may be  some  pockets  in  the  retail  level  that  could  exert
more  of  a drag  on  output  in  coming months  than we  have  [assumed].  But
I don't  see  that  as  a very  great  problem.  So,  I think there  are  any
number  of areas  across  the  economy where  conceivably things  might turn
out  weaker  than we  have.

MR. BOEHNE.  Thank you.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY.  Mike,  if you would  for  just  a second  speculate

on  the  other  side  of the  suggested  policy  recommendation  for  taking
federal  funds  up  to  9-1/2  and  10  percent--the  possibility  that  that
might induce  a recession  somewhere  along  the  line.  What  would  be the
implications  of  a recession  let's  say  in  late  1989  or  early  1990  if
you began to  see  the  federal  deficit  burgeoning  and  so  forth?  What
would be  the  broad  brush  of a  scenario  of  a recession,  given the
larger  picture  of where we  are  on  the  deficit  and  the  new  president  in
place  trying  to  get  new policies  established  and  so  forth?

MR.  PRELL.  Well,  I'm  not  sure  that  that  recession would

appear  soon  enough  to  greatly  affect  the  discussions  about  the  1990
budget.  But  it's  conceivable that,  in  your  hypothesis,  the  picture
could  change  and  then  one  has  to  make  a political  judgment.  There  are
many  people,  obviously, who  would  question the  ability  of the  Congress
to  institute  significant  further  deficit  reduction measures  if  the
economy  appeared  to  be  weakening.  And  the  actual budget  deficit  in
those circumstances  could  become  very  large  in  1990,  which  in  effect
would exacerbate  the  long-run  problem by  adding further  to  the  level
of  debt.  So,  it's  a pretty  dicey  situation.  I think  it's  clear  that
they will  have  an  easier time  putting  together  a budgetary  package
that  makes  substantial  ongoing  progress  in  reducing the  deficit  in  an
environment  where the  economic  outlook appears  to  be  reasonably
satisfactory.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Stern.

MR.  STERN.  Mike,  a few minutes  ago  you  alluded  to
inventories  as  a possibility  of adding  a  little  bit  to  the  downside.
But  I have  the  impression  that  your  inventory  path  is  really pretty
conservative.  Is  that  a fair  characterization?

MR. PRELL.  Basically, if we  strip  away  farm and  strip  away

autos,  which  are  in  good  shape now--though  there may  be  some
accumulation  over  the  remainder  of  the  year.  But  I think that's  a
sort  of  a separable  situation.  Outside  of  that  area,  we're  looking
for  a bit  faster  accumulation than we  saw  in  the  spring  over the
remainder  of this  year  and  then  some  slight  tapering  off.  It's  not  a
dynamic  factor  in  this  projection.  And  as  the  Chairman  has  pointed
out,  in  an  environment  where business  activity  is  fairly  robust  and
capacity is  getting  tighter  and  prices  are  rising fairly  rapidly  for
materials  and  so  on,  it's  not  inconceivable  that  at  some  point
manufacturers will  become more  aggressive than  we've  put  into  this
forecast.  We have  manufacturers  increasing  their inventories  over  the
coming months;  but  there could  be  an  outside  risk,  as  I noted  in  my

9/20/88

-10-

comments,  that  if things  got  out  of hand  on  that  score  it  could add
perhaps  to  greater  near-term  strength  in  the  economy.  But  it  would
set  us  up  perhaps  for  more  of  a shakeout  later  on  in  1989.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE.  Mike,  I'm having  difficulty understanding  the

consistency  between  your  interest  rate  forecast  and  the  forecast  for
further  downward pressure  on  the  dollar.  Help me  with  that  one.

MR.  TRUMAN.  Maybe  I ought to  do  that.  The  forecast  for  the
dollar  is  largely  driven by  the  view that  ultimately you  have  to  have
substantially  smaller  trade and  current  account  deficits  than we  have
now.  The  exchange  rate  adjustment  will  be  part  of what  brings  that
about.  We  don't  have  any  strong view  about  when  we're  going  to  get
it,  but  it  would  be  over  the  next  five  years,  say.  So  in building  the
forecast  we  have  tended  to  put  in  a moderate  decline  in  the  dollar  as
a background  factor,  which  does  not  have  a big  role  in  the  short  run
but  it  is  the  direction  of  where  we think the  pressure  is  going to  be,
as  I said  in my  answer to  the  question  from Governor  Seger.  In
producing the  forecast  we  tried  to,  in  some  sense,  trim that  longer-
term view by what  our  assumptions  about monetary  policy  here  and
others  [unintelligible].  Over  the  past  several  meetings  of the
Committee we  have  tended  to  adjust  up  our  forecast  of the  dollar;  we
have  less  of  a decline  in  the  dollar  cumulatively over  the  period  for
basically two  reasons.  One  is  that the  trade  performance  has  been
better  than  we--and  I think a  lot  of  people--expected.  Therefore,  in
some  sense,  the  amount  of  adjustment  you need  in  this  process  is  less.
So  you  don't  have  to  build  much  into  the  medium-term  framework.  We
have moved  the  dollar  up because  the  presumed  stance  of monetary
policy  has  been  somewhat tighter.  But  over  this  immediate  horizon,  we
have  the  dollar  flat,  essentially,  over  the  balance  of this  year.
That  is  associated  with a view that  there's  a perception  of  policy  as
being tighter.  But  as  we  move  into  1989,  there  inevitably  will be
some  slowing  in  the  pace  of current  account  adjustments  from what
we've had  over  the  past  three or  four  quarters,  and we  would  expect  to
get  some  reemerging pressures  on  the  dollar  despite  the  increase  in
the  interest  rates  that  we  have had.  We  have  tried  in  a very  crude
way  to  talk  about  what  it  would take  to  stabilize  the  dollar,  and  it
is  a difficult  question  to  answer  convincingly--as  I explained  in  the
first  part  of my answer--if  you view  the  dollar's  course  as  being
driven  by medium-term factors.  But  the  answer  comes  out  somewhat  like
the  answer to  Governor Angell's  question:  That  you  need more  than
monetary  restraint  in  the  short  run  [unintelligible]  the  dollar.

MR. LAWARE.  Thank you.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Any  further  questions  for Mr.  Prell?  If
not,  we've  come  to  the  general  discussion where  the  individual members
will  give  us  definitive forecasts  of  the  outlook.

MR. BOYKIN.  Mr.  Chairman,  I'll  lead  off.  As  far  as  the

Eleventh District  economy  is  concerned,  we're  looking  at  what's
happening  or  might  happen  in  energy--which  over  the  past  year  or  so  is
showing  a little  bit  of  improvement  and turning  into more  of  a neutral
factor  for  us.  As  far  as  the  outlook  for  the  economy  generally, the
overall  mood  of the  people that  we've  talked  to  very  recently has  been

9/20/88

-11-

a little more  positive,  although  it's  difficult  for them--or  for  us--
to  point  to  specifics  that  show that  something's  happening.

If  we  do  get  a sustained  price  for  oil  in  the  $14  range,  that

would probably  indicate  that we  have  no  growth  at  all  in  our  District
economy,  whereas  we  currently have  a forecast  of  sluggish  growth  of
something  around  1 percent  or  less  for  next  year.  We  are  getting
reports  of  substantial  capital  investments  that  are  planned  or  that
are  under way  in  petrochemicals,  particularly in  Houston--the  upper
Gulf  Coast  area.  And  they  are,  of  course,  benefiting  from the  lower
price  of  oil.

We  were  fortunate  over  the last  several  days  to  have  missed

some  of  the  rather  devastating  effects  of  Hurricane Gilbert.  Although
there were  tornadoes  and  there was  some  damage,  it  wasn't  anything
close  to what  had been  anticipated.  The  real  estate  area  continues,
of course,  to  be  the  biggest  drag that  we have.  And  I do  have  a real-
-as  opposed  to  an  anecdotal--comment  on  that.  About  five  years  ago,  we
had  our  bank property  appraised  in  connection with  a study  that we
were  doing.  The  appraiser  came  up  with  a value  in  excess  of  $30
million,  which  a couple  of  our  directors--particularly  our  then-
Chairman who was  in the  real  estate  business--felt  was  low.  We've
just  had  our property  reappraised  in  connection with  another  study
we're  doing.  The  same  professional  independent  appraiser  group  did  it
this  time.  They're  telling us  that  our  property now is  worth  between
$6-1/2  and  $8-1/2  million.  You  know, that's  something  else.

MR. BLACK.  What  did  you do  to  it?  Did  you take  care  of  that

place?

MR. ANGELL.  Bob,  it  sounds  like  quite  a bargain,  doesn't  it?

MR. BOYKIN.  Well,  there  are  special  factors.  The  key--and

this  is  not  the  place  to  make  this  statement--but  I'll  make  it  anyway.
What  they're  saying  is  our  building  is  totally  used  up  in  terms  of  its
usefulness.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Over the  last  five  years!

MR. BOYKIN.  But  I thought  that  was  very, very  significant.
Granted,  we have  special  circumstances;  nevertheless  I have  a better
appreciation of  what  the  commercial banks  have been  having to  deal
with  as  they  get  new appraisals  and  reappraisals.  And  I don't  believe
anybody knows  what  real  estate  is  worth  any  more.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Well,  conversion  in  terms  of  barrels  of

oil  isn't  that  bad.

MR.  BOYKIN.  That's  all  I have.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Forrestal.

MR.  FORRESTAL.  Thank  you, Mr.  Chairman.  I'm  sorry  I don't

have  a real  estate  study to  talk about  this morning.  Let  me turn
first  to the  national  economy.  I have  very  little  problem with the
Board  staff's  Greenbook  forecast;  in  fact,  if we  were  to  build  in
roughly  the  same  kind  of  restraint  that's  in  the  Greenbook  we'd  be
very  close  indeed.  I think all  forecasts  these  days  are  a little  bit

9/20/88

-12-

cloudier than usual  because  of the  statistical  difficulties with the
drought,  so  I think we  need to  be  a little  careful  about  forecasts
generally.

I'm very happy to  see  the  recent  deceleration,  although I
wouldn't  want  to  put  a lot  of  credence  in a couple  of months'  data.
But  I think the thing  the markets  perhaps  are not  focusing  on  is  that
we  are  still  growing beyond  our  potential.  And  that  is  really what's
guiding my thinking  and my  judgment  at  the  present  time.  In  response
to  Governor  Johnson, there was  a discussion  about  the  yield  on  the
30-year bond  and  long-term  rates  generally,  and  it  seems  to  me  that
the  market may very well  be  underestimating the  strength  of  the
economy  and  thus  reducing its  inflationary  expectations.  I think
there  is  generally a tendency  among market  participants  and  business
people that  I talk with to  feel  that  a slowing  economy  is  a slow
economy.  I think we've  gotten  used to  large  numbers  over the  past
several  quarters  and the  focus  is  not  really  on the  potential  of the
economy.  So,  I not  only  agree with the  forecast,  Mr.  Chairman,  but  I
agree with the  analysis  of the  staff  that  unless  the economy  slows
appreciably, we  will  have  to  restrain  growth  further--take  additional
[steps  of]  monetary  restraint--by  the  end  of the  year.

I don't  think  I need  say very much  about  the  District because

not  a great  deal has  changed  since  the  last  meeting.  Growth in  the
Sixth District  remains  fairly  spotty.  The manufacturing tradeable
goods  sector is  doing  quite well,  but  the  service  sector--particularly
in  urban  areas--is  not  doing well  and  is  really  quite  sluggish.
Construction is  off.  We  used  to  report  pretty  regularly, as  I said
last  month,  that  almost  every  state with  the  exception of  Louisiana
was  doing better than the  national  average.  That  has  really turned
around.  I think  Florida  now would  be  the  only  state  that  I would
characterize  as  doing better  than  the  national  average.  The
unemployment  rate  in  all  of  our  states  except  Florida  is  now above
those in  the rest  of  the country.  The  good  news  part  of that,  I
suppose,  is  that  there's  very  little  pressure  on wages  in  this  kind  of
a market.  I probed  a lot  for  that  among  our  directors  and  other
business  people;  and while  you hear  a little  bit  of  concern  about
entry-level  people  and  trying to  attract  them with  higher wages,
basically we're  not  seeing any  wage  pressure  at  all.  The  same  thing
is  true  generally of  prices.  The  price  increases, where  they have
occurred,  have  been  kind  of  spotty  and  in  industries  that  are  really
going  flat  out--paperboard,  paper,  and  so  on.

The  good  news  in  all  of this  is  that Louisiana  and

Mississippi  are  doing better  than  they were.  That's  basically  because
of  some  chemical  production that  is  now  occurring in  Louisiana  as  well
as  the  pickup  in  ship  building.  Although they  are  doing better, we
have to  remember that  they're  coming  from a very  low base  and  they
would  still  have  to  be  characterized,  I think, as  negative  growth
areas.  On  the  agricultural  side,  higher  prices  for  some  agricultural
commodities  are  going  to  improve  farm incomes  since  the  crop yields
were  not  as  affected  in the  southeast  as  they were  in  other  areas  of
the  country.  That's  all  I have, Mr.  Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Keehn.

MR. KEEHN.  With  regard  to  the  national  economy--with  some

modest  adjustments  for  the  fourth  quarter  of  this year  and the  first

9/20/88

-13-

quarter  of  next  year due  mainly to  agriculture--our  outlook  is  quite
consistent  with  the  staff  forecast  in  the  Greenbook.  With  regard  to
the  District,  there's  really very  little that's  new to  report.  With
the  obvious  exception of  agriculture,  I  think the  economy  continues  to
be  really very  strong.  But  there  are  just  a few signs  of moderation--
nothing  pronounced.  I think  there are  somewhat  slower  growth  rates  in
a couple  of  parts  of our  economy.  Retail  sales,  for  example,  were
much weaker  in  the  summer months  than  earlier  in  the  spring.  And
construction activity  is  down  a bit.  Another  example  is  paperboard,
which  of course  has  been  so  very  strong;  after  a string  of  almost  two
years  of record  monthly  shipments,  last  month's  shipments were  down
just  a bit  there.

It's  too  early  to  tell  if these  early  signs  are  indicative  of
a trend  and  if  they're  going  to  be  sustained.  It's  entirely  possible,
I think, that the  trends--particularly  in some  of the  areas  that  I've
mentioned--are  the  result  of the  exceptionally  hot  weather that  we've
had.  Since the  turn  of  the weather,  I'm told  by  retailers  that  the
flow  of  traffic  in  their  stores  is  back  up  to more  normal  levels.  So
some  of these  things may have  been  very weather  related.

Perhaps  the  lack  of  any  significant  changes  could  be  a good

thing.  Anecdotally, at  least,  I don't  sense  a continuation of  the
upward  pressures  on  prices  that were  so  very  evident  earlier  this
year.  I still  think that  the  risks  are  very much on  the  side  of
greater inflation.  But  I am  beginning to hear  some  comments  about the
leveling  of prices  for  a variety  of materials--or  certainly that more
moderate  increases  are  taking place  as  opposed  to  the big numbers  that
we had  earlier  this year.  And  at  least  one major  manufacturer that  I
talked  to  the  other day  is  forecasting that  raw  material  purchases
next  year  will  be  level with  1988--really no  increase at  all.

Surprisingly,  consistent with  what  Bob  Forrestal  has  just

said,  I don't  sense  any  deterioration  on  the  wage  front.  Wage  rates
do  not  at  this  point  seem  to  be accelerating.  Also,  there  doesn't
seem to  be  a hardening  of  attitudes  on  the  part  of  labor.  I'm told
that  the  attitude  of  organized  labor  continues  to  be very
constructive,  given the  continued  progress  on work-rule  changes.  So  I
think the news  there  continues  to  be  pretty  good.  Companies  are  not
losing  ground  on unit  labor  costs  but,  as  a caveat  on  that,  there are
two major  contracts  out there  that  are  currently  reaching the  final
stages  of  negotiations.  We'll  just have  to  wait  to  see  how those  work
out.  Again,  I think it's  too  early to  tell whether  these  early signs
of moderation will  be  sustained.  But  certainly they  are  favorable,
and  for  now  it  just  could  be  the  case  that  things  are  falling  into
line  pretty  well.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Parry.

MR.  PARRY.  Mr.  Chairman,  the  Twelfth District  economy

appears  to  be  growing  at  a relatively brisk  pace,  and  I'd  say that  the
outlook  for  the  District  generally is  favorable.  A very  strong order
book  for aircraft  should assure  strength  in  the  Seattle  area  for  a
couple  of years.  That  also  boosts  prospects  in  the  aircraft  industry
in  southern California.  Prospects  for  the  growth of  exports  are
reasonably bright  for  such things  as  agricultural  products,  specialty
products,  and  also  transportation and  electronic  equipment.
Agriculture  in  the  west  appears  as  though it  may  actually be

9/20/88

-14-

benefiting  somewhat  from the  drought  as  a  result  of  the  higher  prices
that  more than offset  the  effects  of  very mild  reductions  in yields  in
the  west.  At  this  time,  signs  of  weakness  in the  District  are  really
quite  spotty.  And  they're  only  concentrated  in  a few states--Alaska,
Arizona,  and Utah--and  a very  few  industries  as  well.  Residential
construction  is  weak.  Dairy  and  livestock  are  rather weak as  a  result
of  the  fact  that  they're  paying higher  costs  for  feed.  And  aluminum
and  forest  products  are  weak due  to  capacity  constraints.  It's  rather
interesting that  even  where you have  weakness,  it's  in  areas  that  are
pretty  much up  against  capacity  constraints:  in  residential
construction,  for  example,  that's  solely  a result  of  extremely  strong
export  demands  for  lumber.  Weakness  may  intensify  in  the  District  if
the  very  recent  sharp  slowing  in  retail  advertising  in  California--
which  looks  quite  pervasive--is  a precursor  of  softer  retail  sales.

If  I may  turn to  the  national  outlook,  it's  my view that  it's
premature  to  conclude  that  the  recent  softening  of  economic  statistics
is  indicative  of a trend  that  will  persist  through  1989.  Rather,  it
seems more  likely to  me that  if  interest  rates  were  to  remain  at
present  levels,  growth  of  the  nonfarm  economy  would  probably exceed
the  growth  of  potential  over  the  entire  forecast  period.  Thus,
prospects  for  the  underlying rate  of  inflation still  are  a concern,
though  obviously we're  going  to  see  actual  inflation  rates  buffeted by
many  special  factors.  If  this  expectation  in our  forecast  is  correct,
then  it  seems  to  me  that  the  process  of tightening probably  is  not
over  and  will  have  to  be  resumed  sometime  soon.  Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Vice  Chairman.

VICE  CHAIRMAN  CORRIGAN.  Mr.  Chairman,  our  forecast  at  the
Bank  is  one  that  I think  is  close  to  the  other  side  of Mike's  coin.
We  do  not have  a significant  increase  in  interest  rates  built  into  our
forecast;  we  have  a bit  of  an  upward  drift.  But  for  that  reason  and
for  others,  it's  a  forecast that  ends  up,  on  balance, with  a
phenomenal  GNP  growth  rate--a percentage  point  and  a half  or  so  above
what's  in  the  Greenbook.  And  because  of where we  are  relative  to
potential,  a good  part  of  that  excess  shows  through  in  terms  of higher
inflation.  Indeed,  by the  end  of  the  forecast  period,  our  forecast
would have  a very  significantly  higher  inflation  rate  than what's  in
the  Greenbook.

That  is  not  a testimony  to  any  one  forecast,  but  I think  it's
very  vivid  testimony to  how much  of a razor's  edge  we  are  on,  in terms
of  what  does  or  does  not  happen  in the  economy.  I don't  have  a  great
deal  of conviction  per  se  about  any  one  forecast,  but  I must  say my
instincts  continue  to  be very  similar  to Bob  Parry's.  I'll  just
briefly  share  [some  comments]  with  the  Committee,  Mr.  Chairman,  partly
because  this  is  such  a very difficult  period  to  read.

In  the  first  two  weeks  of  September,  we  talked  to  a couple  of

dozen firms  to  try  to  get  a more  systematic  anecdotal  appreciation of
what's  going  on.  Now, a systematic  approach  to  anecdotal  reports  is
in  no way  a  survey  for  purposes  of OMB  or  anybody  else.

MS.  SEGER.  Can't  be  or  you'd  get  in trouble.

VICE  CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.  With  that  in mind,  I'd  like  to  touch

on  just  a couple  of  the  highlights.  The  firms  that we  talked  to

9/20/88

-15-

included  about  a dozen or  so  very  prominent  manufacturing  firms  with
headquarters  in  the  Second  District,  some  smaller manufacturing  firms,
and  some  very  prominent  retail  firms.  As  of  right  now, what  comes
through  is  that  the  export  sector  is  literally  still booming.  Export
sales  were  very  strong indeed,  with  increases  in  volume  terms
typically well  into  double  digits.  There was  only  one  case  where  that
was  not  true,  and  that  particular  firm  didn't  seem very  concerned
about  it  because  they have  a very  large  backlog  of  orders--orders  that
haven't  even  formally been  booked  yet  for  jet  engines  that  are
ultimately  destined  for  overseas  markets.

On  the  question of the  current  level  of the  dollar,  none  of

the  firms  expressed  any  concern  about  the  current  level.  Indeed,  the
impression  was  that  even at  current  exchange  rates,  U.S.  firms  were
quite  competitive except  in  apparel  and  clothing  categories.  There
were  two  small  firms  that  did  say  that  a yen/dollar  of  140  was  kind  of
a threshhold  for  them.  But  generally  speaking,  there  was  no  concern
expressed  in terms  of  current  exchange  rates  and  the  ability  of this
strong  export  performance to  continue.  But  perhaps  even more
interesting is  that  we  see  here  for  the  first  time,  in  anecdotal
terms,  a number  of  clear  cases  of  capital  goods  shifting  away  from
foreign  suppliers  to  U.S.  suppliers.  I don't  want  to  suggest  that
that  was  the  universal  pattern, but  of the  major  firms,  about  an  equal
number  reported  that  positive  shifting was  taking  place.  None  said  it
was  getting worse,  with the  exception  of  one  company  that  was  doing
more  sourcing  from Mexico--which  in  some  ways  is  a  good  thing,  of
course.  In  addition,  quite  apart  from  capital  goods,  there  were  also
a number  of  firms--and  we  haven't  heard  this  for  a long  time  either--
that  were  also  reporting  gains  in  domestic market  shares  in  general,
relative  to  imports.  In  other  words,  they  are  actually now  displacing
imports  in  the  domestic marketplace.  Again,  the  major  exception  to
that  is  all  of  the  clothing  and textile  firms--apparel-related things.
That  area  is  still  lousy throughout,  both  at  production  and  retail
levels.  But  in  other  areas  there  are  some  distinct  changes.  In  terms
of domestic  sales  performance,  with  only  one  or  two  exceptions,  these
firms  reported  current  trends  I think  that  were  really  quite  strong,
often  in  double  digits.

On the  output,  wage,  and  capacity  side--again, none  of  this

is  very  scientific  and  I don't  want to  put  the  wrong  cast  on  it.  But
it's  really  interesting because  about half  of the  big  firms--and these
are  the  manufacturers,  of course--reported  no  capacity  constraints  to
speak  of  or  nothing  they  couldn't  cope  with.  Whereas  another  half
reported  some  problems--and  these  were  typically  in  the  areas  that  we
would expect.  When  it  got  to  the  particular  question  of input
problems,  in  terms  of  price,  delivery  delays,  etc.,  again  it  was  about
half-and-half.  About  half  did  report  that  they  were  having  input
problems  defined  either  as  rapidly  rising  prices  or  delivery  lags.
Those  patterns  were  clear  in  steel,  plastics,  computer  chips,
aluminum, paper,  and  surprisingly,  in  some  Japanese  component  parts.
But  the  other  side  of  it  is  that  about  half of them didn't  report
particular  problems  of  that  nature.

On  the  labor  question--and  this  is  very  interesting--the
responses  broke almost  straight  down  the  line  based  on  size.  The
large  firms  did  not  report  any  particular  problems  in  terms  of  labor
shortages;  the  small  firms  did.  The  same  was  more  or  less  true  in
terms  of wages  in  general.  The  overall  impression  that  I get,  not

9/20/88

-16-

just  from this  but  from listening to  our  directors  and  others,  is  that
there  is  some  upward movement  on  the  wage  side  but  it's  not
significant  yet.  That's defined  in terms  of maybe  a 1/2  percentage
point  type  of thing.  But  the  conclusion  that  I draw from all  this
impressionistic  data  is  consistent  or  compatible  at  least  with my  own
thoughts  and  instincts--that  the  risks  are  rather  asymmetric  in  the
direction of  greater  pressures  on  domestic  output  and  resources,  at
least  over the  near term.  On the  other  hand,  it may  also be
consistent with  the  view that  while the  inflation  genie  isn't  perhaps
out  of  the bottle,  it's  by  no  means  clear that  the  cork  is  firmly  in
place.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor  Seger.

MS.  SEGER.  The  most  intriguing information  I've  had  since

the  last meeting didn't  come  from  an  economist  or  businessman  but  from
a psychiatrist  who  happened  to  be  sitting next  to me  on  an  airplane
coming back from  Boston.  He  was  writing madly  and  I could  see  the
word  depression,  so  I thought  he  was  one  of the  crackpots who  writes
the  doom-and-gloom books  about  the  end  of the  economic world.  After  a
few minutes  we  got  to  talking,  and  I discovered  that he  is  a
psychiatrist  specializing in  depression.  But  the  useful information
to  me  was  that  as  he  counsels  people,  one  of the  first  things  he  asks
them is  for  information  about  their  spending  habits,  particularly the
spending that  they  do  using little  pieces  of  plastic.  And  what  he's
discovered  is  that  this  is  one  of the  early  signs  of  depression--that
people  go  out  on  these big  spending  sprees.  They buy  cars--no,
seriously--that  they  can't  afford.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  I know;  I've  done that!

MS.  SEGER.  I'm not  smart  enough to  make this  up.  They buy

cars  they can't  afford,  do  all  this  spending,  and  run  their  cards
right  up to  the  limits--and this  is  just  before  they go  over the  edge.
So we  decided  that  based  on what  he  saw and  what  I had  seen  in the
statistics that  there  are  a lot  of psychos  running  around.

MR.  STERN.  Another  problem  for the  Federal  Reserve.

MR. BLACK.  Another  problem  for him;  he  can  [profit?]  from

that.

MS.  SEGER.  Yes,  that's  right,  he's  doing  okay.  In  that  con-

nection,  though,  anyone  I speak with  other  than  him  suggests that
consumers  as  a whole  aren't  on a big  spending  spree.  So  I guess my
view of the  economy  is  a little  less  optimistic  than the  staff's.

Also,  on  the  housing  side,  some  of the  realtors  I've  spoken

with  suggest,  first  of  all,  that  the  recent  increases  in mortgage
rates  haven't  all  been  felt;  and,  secondly,  that  consumers  are
beginning  to  react  to  the  high  prices  on  new homes.  Also,  in  certain
parts  of  the  country,  like  Mr.  Parry's  enlightened  California, there
are these  tremendous  restrictions  on  growth;  and  it's  very difficult
to  get  lots  on  which to  build  houses  despite  the  whining about  the
housing  shortages.  So  I think  that  our  forecast  on  housing  starts
might  be  a touch high.

9/20/88

-17-

Finally,  as  I think  I hinted  in  my  discussion with  Mike  Prell
and  Ted  Truman,  I'm  a little  less  certain  that we're  going  to  get  the
export  improvement  that we  are  forecasting.  I would  certainly  like to
see  it  because,  while  certainly some  companies  are  still  competitive
at  existing  exchange  rates  and  in  [scenarios]  that  involve  a slightly
cheaper  dollar,  I don't  think  everybody  is.  And that  concerns  me.  So
those  are  the three  areas  where  I guess  I differ  from the  staff.
Thank you.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Black.

MR. BLACK.  Mr.  Chairman,  I think  every  point  I wanted to

make  has  been made  by  someone--but  some  by  one  person  and  some  by
another.  Let  me  just  summarize briefly.  We  agree  very  closely  with
what  the  staff has  suggested  in the  Greenbook.  We  see  the  same  signs
of moderation,  partly  because  of the  employment  figures  and  other
national  figures,  and  also  because  of  the  grass-roots  reports  that
we've  getting  from  our  directors,  particularly in textiles  and
furniture.

But  I'm  glad  to  see  this,  because  I thought  the  economy was

growing way, way too  fast  and  the  risks  were  all  on  the  upside.  This
suggests  that maybe  they're  less  on the  upside now than  they were
before.  But  like most  of  those  who have  spoken,  I still  think that
the  risks  definitely  are  skewed more  towards  the  upside  and  that
there's  a danger that  the  economy might  overheat.  These  figures
showing moderation have  been  around  for  only  a month  or  two  at  most,
and  apart  from housing,  there  are  no  real  large  parts  of the  GNP
accounts  or  significant  sectors  that  show any  signs  of  a great  or
sustained weakness.

And  then, if  you look  at  the  figures  in  section  II  of the

Greenbook, they  show that  there  is  some  upward  pressure  on  both wages
and  prices.  Mike  has  just  reported that  the  figures  on  the  implicit
price  deflator  and  the  fixed-weight deflator  for  the  second  quarter
were worse  than we  thought  they  were,  based  on  the  initial  reports.
So  in  short,  while  I feel  a little  bit  better than  I did  before,
because  there  are  some  signs  of  slowing,  I don't  think  we're out  of
the  woods  yet.  And  I would think that  the  staff's  prognostication
that  somewhere  down the  line we'll  need  to  tighten  further  is  probably
still  right,  although  now might  not  be  the time  to  do  that.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Stern.

MR.  STERN.  There's  very  little new to  report  on  the  District

economy.  I'll  try  to  dispense with that  very  quickly.  As  I've
commented  before,  most  of the  District  economy  is  and  remains  very
strong.  The  obvious  exception  is  the  areas  affected  adversely by  the
drought;  otherwise, the  economy in  the  District  is  in  good  shape.

As  far  as  the  national  outlook  is  concerned,  I find myself  in

substantial  agreement  with the  Greenbook forecast.  I don't  know how
much  of  a further  rise  in  interest  rates  might be  required to  stem
building  inflationary  pressures,  perhaps  not  very much,  but  I think
the  Greenbook does  appropriately  identify where  the  risks  are.

As  I look  at  the  latest  statistics,  I think they  do  suggest

some  slowing  in  the pace  of  expansion in  the  last  month  or  two--a

9/20/88

-18-

slowing  that,  as  several  people have  already  commented,  is  welcomed,
in my  judgment.  But  I find  that  there's  maybe  a little  tendency to
exaggerate  this.  Even though  I wouldn't  try  to  construe  the  August
labor market  report  as  very  strong,  it's  still  a  200,000  increase  in
payroll  employment--2-1/2  million workers  at  an  annual  rate--which  is
not  a trivial  increase  in  employment  at  all,  especially  given  the
tightness  in  labor  markets  that  already  exists.  And,  as  I already
suggested,  inventory/sales  ratios  look,  if  anything,  on  the  low  side
to  me.  So  I think we  may  see  more  strength,  at  least  in  the  near
term,  coming  out  of  inventories than  the  Greenbook  forecast
anticipates.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Boehne.

MR.  BOEHNE.  The  region  continues  as  it  has  been:  It's

operating at  high  levels,  although there  is  some moderation;  labor
markets  are  very  tight;  and,  wage  rates  are  higher  than  the  nation as
a whole.

As  far  as  the  national  economy,  I subscribe  to  the  view that

the  economy  is  moderating, but  that more moderation  is  needed  and
additional  restraint  is  probably  also  needed.  While  the  risks  are  on
the  side  of too  much demand,  I think we  need  at  this  point  to  keep  a
very  open mind  and  shouldn't  rush  to  judgment  on  it  for  the  reasons
that  were  articulated  nicely  by Mike  Prell.  I'd  like  to watch  the
economy  closely  and  be  prepared to  tighten  if necessary.  But  I
wouldn't  rush into  it  at  the  moment,  just  because  I have  enough  doubts
to  think that  a  little  patience  is  in  order.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Morris.

MR. MORRIS.  Mr.  Chairman, we  in Boston  agree  very  strongly

with  the  staff's  long-term  conviction that  the  economy  is  so  strong--
its  strength  stemming  from  net  exports  and  capital  goods--that  the  job
of  the  Federal  Reserve would  be  to  try  to  keep  this  economy  from  going
beyond  capacity  levels  and  generating  a new inflationary  cycle.  And
we  agree  that  substantial  increases  in  interest  rates  are  likely  to be
required to  produce  that.

We're  seeing  a little  evidence  of  a slowdown recently,  but

this  is  the  kind  of  flow that  you  often  get  in  a very  strong  economy.
I don't  think we  ought  to  get  it  in  our minds  that  we've  reached  a
level  of  growth which  from  now on  is  going to  be  compatible  with  price
stability.  I think  it's  a very  short-term phenomenon we're  talking
about.  And  I think our  financial  markets  have  been  impacted  in the
last  couple  of months  by  a very  special  factor--a  nonsustainable
special  factor--which  is  that  private  foreign  capital  inflows  have
been coming  into  this  country  at  rates  substantially  in  excess  of the
amount  of  our  foreign  account  deficit.  Of  course,  the  counterpart  of
that  is  very  large  sales  on the  part  of  central  banks,  including
ourselves.  This  I think has  greatly  strengthened  our  bond  market;  but
it's  not  a factor  that  we  can  count  on being  sustained  for  very long.
We've  seen  foreign  exchange markets  in the  past  couple  of years  turn
on  a dime.  And  I suspect  that  sometime  in  the  next  few  months  the
appetite  of private  foreign  investors  for  U.S.  assets  is  not  going  to
continue to  grow at  the  present  rate.  And when that  happens,  you're
going to  see many  long-term bonds  go  up  by  50  basis  points,  and

9/20/88

-19-

perhaps  more,  overnight.  I think we're  living in  a  special  financial
world here  which  is  not  sustainable.

Could  I comment  about  the  meeting schedule  for  next  year

since  I can  do  so  in  an  objective manner  since  I won't  be  here?  You
know we--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  In  a way  in  which you  will  choose  now to

comment.

MR.  MORRIS.  We  set  up  this  eight-meeting  schedule  at  the

time  we went  to  targeting the  monetary  aggregates.  And  the  idea was
that,  since  we're  controlling M1  and  presumably  not  paying  attention
to  anything  else,  why  do  we  have  to  meet  every month?  It  seems  to  me
that  the  Committee  would  be well  advised to  go  back to  a once-a-month
schedule because  we're  in  an  environment  in  which  I don't  feel
comfortable that  we're  not  having  another meeting until  November  1st.
It's  such  a rapidly  changing  world that we  live  in  that  I think  an
eight-meeting  schedule  is  too  few.  It's  true  that  we  can handle
problems  in  conference  calls,  but  that  doesn't  quite  substitute,  in my
mind,  for the  discipline  of  gathering  around this  table.  I know the
staff won't  like  it  because  it  increases  their work  load,  and  a lot  of
the  presidents  won't  like  it  because  of  travel  requirements.  But  I
don't  think those  considerations  should  be  paramount.  And  I would
strongly  advise  you  to  at  least think  about  going back to  the  once-a-
month  schedule because  it  seems  to  me  that  the  volatility  of the  world
we  live  in  isn't  well  suited  to  this  Committee  meeting  every  five  or
six weeks.

As  far  as  the  New England  economy  is  concerned,  we're

continuing  to  grow  at  about  half  the  rate  of  the  national  economy,
simply  because  of  the  shortage  of labor.  The  only  state  in  New
England  which  is  growing  as  fast  as  the  national  economy  is  Maine,
which has  a very  high  unemployment  rate  of  4 percent.  And  it's  the
only  surplus  labor  area  in  New  England,  so  manufacturing industries
are  tending to  push  farther  and  farther  north into  Maine  and  threaten
our  little  enclave  at  Lewiston, Maine.  That's  a very  low-wage  RCPC;
it  has  the  lowest  unit  labor  costs  of  any  check  processing  center  in
the  country,  and my  successor  may not  have  that  distinction  for  very
much  longer.

VICE  CHAIRMAN  CORRIGAN.  I think you  can  tranship  them to

Dallas.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Melzer.

MR. MELZER.  I want  to  make  a couple  of  comments  on

projections  based  on  a money-driven model  and  just  what  that  looks
like.  Essentially,  I'd  say  the  projections  are  very  similar  to those
of  the  Board's  staff.  There  are  some  differences between  the  second
half of  this  year  and  next  year,  but  I would  characterize  the  pattern
as  one  in which  inflationary  pressures  are  contained,  but  not
significantly  reduced,  over  that  18-month  period.  The  projections  I'm
talking  about  are  based  on  an  assumption  of  4 to  6 percent M1  growth.
And  I guess  the  conclusion  that  I reached  from looking  at  that--and
obviously, this  is  the model  output  and  then,  just  as  the  Board  staff
does,  some  subjective  judgments  are made--was  that  I'd  be much more
concerned  about,  say,  money  growth in  June  and  July  of  9 percent,  than

9/20/88

-20-

I would  be  about  August  of  less  than  1 percent.  I think the  general
pattern  is  such  that  the  same  conclusion  comes  out  in  this  sort  of
model--that  the  risks  are  more on  the  upside  than  the  downside.  As
far  as  the  District  goes,  the  report  is  essentially  the  same  as  last
month.  We're  still  showing  weakness  relative to  the  rest  of the
economy  and  in  some  areas,  particularly in  industries  like  textiles
and  apparel,  there  are  employment  declines.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY.  Thank you, Mr.  Chairman.  With  respect  to  the

Tenth District,  there  is  not  a great  change  from  last  time.  To
summarize,  we  are  still  trailing the  growth  rate  of  the  national
economy.  But  in  all  areas,  including  energy  and  agriculture,  there  is
some  improvement--to  be  sure,  improvement  from a very  low base.  Manu-
facturing is  doing  very well;  retail  sales  have  been  holding up  but
not  very  vigorous.  By  and  large,  the  Tenth  District  is  continuing  on
a trend to  recovery, but  a bit  slower  than  the  national  rate.

With  regard  to the  national  economy  and  the  projection  con-

tained  in the  Greenbook, we  would be  very  close  to  that  except  that
the  pattern  we  have  is  a bit  different.  If  I understand the  Greenbook
forecast,  the  drought  effect  has  largely  run  its  course  by  the  end  of
the  year, whereas  we would  find  the  effect  to  be  fairly  even in  each
of the  four  quarters  from  the  second  quarter  of  1988  to  the  second
quarter  of  1989.  Notwithstanding  that  minor  difference,  it  still  seems
to  me  that  we  are  projecting  a very  vigorous  growth well  into  1989.
And,  given  the  comments  around the table  and what  we  hear in  the  Tenth
District with  respect  to  wage  and  price  increases  not  really  showing
up  yet,  it  is  still  a matter  of  major  concern that,  on  the  national
level,  we're  putting  considerable  pressure  on  our  resources.  I guess
my view  is  that  there  is  going to  have  to  be  some  greater  restraint in
the  future  in  order to  get  the  kind  of  pattern over  the  longer  term
that  we'd  like  to  have.

I would  also  like  to  add,  if  I may, that  I happen  to  agree

with Frank Morris--as  painful  as  it  is  personally because  of  the
travel--that  going  back to  a monthly meeting  schedule makes  a  lot  of
sense,  given  the way we're  operating  at  the  moment.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Hoskins.

MR.  HOSKINS.  The  District  overall  remains  pretty  strong,

particularly in  manufacturing.  We  have  some  slow delivery times  in
particular  industries,  and  we  have  some  price  increases  coming  across,
but nothing  that  startling at  this  point,  particularly  in the  capital
goods  area.  Wage  demands  on  the  manufacturing  side  have  remained
moderate, but  we're  concerned  that  because  of the  strength  in  the
service  wage  component--they're  in the  same  labor markets--that  in
fact,  they'll begin  influencing  each  other  and  then  we'll  see  sharper
wage  increases  across  the  board  than we're  currently  seeing.  Retail
sales  ex-autos  have  been  flat  and  construction  has  been  rather
lackluster.  As  you know well,  our  directors  have  felt  very  strongly
about the  strength  of the  economy,  except  that  at  the  last  go-around
they  were not  quite as  adamant,  as  you probably  noticed;  I saw  some
deterioration  in their  concerns  about  inflation.  Nevertheless,
there's  still  great  strength  in  the  District.

9/20/88

-21-

As  far as  the  national  economic  outlook,  I guess  I really

don't have  much  reason to  disagree with Mike's  projections.  However,
if  I were  to  estimate  an  error  on  it,  I would  say  the  error  is
probably  going  to  be  on  the upside  in  terms  of  strength  and
inflationary  pressures  rather  than  on  the  downside.  We've  seen the
inflation  rate  move up  a 1/2  percent  or  so  each  year.  And,  as  you
know, that  is  the  wrong  direction  from my  perspective.  I think  we
ought to  gear  policy  to that  long-term objective,  which  implies we'd
probably have  to  face more  tightening--perhaps  more  than  the  staff has
in  place.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL.  I'm  very  pleased with  the  present  state  of

monetary policy  and  conditions  in  the  economy.  That  doesn't mean  I
like  the  4 percent  rate  of inflation.  I just  didn't believe  that  we
could make the  exchange  rate  adjustments  that were  so  necessary  to
make--[along with]  the  rebound  of  oil  prices  from  those  lows  and  some
rebound  in  wage  rates  from what  I would  call  somewhat  unsustainably
low nominal  rates--without having  some  temporary bounceback  in  the
rate  of  inflation.  I have  no  reason to  think that  the  staff's  real
economy  forecast  is  not  within the  range  of that  which  is  likely.  I
would tend  probably to  have  a slightly higher  net  export  figure,  Ted--
closer  to  what  you  had  in  the  June Greenbook  than  those  that  you have
in  today--but  there's  not  enough there  to  argue much  about.  I think
if anything  is  different,  consumer  spending might be  slightly  softer,
but  it's  very  difficult to  predict.

The  pleasing  aspect  of  policy  at  this  point  in  September  1988

is  that,  as  far  as  I can see,  we've  returned  the  growth of the
monetary aggregates  to  the  pace that  was  occurring  in  1987--and  I
thought  the  rate  we  had  in  1987  was  appropriate to  provide  a soft
landing  for  the  dollar.  And  it's  very  encouraging to  me  to  see that,
after the  monetary  aggregates  responded  to  the  somewhat  easier  stance
we maintained  during the  fall  and winter,  the  aggregates have
responded the  way  they  have to  our  attempts to  be  serious  about  not
letting  M2  rise  above  the  top  of the  target  at  the  first  of the year,
even  though we  had  a somewhat  distorted  base  level.  And now  it  looks
as  if M2  is  going  to  end  the  year  in  the  fourth  quarter  below the
midpoint  and  could  very  well  be  as  low  as  4-1/2 to  5 percent  at  the
end  of  the  year.  Don Kohn  shakes  his  head  a little bit  at  that.  I
think we  have to  keep  in mind the  time  lag between  interest  rate
changes  and  response  in those monetary  aggregates.

In June,  as  you may  remember,  I talked  a little bit  about  the

hint  of  changing commodity  prices,  and  I think  I was  kind  of  reading
tea  leaves  at  that  point.  But  we've  had  further  evidence  that  the
monetary  restraint  in  place  is  having an  impact  on commodity  prices--
and  even though we've  had,  it  seems  to me,  a peaking  of  commodity
price  rises  earlier  in  the  year,  the  drought  gave  us  a kind  of  a
double-peak  effect.  But  the  commodity price  picture  does  look much
improved.  I believe that  the  fight  against  inflation is  a long  one
and  one  that  we must  sustain  over  a long  period  of time;  and  I would
be  willing,  of  course,  to  accept  very  low growth  rates  in  the monetary
aggregates,  but  I would  really suggest  that  zero may not  be  desirable.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor  Heller.

9/20/88

-22-

MR.HELLER.  Thank you.  Let  me  take  a little  bit  longer

perspective  on  the  current  situation.  In  1986,  we  had  15-1/2  percent
M1  growth  and  almost  10  percent  M2  growth and  that,  I think,  is
reflected to  some  extent  in  some  inflationary  bulge,  which  is  now
working  its  way through  the  economy  from  producer  prices  slowly  down
to  consumer  prices.  By  the  way,  I think that  lag  is  exactly  what  the
textbooks tell  us  it  is--18 months  or  thereabouts,  counting  from the
1986  area  to  slightly  over  the middle  of  1988,  with  some  variance
around  it.  Then,  following what  Governor Angell  just  said,  in  1987  we
saw  a very  substantial  slowdown  in  monetary  growth and  I think that
slowdown  is  starting  to make  itself  felt  in  the  real  economy,  which  we
are  observing right  now.

As  I think many  people pointed  out,  there  is  some  moderation

in  the  economic  growth  picture  in  the  Greenbook  forecast.  There's
more  of  that  weakening,  especially  in  the  coming  year.  Personal
consumption  next  year  is  forecast  to  be  1-1/2  percent;  residential
construction  is  negative;  and  there  isn't  one  single  sector which  is
growing  above  the  2-1/2  percent  growth  rate  that  was  described  as
optimal--except  for  domestic  investment  and  exports.  And  I think  it's
absolutely  essential,  if we  worry  about  growth  constraint,  that we
keep  domestic  investment  growing  at  a  solid  rate.  It  is  somewhat
disconcerting,  however,  that  even  the  growth  rate  in that  sector  is
forecast  to  be  cut  in  half  for the  coming  year.  So,  what  we're  about
to  do  here  is  kill  the  goose  that  lays  the  golden  eggs.  We  can't  talk
about  a growth  constraint  being  relevant  for  policy when the  one
factor  that  can  ease  that  growth  constraint,  which  is  domestic
investment,  is  being  cut  and  restrained.  I also  agree  that  exports
have  to  be  maintained.  I'm happy to  see  the  higher  export  growth
rates.  The  current  level  of  the  dollar,  I think,  is  entirely
appropriate.  We're below  purchasing  power  parity;  therefore, we  do
have  a competitive  advantage  and we  can make  further  inroads  into
foreign  markets.

The  scenario  that  was  outlined  by Mike  Prell  in  response  to

Governor  Kelley's  questions  is  the  really scary  one--the  black box,
the  Pandora's  box, that  the  new President  would  have  to  face  if  growth
falters,  if  we  have  the  higher  interest  rates  that  we're  talking
about,  and  if the  tax revenues  are  not  coming  in.  So  I  see  the
downside  risks  as  a very  unpalatable  combination  of  factors  indeed.
The  upside  risks  I see  as  rather  minimal,  because  of the  items  that
Governor  Angell  has  outlined  already.  In my view,  we're  seeing
essentially  a moving  through  the  economy  of  that  inflationary bulge.
If  you  look at  the  beginning  of  that  process,  you'll  see very  positive
signs--the  commodity prices  being maintained,  the  flattening of  the
yield  curve,  and  also  the  strong dollar  in  international markets.  All
are  good  portents  of  rather  subdued  inflationary expectations.  So,
basically  I like  the  economy  the  way  it  is  running  right now.  I think
we're  exactly  on  the  right  track and  I would  like  to  do  everything
possible  to  keep  it  moving  that  way.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Governor  Kelley.

MR. KELLEY.  I wanted  to  very briefly  express  something very

similar  to  what  Governor Heller  just  expressed,  and  I won't  repeat  it.
I'll  simply  say  I'm  coming  from the  same  place  that he  is.  I had
expressed  before my  concern  about what  could  happen  in  the  1989-90
time  scenario.  If  the  black  box  kind  of  thing  begins  to happen  and  we

9/20/88

-23-

slide  over  into  a  recession before  we  have  a chance  to  adjust  further
the  fiscal/monetary mix  and  the  trade/consumption mix  and  so  forth,
I'll  continue to  have  those  concerns.  I have  a very  low  level  of
enthusiasm  for  running  a high  risk  of  inducing  a  recession in  the  near
future.  Hopefully,  we  do  have  some  slowing  going  on  and to  quote Ed
Boehne  from a few minutes  ago,  I think that  this  is  not  a time  to  rush
to  judgment.  So  I would  prefer to  watch  and wait  a little  bit  and  see
how things  go.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Governor Johnson.

MR. JOHNSON.  I really  don't want  to  add  much to  any  of  that.

I think  everything  has  been  said.  We've  seen  recently  some  signs  of
slowing  as  everyone has  pointed  out.  That  seems  to  have  had  a
moderating effect  in  the  financial  markets  and  I don't  know whether
that's  going to  continue  or  not.  All  I know  is  that  it  looks  pretty
good  right  now and  certainly doesn't  lend  any  weight  to  overreacting.
So  I support  what  others  have  said.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Governor  LaWare,  do  you have  any

comments  you'd  like  to  make?

MR.  LAWARE.  No.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Why  don't we,  then,  go  to  relevant

policy  decisions.

MR. KOHN.  Thank  you, Mr.  Chairman.  [Statement--see

Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Thank you.  With that  we'll  take  our

usual  break.

MR.  ANGELL.  Are  there  going to  be  questions?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  I'm  sorry.  I thought  we might  do

questions  after  the  break.  We  can  do  questions  now,  if  you  like.

MR. ANGELL.  Don,  we  have  in  the  Bluebook, the  M2  and  other

forecasted  growth  rates.  What  happens  in  1989  quarter  1 and  quarter  2
with,  let's  say,  alternative  "B"  and what  would happen  in  quarter  1,
quarter  2,  and maybe  in  quarter  3  if you  put  in  the  staff's  interest
rate  forecast?

MR.  KOHN.  I can  answer  the  second  one  more  easily because  I

have  a table  in  front  of me.

MR. ANGELL.  Okay,  that's  fine;  that's the  most  important.

MR. KOHN.  We  have  about  3-3/4  percent  growth  of M2  over  the
year  1989  consistent  with the  staff's  interest  rate  and  GNP  forecast.

MR.  ANGELL.  1989  over  1988?

MR.  KOHN.  Q4  1988  to  Q4  1989.

MR. ANGELL.  Okay.

9/20/88

-24-

MR. KOHN.  And  that  embodies  slightly  lower  growth  rates  in
the  first  half of  the  year than  in  the  second--on the  order  of  2-1/2
percent  in  the  first  two  quarters--and  that's  because we've  assumed
that  interest  rates  continue  to  rise  through the  first  half  of the
year.  And then  things  level  out.

MR. ANGELL.  So  that  means you need  almost  a 5 percent  growth

rate  in  the  second  half  of the  year to  get  3.7?

MR. KOHN.  That's  correct.  Now, let's  suppose  interest  rates

were  flat.  I don't  have a direct  table  here,  but  I do  have  a sense
from  our model  simulations  that  to  those  2-1/2,  3 percent  growth rates
for  the  first  half of  1989,  I would probably  add  about  1-1/2  to  2
percent  per  quarter  if interest  rates  were  kept  flat.  So  I would  have
more  like  4 to  5 percent.

MR. ANGELL.  Okay,  so  the  2.8  percent  rate that  you have for

quarter  4 would  tend  to  rebound  in  quarter  1.

MR. KOHN.  It  should.

MR.  ANGELL.  If  we  did  not  have  other  increases.

MR.  KOHN.  Absolutely--with the  increase  in  interest  rates

through August.

MR.  ANGELL.  And  it  could  rebound  to  4 or  4-1/2?

MR.  KOHN.  Yes,  in  the  first  half;  and  I would  expect  it  to

rebound  further  in  the  second  half as--

MR. ANGELL.  Thank you.  That's  very helpful.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Any  other  questions  for  Mr. Kohn?  If

not,  we'll  have  a recess.

[Coffee  break]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Following up  on  Peter  Sternlight's

remarks  about the  borrowing  requirements,  I think  that  policy
generally  over the  intermeeting period  has  required  very  little  in the
way  of  adjustment.  In  fact,  it's  very  rare  that  the  outlook  seems  to
change  so  little  over  so  short  a period.  One thing  that  worries me
about  the  current  economy  is  that  it  is  vaguely  reminiscent  of  a sag
that  occurred  in  1976--which  everyone  assumed  was  the beginning of  a
decline,  and  it  was  a pause  which  sort  of  disappeared.  That was  a bit
more  in  the  way  of  a real  slowdown.  And  I think we've  got  to  be  a
little  careful  that  we're not  looking  at  a false  dawn.

Export  orders,  unfilled  orders  are  still  very high.  I see  no

evidence  of  any  deterioration,  even though there's  been  some  slowdown
in  actual deliveries  over the  last  three months.  Capital  goods
markets  remain  quite  strong.  The  order  structure,  appropriations,
does  not  seem to  be  deteriorating.  It  is  true  that  there  is  some
marginal weakening  on  the  edges  in a lot  of different  areas--the
textile-apparel  complex,  I think, being the  most  obvious  and  the most
important  so  far  as  size  is  concerned.  I think  the  crucial  issue,
which  bothers me  about the  presumption that  we would be  in  any way

9/20/88

-25-

accumulating a  softening  from  here,  is  that  the  inventory situation
has  actually softened  some.  And  I suspect  that's  in part  the  cause  of
some  of the  overheating or  preceived  overheating being  offset.  I'm  a
little  concerned  about  the  numbers,  because  whenever you  get  this  high
in  operating rates,  seasonal  adjustments  for  July  and August  often
tend to  be  a problem.  The  classic  case  is  the  steel  industry,  which
normally  shuts  down  for  a  couple  of weeks  as  an  ordinary  seasonal,  but
in times  of  peak demand,  such  as  now, it  doesn't  shut  down.  Then  what
you  get  is  a seasonally  adjusted  sharp  rise,  unless  somebody has  the
good  sense  to  cut  it.  And  it  comes  right  back down.  I think  that's  a
part  of the  surge  that  appeared to  be  a real  acceleration in June  and
July  and  an  easing  in  August.  I suspect--at  least  looking  at  the
initial  claims  figures  which  I think are  really  relevant  to  this
situation--that  basically, the  economy  probably  continues  firm,
although  not  as  aggressive  as  I think  some  of us  feared  somewhat  a
little  earlier  in  the  summer  and  in  the  late  spring.  Corporate profit
figures  look quite  good.  The  report  this  morning was  showing  that
profits  continue to  move  forward  in  a  reasonably  good  fashion  and  that
usually  is  a precursor  of underlying  capital  investment--domestic
capital  investment--being  supported.

So,  in  general,  I think  it  is  very  difficult  to  visualize  any

really  significant  change  in  the  outlook.  I think we're  neither
accelerating  nor  decelerating.  As  a consequence,  I must  say  I would
feel  comfortable with  just  taking  the  last  directive,  changing  the
dates  and  a couple  of  numbers,  and  going  with it.  It  is  essentially  a
no-change  scenario,  asymmetric  towards  tightness,  which  I think  is
probably  right.  My  only  suspicion is  that  we're not  going  to  see
anything that  will  require  moving  in  a tightening  direction  in  the
intermeeting  period.  But  I find  the  possibilities  of easing  just
about  as  remote  as  I think they  can  get.  I see  no  particular  problem
in  continuing  to  be  concerned  about  acceleration  but  I think that,
unless  and  until we  actually  see  the  events  as  they emerge--until  we
get  some  evidence that  this  is  in  fact the  type  of  pause which,
frankly,  I think  it's  likely to  be--it would  be  premature  at  this
stage  to  tighten  further.  Governor  Angell.

MR. ANGELL.  Mr.  Chairman,  I can  certainly go  with  your

suggestion.  I, too,  believe that  we're more  likely  in  the
intermeeting  period to  need to  tighten than  we  are  to  ease,  but  I
would  not  take  that  to  mean  that  there's  not  some  circumstances  in
which we  might be  surprised.  If  there's  a 60  percent  chance  that we
would  not  need to  make  any  move  at  all,  and  a 30  percent  chance we
might need  to  tighten,  I think there  are  some  circumstances  that  might
develop--,  that  conditions  might  change  in  an  economy  with certain
kinds  of  financial bankruptcies  occurring  and  certain  kinds  of
uncertainties.  But  I can--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  If  you're  saying 60,  30,  10,  I buy that.

MR. ANGELL.  Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Parry.

MR. PARRY.  If  that's  in  the  form of  a motion,  I certainly

would  second it,  particularly with  the  asymmetric  language.  I would
point  out,  though, that  I really do  doubt  that  we're  going  to  be  lucky
enough to  get  through more  than  a meeting  or  two  without  further

9/20/88

-26-

tightening.  I think there  are  pressures  on  the  underlying  rate  of
inflation that  are  likely to  intensify.  And  I think that  some  of the
potentially  favorable  developments  associated  with the  price  of  oil
and  the  rising dollar--as  far  as  inflation  is  concerned--could  easily
be  reversed.  At  this  time,  given the  uncertainties,  it  seems  to  me
that  alternative  "B"  is  probably  the  appropriate path.  But  given  my
concerns,  I would  very much  favor the  asymmetric  language that  was
incorporated in  the  previous  directive.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Boehne.

MR.  BOEHNE.  Second  the  Chairman's  suggestion.

MR.  PARRY.  Third.

SPEAKER(?).  Third.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Forrestal.

MR.  FORRESTAL.  Mr.  Chairman,  as  I had  tried  to  suggest  in my

earlier  comments,  I think the  risks  continue to  be  on the upside  in
the  economy.  I think we  should not  be  lulled by  this  softening  at  the
fringe,  as  you  put  it.  So  I would very  strongly  support  your
recommendation,  particularly with  respect  to  the  asymmetric  language.
I think  that we  do  have  a period  in  which  we  can  pause  and  take  stock
of what's  been happening.  And  particularly  with  respect  to  the
dollar,  I think  if we  were  to  initiate  additional  tightening  moves  at
this  time  we might  get  another  increase  in the  dollar, with  the danger
of  a  ratcheting upward  of  rates  around the  world  that would  not  be
appropriate at  this  time.  So  I would  strongly  support  your
recommendation.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Morris.

MR. MORRIS.  Mr.  Chairman,  I agree  with  Mr.  Parry  that  the

Committee  is  going  to  have to  be  taking  other moves  toward  tightening
in  the  not-too-distant  future,  but  the  timing  is  not  right  for the
moment.  And  I would  agree  with your  position.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Black.

MR. BLACK.  Mr.  Chairman,  I agree  with your  position  too.

The  only  thing  I would  add  to  it  is  that  these  rates  of inflation
projected  by the  Board's  staff, as  indexed  by  the  fixed-weight
deflator,  are  way  too  high.  So,  I wouldn't  be  completely  satisfied
with  that  outlook,  although that  may  be  the most  it's  reasonable to
expect.  I would  go  right  down  the  line  with you  on  it.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Keehn.

MR. KEEHN.  Mr.  Chairman, I also  agree  with your
recommendation.  I would  add  only  one  thing  to  it  in terms  of  the
operations  of the  Desk.  If  what we're  doing would  suggest  a federal
funds  rate  of,  say  8-1/8,  I'd  certainly  be  more  comfortable with  a
slightly higher  rate  than  I would with a  lower  rate.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Further  comments?

9/20/88

-27-

MR.  GUFFEY.  I'll  join.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Vice  Chairman.

VICE  CHAIRMAN  CORRIGAN.  I, too,  agree  with the  prescription

you've  put  on  the  table.  I guess  I would  be  more  in  the  Bob  Parry
camp  in  terms  of what  I think  the  likely  pressure  points  are  going  to
be  in  the  intermeeting  period.  If  I could,  I'd  just  like  to  add  a
quick  comment  on  the  point  Governor Kelley  and  Governor  Heller made
about  the  dangers  of  a recession-induced  rise  in  the  budget  deficit  in
the  intermediate term.  That  really is  pretty ugly  in  terms  of  a
setting,  not  just  for  monetary  policy,  but  more  generally.  But  I
think that  of the  things that  could  produce  that  result,  one  of them
clearly  is  a  rise  in  the  inflation  rate  in  the  shorter  term.  If  added
inflationary  pressure  does  begin to  show  through more  than  it  has  to
date,  to  be  certain  that  is  a recession  in  the  making.  So  if  we're
really  concerned  about  a recession-induced  rise  in  the  budget  deficit,
that's  just  double  reason why we  should  be  especially  sensitive  about
any  further upward  movement  in  the  inflation  rate.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  I think we're  still  ahead  of  the  curve.

And  that's  extraordinary,  if  we  can hold  that.

MR.  BLACK.  Except  that  the  fixed-weight  did  hit  5 percent

last  quarter.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Well,  I'm  a little  suspicious  of  that.

Until  I disaggregate it,  I don't  know what  to make  of  it,  because  all
the  other  price  indicators  don't  capture  that  number.  Further
comments?  President  Hoskins.

MR.  HOSKINS.  I think  if  we're  serious  about  the  inflation

objectives,  over  time we're  going to  have  to  face  further tightening.
That's  what  I suspect  right  now.  There's  been  a flattening  in  the
yield curve;  there's  been  some  improvement  in  commodity  prices;  and,  I
think that  needs  to  be  recognized.  But  if  I push  forward,  it  looks  to
me  like  we've  got  more  to  do.  I am  encouraged by  the  moderation  in
the  aggregates  relative  to  the  past  trend  that Governors  Angell  and
Heller  raised.  I'd  have a  lot  more  comfort  I guess  if, when we  did
see  the  signs  of  inflation  picking up,  we  could  move  aggressively.
But,  I think,  given  the  sentiment  of the  Committee,  I can  certainly
accept  your  recommendation.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President Melzer.

MR. MELZER.  I'm  in  agreement  with that  proposal.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN.  I would  just  express  agreement.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY.  Include  me  in.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor  Seger.

9/20/88

-28-

MS.  SEGER.  You  can  include  me,  too.  I just want  to  mention

one  other thing  that  I haven't  heard  commented  about  this morning,  and
that  is  the  risk to the  thrift  industry.  That  industry is  already
very weak, with  many institutions  on  their backs.  And  a further
significant  upward  movement in  interest  rates,  as  the  Board  staff
presentation yesterday  showed  us,  would  add  significantly  to  the
number of  insolvent  institutions  around.  So  I think that's  just
another  good  reason  for  sitting  tight.  Thank you.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Governor  Heller.

MR. HELLER.  I agree  with your  recommendation.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Governor  Johnson.

MR. JOHNSON.  I agree  with  the  recommendation.  I'll  just  add

a response  to  what  Don was  saying earlier  about  the  financial markets
and  some  of  the  caveats that  go  with  it.  I think that's  right.  I
think to  some  extent  that  the  good behavior  of  financial markets  has  a
lot  to  do  with the  credibility that  we've  established with  our
actions.  And  I think that  if  there  are  signs  of  market wavering--
thinking that we  are  not  credible  on  policy--then  it'll  show  up  and
that's  the  time  when we  should  consider  further  actions.  But  I think
now the  signs  look  good,  and  we  don't  want  to  lose  that  credibility
we've  established  with  the  financial markets.  I think  clearly this  is
the  right  type  of  policy for  now.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Stern.

MR.  STERN.  I support the  recommendation.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor  LaWare, you  have  any  comments?

MR. LAWARE.  I do,  too.  No  comments.

MR.  BOEHNE.  Call  the  roll.

MR.  HELLER.  Keep  us  [unintelligible],  right?

VICE  CHAIRMAN  CORRIGAN.  Play  your  cards  right,  you can  set

an  all-time  record  here.

MR. KELLEY.  That's  where we  can  get  a free lunch.

MR. HELLER.  The  sandwiches  aren't  made  yet.

MR. BLACK.  We had  doughnuts,  I know that.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Technically, we  have  produced  the

following  operational  paragraph.

MR. BERNARD.  The  operational  paragraph would  read:  "In  the

implementation  of  policy for  the  immediate  future,  the Committee  seeks
to  maintain  the  existing degree  of  pressure  on  reserve  positions.
Taking account  of  indications of  inflationary  pressures,  the  strength
of the  business  expansion, the behavior  of the monetary  aggregates,
and  developments  in  foreign  exchange  and  domestic  financial markets,
somewhat  greater  reserve  restraint would  or  slightly  lesser  reserve

9/20/88 

-29-

restraint  might be  acceptable  in  the  intermeeting  period.  The
contemplated  reserve  conditions  are  expected to  be  consistent  with
growth of  M2  and M3  over  the  period  from August  through  December  at
annual  rates  of  about  3 and  5 percent,  respectively.  The  Chairman may
call  for  Committee  consultation  if it  appears  to  the  Manager  for
Domestic  Operations  that  reserve  conditions  during  the  period  before
the  next meeting  are  likely  to  be  associated  with  a  federal  funds  rate
persistently  outside  a  range  of  6 to  10  percent."

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Does  anyone have  any  comments  on  that

particular  reading?  If not,  can  I have  a vote?

MR. BERNARD.

Chairman  Greenspan 
Vice  Chairman  Corrigan 
Governor  Angell 
President Black 
President  Forrestal 
Governor  Heller 
President  Hoskins 
Governor  Johnson 
Governor Kelley 
Governor  LaWare 
President Parry 
Governor Seger 

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  I'm  going  to  confirm that  the  next

meeting  is  November  1st  and,  well,  is  this  a record?

VICE  CHAIRMAN  CORRIGAN.  Frank Morris  would know.  Can  you

judge  in terms  of  the  time,  Frank?  I can't  remember any  better  than
quarter  of  12.

MR.  MORRIS.  No,  that  has  to  be  a record.  Even with Bill

Martin.

MR. GUFFEY.  In  fact,  we've always--

MR.  JOHNSON.  No  matter  what.

MR.  GUFFEY.  No matter what.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  We  have  a few topics  on  the  agenda  for

luncheon,  which  I guess  will  be  around  12:30.  Let's  recess  until
12:30.

MR. HELLER.  We'll  take  it!

END  OF MEETING




==== GREENBOOK | 1988-09-20_fomc19880920gbpt119880914.txt ====

Prefatory Note 

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 

available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain. 

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 

gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.    

1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Strictly  Confidential  (FR)  Class  II FOMC

September  14,  1988

SUMMARY  AND  OUTLOOK

Prepared  for the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee
By the  staff of  the  Board  of Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System

DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS

Recent  Developments

Data  on  labor market  activity  through August  suggest that  the

economic expansion may be moderating  somewhat  from the  robust  pace  of

the  first  half  of the  year.  However,  information on  spending  in  the

current  quarter  is  fragmentary at  this  point  and provides  no  firm basis

for  judging whether  a meaningful change  in  the trend  in demand  has yet

occurred.  On the  inflation  side,  incoming information  shows  little

change  from  recent trends,  apart  from the  effect  of  the  drought  on  food

costs.

Nonfarm payroll employment  (strike adjusted) rose  about  220,000  in

both July and August, well below  the  especially strong  gains  of  345,000

per month in  the  first  half  of  the year.  Hiring in  construction and

services  slowed  considerably  over  the  two-month span,  and  in August,

factory  jobs  edged down,  ending a four-month  string  of  sizable

increases.  Gains  in  household  employment  have  been even  smaller than  in

the  payroll  series  both  in  recent months  and on  net  this  year,  for

reasons  that  are  not  fully  clear  from available  data.  Thus,  the

civilian  jobless  rate  has  edged back  up to  5.6 percent  after dipping to

5.3  percent  in  June.

Total  industrial  production is  estimated to  have  advanced  0.2

percent  in August  after an  upward-revised  1.0 percent  jump  in  July.

Among final  products,  output  of  consumer  goods  and business  equipment

rose  0.2 percent  last  month.  Materials production also rose moderately

after  surging in  July.

I-2

Capacity utilization rates  changed  little  last  month.  The

continued  advance  in  production in  capital  goods'  industries  is

gradually taking up  available  slack,  while the  operating rate  for

primary processing  industries  remains  close to  the  relatively high level

that  prevailed  at  the  end of  last  year.  As  a result,  purchasing

managers  still  report  that  industrial materials,  such as  various

chemicals,  paper, aluminum,  steel  products,  and plastic resins,  are  in

short  supply.  Further  sizable price  increases  for these  items  continue

to  boost  the  producer price  index  for  intermediate materials  (excluding

food  and energy),  which rose  another  0.4  percent  in August  to  a level  7-

1/4  percent  above  a year earlier.

Consumer spending,  in  real  terms,  is  estimated to have  leveled  off

in  July;  the flatness,  however,  follows  an especially sharp  increase  in

June.  Moreover, growth in  real  income  appears  to  have  been well

maintained through July,  and information  from the August  surveys

indicates that  consumer  sentiment  remains  quite  positive.  Sales  of

motor vehicles  held up  relatively  well through August,  with domestic

autos  only a bit  below the  pace earlier  in the year  and light  trucks

setting  another  record.  Sales  of  imported  cars,  however,  were on the

weak  side  for  a second month.

Construction  of  single-family  homes  was  little  changed in  July  from

the  pace that  prevailed during the first  half  of the year;  starts  were

1.08  million units.  Sales  of  new  and existing  homes  retreated  from

their  near-record June mark to  a level  more  consistent  with the  pace  of

homebuilding and with mortgage market  conditions  in  early  summer.

Multifamily construction, which turned up  in  July,  continues  to

fluctuate  in  a low  range.

In  the  business  sector,  spending  for  equipment  increased  further  in

July,  despite a downturn in  shipments  of  office  and  computing  items.

New  orders  for  nondefense  capital  goods  generally  continued to  rise,

with the  level  of  bookings  (excluding aircraft)  up  1-3/4  percent  from

the  second-quarter average.  Taken together, these  early indications  of

third-quarter activity suggest  that  real  outlays  for producers'  durable

equipment  will  remain an  area  of  strength  in the  near  term, although the

exceptionally rapid rates  of  growth of  the  first  half  of  the  year are

not  likely  to be  repeated.  In contrast,  nonresidential  construction

activity  remained slow  in  July  as  oil  drilling  continued  to  contract  and

spending on industrial  and commercial  structures  (other than  offices)

dropped back.

Wholesalers  and ret  ilers  (other than auto  dealers)  sharply  reduced

their accumulation of  inventories  in  the  second quarter,  apparently in

response  to  uncomfortably high  stock-sales  ratios.  In  July,

stockbuilding  was  again slow  at  the  wholesale level.  In manufacturing,

inventory  investment  has  been moderate  for  some time  relative  to

shipments;  as  of  July,  stocks  appeared lean  at  all  stages  of

fabrication, leaving room  for  some pickup in  accumulation,  particularly

in  industries  in which  production trends  remained  strong through August.

Incoming data show  that  the  drought  is  boosting  consumer  food

prices  noticeably.  Retail  food  prices  were  up  1 percent  in  the  July

CPI.  And, although  the  PPI  for  finished  foods  posted  somewhat  more

moderate  increases  of  0.4  percent  in  July  and  August,  the  index  for

crude  food  jumped  another 2.2  percent  last  month, indicating  potential

pressure  from higher  grain  and  livestock  costs  on  retail  prices.  At  the

same  time,  a surprising  runup  in  gasoline prices  has  added  to  inflation

in  recent months,  as  a tight  inventory  situation  earlier this  summer

apparently  allowed refiners  and  retailers  to boost their margins.

Excluding food  and energy, consumer prices  increased 0.3  percent  in

July,  a bit  below the  average  over the  first  half  of  the  year.  However,

the  PPI  for  finished  consumer  goods  other  than  food  and energy posted a

large  0.9 percent  advance  in  July  followed by a 0.3  percent  rise  in

August.  This  index has  accelerated to  a 4-3/4  percent  rate  so  far  this

year from  2-3/4  percent  in  1987.

Outlook

The monetary policy assumptions  underlying the  staff projection are

essentially  unchanged from the  previous  Greenbook.  The  staff  continues

to  believe that  additional  pressures  on  financial markets will  be

required to  slow the  expansion  in economic  activity  enough to  avert  a

significant  pickup  in  inflation.  Thus,  we have  built  into the  current

projection a path  for  interest  rates  that  differs  little  from that

underlying the August  forecast,  the  only alteration being  some  shaving

of  the  increase  in  long-term rates  in  light  of  recent  market

developments.  Similarly, the  assumed path  for  the  foreign  exchange

value  of  the  dollar  associated  with this  projection  is  unchanged.

Growth  of  M2  is  expected to  remain below its  first-half  pace through the

end of  this  year,  placing  growth for  the year  a little  below the

midpoint  of  its  annual  range;  next  year, M2  is  anticipated to  be  in the

lower  part  of  its  range.  Growth of M3,  though,  is  projected to  run

higher than  for M2,  remaining above  the midpoint  of  its  range  in  1988

and then moving to the middle  of  its  range  in  1989.

The  staff's  fiscal policy assumptions  also are  essentially

unchanged from  the  last  projection.  The  federal budget  deficit  is

anticipated  to be  $158  billion  in both FY1988  and  FY1989. 1  The  OMB's

initial  sequestration report  for FY1989  estimates  a deficit,  on  a Gramm-

Rudman-Hollings  (GRH) accounting basis,  that  is  slightly below the

trigger of  $146  billior.  And, progress  on  appropriations  legislation,

to  date,  would  suggest  that  the  Congress  will manage  to  stay within  the

GRH limits.  Thus,  the  staff  has  assumed that  no  automatic  spending  cuts

will  be  ordered.

Updated assumptions  regarding  the  effects  of  the  drought  account

for much of  the  revision to  the  projected quarterly pattern  of  real  GNP

growth over the next  year.  The  BEA has  estimated that  crop  losses

reduced growth in  the  second quarter by  a percentage point,  more than

twice the  earlier estimate.  And, BEA's  likely  interpretation of  the

most  recent  USDA crop  report,  released this  week, would  imply effects  of

a similar magnitude over the  second  half  of  the  year.  Owing mainly to

the  second-quarter revision, the  effect  of  the  drought  on  the  staff

forecast  is  somewhat  larger  than  in the  August  Greenbook;  it  is  now

expected  to  reduce  growth of  real  GNP  3/4  percentage  point  over the  four

1. An  appendix to Greenbook Part  2, Nonfinancial  Developments  section,
discusses  a new fiscal  indicator  developed by  the  staff  and presented  on
the  Federal  Sector table in  this  volume.

quarters  of  1988.  As  in  the  previous  projection, the  drought-related

output  losses  in GNP  show up  primarily  as  a drawdown  in  farm inventories

and  CCC  stocks.  Farm production  is  projected to  rebound  sharply  in

1989,  in  part  reflecting  more expansive  agricultural  policies.  This

adds  almost  2-1/2  percentage  points  to  growth in  the  first  quarter and

1 percentage point  for  the  year as  a whole.

Real  GNP  and the  Drought
(Percent change,  annual  rate)

Q2 

1988
Q3 

Q4

Q1 

1989
Q2 

H2

Real  GNP 

3.3 

2.5 

1.6 

4.4 

2.7 

2.4

Real  GNP  excluding

effects  of  drought 

4.3 

3.3 

2.9 

2.0 

1.9 

2.0

In the  current  quarter,  the  staff  projection of  real  GNP  growth

excluding the  effects  of the  drought  remains  relatively robust--3-

1/4  percent.  This  is  a little  lower  than  in the August  Greenbook,

reflecting  the weaker than anticipated August  labor market  report.

Growth in  consumer  spending  is  expected to  remain  around  3 percent,

about  in  line  with the  recent trend  in  real disposable  income.  Spending

on  business  equipment  and  exports  should continue  to  be  the  most

important  sources  of  impetus to  aggregate  demand this  quarter.

The  assumed monetary and  fiscal  restraints  exert  a broad effect  on

economic growth  in  coming quarters.  The  influence  of  higher  interest

rates  is  most  obvious  in the  projection  of  homebuilding:  housing  starts

are  projected to  fall  from their  current  level  of  close  to  1.5  million

units  to  less  than 1.4  million units  by  next  summer.  Higher interest

rates,  through their  effects on  borrowing  costs  and  asset  values,  also

exert  some  damping influence  on  consumer  spending,  which is  expected to

grow a bit  less  rapidly than disposable  income  next  year.  Business

fixed  investment  spending  should  be  only mildly affected, over  the

projection  span, by  an  increase  in  financing  costs  of  the magnitude

assumed  in this  projection.  However,  concerns  about  a softening economy

could  have  more powerful  effects.  Output  already has  decelerated

somewhat  from the  pace  of  1987,  and with further moderation projected to

become evident  early next  year, the  boom in  capital  spending  is  expected

to  lose much of  its  momentum.  Growth  of  real  exports of  goods  and

services  is  expected to  slow  somewhat  over  the projection period while

growth of  imports  rebounds  from the  recent  reduced pace.  Nonetheless,

the  external  sector  still  contributes  more  than 3/4  percentage point  to

GNP  growth  in  1989,  compared with about  1 percentage point  in  1988.

Excluding the  effects of  the drought,  growth of  real  output  is

projected to  remain around 3 percent--and thus  somewhat  above  its

longer-run potential  rate  of  2-1/2  percent--through  year-end before

slowing to  2 percent  in  1989.  Under  the  circumstances,  the  reduction  in

resource  pressures  is  slight  and does  not  leave  a substantial mark  on

wage  and price  performance within the  projection period.  Hourly  labor

compensation is  projected to accelerate  gradually, and  rising  costs  at

earlier  stages  of  processing are  more likely  to  be  passed  on  into  final

product prices.

Although the  underlying  inflation outlook has  not  changed,  revised

assumptions  about  food  and  energy  prices  have  altered the  quarterly

pattern of  inflation  in  the  near  term.  The  drought-related  runup  in

consumer  food  prices  has  been accentuated, most  notably in  the  current

quarter.  The  decline  in  crude  oil  costs  this  summer  has  been steeper

than previously  anticipated, and the price  of  imported  crude  is  now

projected to remain  somewhat  below $14  per barrel  through year-end,

about  $1-1/2  per barrel  lower  than in the August  Greenbook.2  Thus,

retail  energy prices  are  anticipated to  drop  sharply  in  the  fourth

quarter,  offsetting  in  large  part the  push  from food  prices  and  from

rising prices  for  consumer  durables.  As  a result,  the GNP  fixed-weight

price  index  is  projected to  rise  at  a 5-1/4  percent  annual  rate  in  the

third quarter,  about  1/2  percentage  point more  than in  the last

projection;  this  measure  of  inflation then  decelerates  to  a 4-1/2

percent  rate  in  the  fourth  quarter.  The  consumer  price  index  is

projected to  average  a 4-3/4  percent  rate  in both quarters.

At  4.5  percent  and  3.7  percent,  respectively, the  1989  projections

for the GNP  fixed-weight  index  and the  GNP  deflator  are  essentially

unchanged  from the  previous  Greenbook.  A  lower  oil  price  path and

slightly  less  rapid  increases  in  food  prices  in  late  1989  have  only

2.  Crude  oil  prices  are  projected to  recover  to  around $15.50  per
barrel  in  1989.  However,  recent  developments  in  the  oil market  once
again have  highlighted the  volatility of  factors  affecting the  outlook
for energy prices.  Depending on  supply  decisions  by OPEC producers,
prices  of  crude  oil  could,  at  least  for  some  time,  vary considerably
from the  forecast.  If,  for  example,  crude  oil  prices  were  to  average  $5
per  barrel  lower  (higher) than  projected next  year,  the  direct  effect  on
consumer prices  would be  to  subtract  (add) roughly  1/2  percentage  point
from  (to) inflation over  the  four  quarters  of  1989.

Staff  Price  Projection
(Percent change,  annual  rate)

1988 

1989

Q3 

Q4 

Ql 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4

GNP  fixed-weight

price  index 

5.2 

4.4 

5.0 

4.4 

4.3 

Consumer  price  index 

4.8 

4.7 

5.0 

4.8 

4.7 

4.3

4.8

fractionally  reduced the  inflation  projection.  As  has  been the  case  for

some  time,  the  federal  pay adjustment  assumed to  occur on  January 1,

1989,  accounts  for  an  uptick  in  the  GNP  fixed-weight  price  measure  in

the  first  quarter.  The  CPI,  which is  not  affected by the pay

adjustment,  shows  a more  stable  inflation  rate  of  around  5 percent  for

the  year.

The  details  of the  staff  forecast  are  provided in  the  tables  that

follow.

IDENTIAL  - FR

CLASS II  FOMC 

STAFF  GNP PROJECTIONS

Percent  changes,  annual  rate

I-10

September  14,  1988

Nominal  GNP

Real  GNP

GNP  fixed-weighted
price  index

GNP
deflator

Unemployment
rate
(percent)

8/10/88 

9/14/88 

8/10/88 

9/14/88 

8/10/88 

9/14/88 

8/10/88 

9/14/88 

8/10/88 

9/14/88

Annual  changes:

<1>
<1>

1986 
1987 
1988
1989

Quarterly  changes:

1987 

1988 

Q1  <1> 
Q2  <1> 
Q3  <1> 
Q4  <1> 

Q1  <1> 
Q2  <1> 
Q3 
Q4 

Q1 
2 
Q3 
Q4 

8.4
8.7
7.7
8.6

5.4
7.2
7.3
6.1

7.7
6.4
5.8
5.8

Two-quarter changes:  <2>

1987 

Q2  <1> 
Q4  <1> 

8.5
8.1

1988 

Q2  <1> 
Q4 

6.3 
6.7 

1989 

Q2 
Q4 

7.1 
5.8 

Four-quarter  changes:  <3>

1986 
1987 
1988 
1989 

Q4  <1> 
Q4  <1> 
Q4 
Q4 

4.8 
8.3 
6.5 
6.4 

8.5 
8.1 

6.8 
6.3 

7.5 
6.0 

4.8 
8.3 
6.6 
6.8 

4.8 
5.3 

3.3 
2.4 

3.0 
2.0 

2.0 
5.0 
2.8 
2.5 

4.8
5.3

3.3
2.0

3.5
2.4

2.0
5.0
2.7
3.0

<1>  Actual.
<2>  Percent  change from two  quarters earlier.
<3>  Percent  change from four  quarters  earlier.

5.7 
5.5 
5.4 
5.4 

5.7
5.5
5.5
5.5

4.2 
3.7 

4.0 
4.6 

4.9 
4.4 

4.2
3.7

4.0
4.8

4.7
4.3

3.5 
2.7 

2.9 
4.1 

3.9 
3.7 

3.5
2.7

3.4
4.1

3.9
3.5

-. 5 
-. 4 

-. 4 
-. 1 

.1 
.2 

-. 5
-.4

-. 4
.0

.1
.1

I-11

CONFIDENTIAL  - FR
CLASS  II  FOMC

GROSS  NATIONAL  PRODUCT AND RELATED ITEMS

(Seasonally adjusted;  annual rate)

September 14,  1988

Projection

1987 

1988 

1989

Units 

Q3 

Q4 

Ql 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4

EXPENDITURES

Nominal GNP
Real  GNP

Nominal GNP
Real GNP
Gross  domestic  product
Gross  domestic  purchases

Final  sales
Private  dom. final purchases

Personal  consumption expend.

Durables
Nondurables
Services

Business  fixed  investment

Producers'  durable equipment
Nonresidential  structures

Residential  structures

Exports
Imports

Government  purchases

Federal

Defense

State  and  local

Billions  of  $
Billions  of  82$

4568.0
3865.3

4662.8
3923.0

4724.5
3956.1

4819.7
3988.1

4896.6
4012.5

4970.1
4028.8

5072.6
4072.4

5154.1
4099.4

5231.8
4124.1

5307.1
4148.3

Percent  change

7.7
4.5
4.7
4.8

6.1
6.6

8.6
6.1
5.8
5.4

.4
-1.3

4.6

16.5

.9
3.7

-2.1

-17.3

-. 6
2.2

28.4
29.4
25.6
-10.7

25.7
23.4

5.7
12.6
7.3
.6

1.7
-2.4
13.4

1.3

17.7

9.9

5.0
6.7
-1.9
3.8

5.4
3.4
4.2
1.6

3.6
4.3

4.5
14.7
1.0
4.0

7.6

21.6
-22.4

-6.5

25.7
6.9

-7.9
-21.0
-5.3
3.5

8.3
3.3
3.1
1.3

6.5
4.6

2.7
8.4
.0
3.0

16.3
17.9
12.1

1.1

11.6
-3.6

3.6
4.0
-2.1
3.2

6.5
2.5
2.6
2.0

2.9
3.0

3.1
7.3
-. 1
4.1

6.1
10.2
-5.3
-5.3

14.0
9.1

-. 1
-3.7
-7.8
2.7

6.1
1.6
1.8
1.2

2.9
2.8

2.5
2.9
2.4
2.4

5.4
8.0
-1.9
-. 1

13.0

8.5

1.4
.5
-5.2
2.0

8.5
4.4
4.4
3.8

2.6
2.1

1.7
-. 3
1.6
2.5

5.6
7.0
1.3
-2.2

14.5

8.9

1.9
1.8
-2.0
2.0

6.6
2.7
2.8
1.9

2.4
1.6

1.3
-. 9
.8
2.3

5.4
6.5
1.8
-3.9

13.3
6.9

2.1
2.3
-. 3
2.0

6.2
2.4
2.4
1.5

2.6
1.5

1.3

.7
.2
2.3

3.9
5.5

-1.0
-3.3

12.9
5.0

2.3
2.7
-. 9
2.1

5.9
2.4
2.3
1.1

3.1
1.4

1.3

.8
.2
2.3

2.6
4.5
-3.2
-. 7

13.5

3.6

3.0
4.3
-. 6
2.2

Change  in business  inventories

Nonfarm
Net exports

Billions  of  82$
Billions  of  82$
Billions  of 82$

13.0
18.3

-130.7

67.1
68.2
-126.0

66.0
51.9
-109.0

36.0
31.1
-90.1

32.4
34.7
-86.3

19.7
37.7
-82.7

37.4
35.8
-77.7

40.1
35.9

-70.8

38.5
33.0
-61.1

31.7
27.7
-48.1

EMPLOYMENT 

AND PRODUCTION

m payroll employment

Unemployment  rate

Millions
Percent*

102.7
6.0

103.7
5.9

104.7
5.7

105.6
5.5

106.5

5.5

107.0

5.5

107.5

5.5

107.8

5.6

108.2
5.7

108.5

5.7

Industrial  production index
Capacity  utilization rate-mfg.

Percent  change
Percent*

Housing Starts
Auto  sales
Domestic
Foreign

INCOME AND  SAVING

Millions
Millions
Millions
Millions

8.8

81.4

1.62
11.42
7.84
3.58

7.0
82.3

1.53
10.02
6.63
3.38

3.9
82.7

1.48
10.79
7.64
3.15

4.6

83.2

1.48
10.76
7.57
3.19

6.7
83.9

1.47
10.63
7.59
3.04

4.1

84.1

1.44
10.80
7.62
3.18

3.1
84.0

1.42
10.52
7.42
3.10

2.8
83.9

1.40
10.27
7.22
3.05

2.5
83.8

1.38
10.29
7.27
3.02

2.2
83.5

1.37
10.27
7.27
3.00

Nominal  personal  income
Real  disposable  income
Personal  saving  rate

Percent change
Percent change
Percent*

Corp. profits with  IVA &  CCAdj

Profit  share of  GNP

Percent change
Percent*

7.1
4.8
2.3

23.9
7.0

11.6
6.9
4.3

-7.1
6.8

4.6
5.0
4.4

.1
6.7

7.3
.3
3.9

21.5
6.9

6.6
3.0
3.9

-4.0
6.7

8.0
2.7
3.9

-8.8
6.5

9.3
4.3
4.5

8.4
6.5

6.4

.8
4.4

6.9
6.5

5.8
.9
4.2

-2.1

6.3

6.7
1.4
4.2

-2.1

6.2

Federal  govt.  surplus/deficit
State  and local  govt.  surplus
Exc. social  insurance funds

Billions  of  $

-138.3
52.9
-10.1

-160.4
49.7

-14.8

-155.1
55.8

-10.3

-130.9
56.2
-11.6

-132.6
59.4
-9.5

-141.0
62.9
-7.2

-143.5
67.2
-4.1

-137.8
69.5
-3.0

-132.0
70.6
-3.1

-136.3
71.7
-3.2

PRICES AND COSTS

GNP  implicit  deflator
GNP  fixed-weight price  index

Cons.  & fixed  invest, prices

CPI

Exc. food  and energy

Nonfarm  business  sector

Output  per hour
Compensation per hour
Unit  labor costs

,t  an  annual  rate.

Percent  change

3.1
3.7
3.9
3.6
3.6

3.7
4.5
.7

2.4
3.8
4.3
3.9
4.2

.9 
6.4 
5.4 

1.7
3.5
2.5
3.2
4.4

3.4
3.5
.1

5.1
4.7
4.7
4.9
5.0

-1.4 
4.2 
5.7 

3.8
5.2
4.7
4.8
4.4

1.5
4.5
3.0

4.4
4.4
4.6
4.7
5.3

.9 
4.7 
3.8 

3.9
5.0
4.7
5.0
5.1

.4
5.1
4.7

3.8
4.4
4.7
4.8
5.1

.7
4.9
4.2

3.6
4.3
4.6
4.7
5.2

.7

5.1
4.4

3.4
4.3
4.6
4.8
5.3

.8
5.2
4.4

CONFIDENTIAL - FR
CLASS  II  FOMC

GROSS NATIONAL  PRODUCT AND RELATED  ITEMS

(Seasonally adjusted;  annual  rate)

September  14,  1988

Projection

Units

1981 

1982 

1983 

1984 

1985 

1986 

1987

1988 

1989

I-12

EXPENDITURES

Nominal  GNP
Real GNP

Real GNP
Gross domestic product
Gross  domestic purchases

Final  sales
Private  dom. final  purchases

Personal  consumption expend.

Durables
Nondurables
Services

Business  fixed  investment

Producers'  durable equipment
Nonresidential  structures

Residential  structures

Exports
Imports

Government purchases

Federal

Defense

State  and local

Change  in business  inventories

Nonfarm
Net exports

Nominal  GNP

EMLOYMENT AND  PRODUCTION

Billions  of  $
Billions  of 82$

3052.6
3248.8

3166.0
3166.0

3405.7
3279.1

3772.2
3501.4

4014.9
3618.7

4240.3
3721.7

4526.7
3847.0

4852.7
3996.4

5191.4
4111.1

Percent change*

.6
.3
.8

-1.9
-1.6
-. 8

.1
-. 3

.2
-3.3
.5
.9

5.6
2.2
11.7
-22.4

2.4
4.9

2.9
9.5
7.6
-1.3

23.9
19.0
49.4

Billions  of 82$
Billions  of  82$
Billions  of 82$

.3
.8

2.9
9.0
1.8
2.3

-11.3
-12.5
-9.1

4.9

-13.8
-5.9

3.8
8.2
8.8

.6

6.5
6.6
8.4

3.7
7.7

5.4
14.7
4.4
3.9

10.8
20.9
-4.8
38.1

5.8
23.8

-2.7
-8.1
5.1
1.5

5.1
5.3
6.4

4.7
5.6

4.1
10.8
2.3
3.5

13.8
14.9
11.8
6.1

5.9
17.4

7.9
13.0
6.5
4.4

3.6
3.8
4.3

4.6
4.6

4.6
7.0
3.3
5.0

3.7
4.6
1.9
5.8

-2.4
4.5

8.6
13.3
7.1
4.9

2.0
2.3
2.4

2.5
2.8

4.2
11.5
3.1
2.7

-7.3
-2.4
-17.4
11.3

5.6
7.6

2.9

.0
4.8
5.3

5.0
5.1
4.4

3.0
2.4

1.8
-2.4
.6
4.2

8.8
9.6
6.7
-3.5

18.4
10.4

2.3
2.1
6.0
2.5

2.7
2.9
1.5

4.0
3.7

3.2
8.2
.8
3.4

8.8

14.3
-5.2
-2.7

15.9
5.1

-.8
-5.6
-5.1
2.9

3.0
3.0
2.1

2.7
1.6

1.4
.1
.7
2.3

4.4
5.9
-. 3
-2.5

13.6

6.1

2.4
2.8
-1.0
2.1

-24.5
-23.1
26.3

-6.4
-.1

-19.9

62.3
57.8
-84.0

9.1
13.4
-104.3

15.4
17.9
-137.5

34.4
36.9
-128.9

38.5
38.9
-92.0

36.9
33.1
-64.4

Percent change*

9.3

3.1

10.4

8.6

6.6

4.8

8.3

6.6

6.8

nfarm payroll employment

Unemployment rate

Millions
Percent

Industrial  production index
Capacity utilization rate-mfg.

Percent  change*
Percent

Housing Starts
Auto sales
Domestic
Foreign

INCOME AND  SAVING

Millions
Millions
Millions
Millions

91.2
7.6

-1.0
78.2

1.10
8.56
6.24
2.32

89.6
9.7

-7.7
70.3

1.06
8.00
5.77
2.23

Nominal  personal  income
Real  disposable  income
Personal  saving  rate

Percent  change*
Percent  change*
Percent

Corp. profits with IVA L CCAdj

Profit  share of GNP

Percent  change*
Percent

9.2

.7
7.5

2.3
6.2

5.3
1.0
6.8

-19.1
4.7

90.2
9.6

14.3
73.9

1.71
9.18
6.77
2.41

7.8
5.1
5.4

70.1
6.3

94.5
7.5

6.6
80.5

1.77
10.43
7.97
2.46

97.5
7.2

1.7
80.1

1.74
11.09
8.24
2.84

99.5
7.0

1.0
79.7

1.81
11.52
8.28
3.25

102.3
6.2

105.9
5.5

108.0

5.6

5.8
81.0

1.63
10.34
7.14
3.21

4.8
83.5

1.47
10.75
7.60
3.14

2.6
83.8

1.39
10.34
7.30
3.04

8.4
4.3
6.1

7.4
7.1

6.6
2.7
4.4

9.2
7.0

5.9
3.4
4.0

.9
7.0

8.5
3.0
3.2

7.6
6.9

6.6
2.8
4.0

1.6
6.7

7.0
1.8
4.3

2.7
6.4

Federal  govt.  surplus/deficit
State  and  local  govt.  surplus
Exc.  social  insurance funds

Billions  of $

-63.8
34.1
4.1

-145.9
35.1
-1.7

-176.0

47.5
4.4

-169.6
64.6
19.8

-196.9
65.1
13.8

-205.6
61.2
5.0

-157.8
52.9
-9.2

-139.9
58.6
-9.7

-137.4
69.8
-3.3

PRICES AND  COSTS

GNP implicit  deflator
GNP  fixed-weight  price  index

Cons.  & fixed invest,  prices

CPI

Exc. food and energy

Nonfarm business  sector

Output per hour
Compensation per hour
Unit  labor costs

Percent change*

8.7
8.5
8.2
9.6
10.2

-. 6
8.3
9.0

5.2
5.0
4.4
4.4
5.2

1.0
7.3
6.2

3.6
3.9
3.3
3.2
4.2

3.6
3.3
-. 3

3.4
3.7
3.3
4.1
4.8

1.5 
4.2 
2.6 

2.9
3.3
3.4
3.5
4.3

1.5
4.5
2.9

2.8
2.7
2.5
1.3
3.9

1.2
4.2
3.0

3.1
4.0
4.7
4.4
4.3

1.9
4.1
2.1

3.8
4.4
4.1
4.4
4.8

1.1
4.2
3.1

3.7
4.5
4.7
4.8
5.2

.7
5.1
4.4

'ercent changes  are  from fourth

quarter to  fourth quarter.

CONFIDENTIAL  - FR
CLASS  II  FOMC

GROSS  NATIONAL PRODUCT AND RELATED  ITEMS
(Net changes,  billions  of 1982  dollars)

September  14,  1988

Projection 

Projection

1987 

1989 
------------  ------------------------------ 

1988 

---------------------------- 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989

(fourth quarter  to  fourth quarter,
net  change)

Real GNP
Gross domestic product
Gross domestic purchases

42.3 
43.6 
47.0 

57.7 
54.3 
53.0 

33.1 
40.3 
16.1 

32.0 
30.2 
13.1 

24.4 
25.3 
20.7 

16.2 
18.1 
12.6 

43.7 
43.8 
38.6 

26.9 
27.8 
20.1 

24.8 
24.5 
15.1 

Final  sales
Private  dom. final  purchases

57.0 
51.0 

3.7 
-10.7 

34.2 
33.4 

62.0 
36.2 

28.0 
24.4 

28.9 
22.6 

26.0 
17.2 

24.2 
13.2 

26.4 
12.1 

Personal  consumption expend.

Durables
Nondurables
Services

Business  fixed  investment

Producers'  durable equipment
Nonresidential  structures

Residential  structures

Change  in business  inventories

Nonfarm
Farm

Net exports
Exports
Imports

Government purchases

Federal

Defense
Nondefense
State  and  local

28.6 
15.2 
2.1 
11.3 

28.0 
20.9 
7.1 
-5.5 

-14.8 
-6.7 
-8.0 

-4.7 
24.5 
29.3 

10.7 
10.0 
4.7 
5.3 
.7 

-13.5 
-18.9 
-1.4 
6.8 

2.0 
-2.0 
4.1 
.6 

28.1 
13.5 
2.2 
12.3 

8.6 
16.7 
-8.1 
-3.2 

17.4 
8.2 
.0 
9.3 

18.2 
14.7 
3.6 
.5 

54.1 
49.9 
4.2 

4.7 
18.3 
13.6 

9.7 
5.6 
-1.3 
6.9 
4.1 

-1.1 
-16.3 
15.2 

-30.0 
-20.8 
-9.1 

17.0 
27.0 
9.9 

-16.2 
-19.9 
-3.6 
-16.3 
3.8 

18.9 
13.5 
-5.4 

6.9 
3.2 
-1.4 
4.6 
3.6 

19.8 
7.3 
-.2 
12.7 

16.0 
3.0 
5.3 
7.7 

7.3 
8.9 
-1.7 
-2.5 

-3.6 
3.6 
-7.3 

3.8 
16.6 
13.0 

-.1 
-3.1 
-5.3 
2.2 
3.0 

6.6 
7.2 
-.6 
.0 

-12.7 

3.0 
-15.7 

3.6 
16.1 
12.4 

2.7 
.4 
-3.4 
3.8 
2.3 

11.3 
-.4 
3.6 
8.0 

6.9 
6.5 
.4 
-1.1 

17.7 
-1.9 
19.6 

5.1 
18.4 
13.3 

3.7 
1.4 
-1.3 
2.7 
2.3 

8.3 
-.9 
1.8 
7.4 

6.7 
6.2 
.6 
-1.8 

2.7 

.1 
2.6 

6.9 
17.4 
10.6 

4.2 
1.9 
-.2 
2.1 
2.3 

8.6 
.7 
.5 
7.5 

5.0 
5.3 
-.3 
-1.5 

-1.6 
-2.9 
1.3 

9.6 
17.5 
7.9 

4.6 
2.2 
-.6 
2.8 
2.4 

I 

72.3
83.3
89.4

90.5
85.8

99.3
40.9
27.0
31.4

-33.6
-7.6
-26.1
20.3

-18.2
-22.0

3.8

-17.1
20.4
37.6

21.8
-. 1

11.7
-11.8
21.9

24.1
23.5
11.1

30.9
11.9

8.8
.8
.5
7.5

3.4
4.4
-1.0
-.3

-6.8
-5.3
-1.5

13.1
18.9
5.8

6.0
3.5
-.4
3.9
2.5

I

188.3 
188.3 
171.9 

110.7 
76.2 

45.5 
-9.7 

5.2 
50.0 

37.5 
29.2 
8.3 
-7.0 

77.6 
67.0 
10.6 

16.4 
71.4 
55.0 

18.1 
7.2 
15.1 
-7.9 
10.9 

105.8
113.9
62.5

153.2
116.6

81.3
32.0

7.3

42.0

40.7
47.5
-6.8
-5.3

-47.4
-30.5
-16.9

43.3
73.2
29.9

7

-
-19.4
-13.7
-5.7
12.7

119.5
119.6
84.9

107.5
54.3

37.0

.2
6.3

30.4

22.0
22.4

-. 4

-4.7

12.0
-10.0

22.0

34.7
72.3
37.6

18.6
9.1
-2.5
11.6
9.5

CONFIDENTIAL FR  CLASS  II

FEDERAL  SECTOR ACCOUNTS
(Billions of  dollars)

Fiscal
Year
1987a

___ 
Admin1

FY1988p

CB0 2 Staff

__ 
Admin1

FY1989p
CBO 2

Staff
Staff

1987
IVa

I

BUDGET
Budget  receipts 3  
Budget outlays 
Surplus/deficit(-)
to be  financed 
On-budget) 
Off-budget) 

Means  of  financing:
Borrowing from  public 
Cash  balance decrease 
Other 

854
1005

-150
-170

20

152
-5
4

Cash  operating  balance,

end of  period 

36

NIPA FEDERAL SECTOR

913 
1066 

908 
1063 

-152
-192
40

-155
-194

39

905 
1063 

-158
-197

39

974 
1097 

980 
1127 

-123
-174

51

-148
-199

52

975
1133

-158
-205
47

205 
287 

-82 
-68 
-14 

133 
16 
3 

n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 

164
-3
-3

118 
0 
5 

n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 

153
-6
11

September  14,  1988

1918 

FRB  Staff  Projection

Ia 

208 
245 

-37 
-64 
27 

19  88 

IIa 

III 

IV 

I 

1989
II 

III

Not  seasonally  adjusted

212 
283 

-71 
-78 
6 

229 
283 

-53 
-67 
14 

268 
268 

1 
-18 
18 

19 
-17 
-3 

224 
263 

-39 
-48 
9 

42
0
-3

285 
281 

4 
-14 
18 

19 
-15 
-7 

249
286

-37
-46
9

35
-10
12

20 

n.a. 

40 

20 

n.a.

23 

23 

40 

40 

14 

21 

36 

46

Seasonally adjusted  annual  rates

Receipts
Expenditures
Purchases
Defense
Nondefense

All  other  expend.

Surplus/deficit(-)

FISCAL  INDICATORS'

895
1058
376
290
86
682
-164

973
1102
375
289
86
727
-129

966
1103
381
298
83
722
-137

966
1111
382
298
85
728
-145

1042
1147
396
295
101
751
-105

1037
1171
396
306
91
775
-134

1037
1176
394
297
97
782
-139

944
1105
391
299
92
714
-160

951
1106
378
298
79
728
-155

984
1115
382
298
83
733
-131

985
1118
379
295
85
739
-133

1002
1143
383
293
91
760
-141

1030
1173
393
297
96
781
-143

1052
1190
398
299
99
792
-138

1066
1199
402
300
102
797
-132

High-employment surplus/
deficit(-),  (HEB) 

Change  in HEB,  percent
of  potential GNP 
Fiscal  impetus  measure,

-140

-1.1

n.a.

n.a.

(FI),  percent 

4.5  *

n.a.

n.a. 

-. 3  * 

n.a.

n.a.

-3.6  *

-. 5

n.a. 

.3 

n.a.

n.a.

0

.8 

0 

.1 

-.4

-. 2 

0 

.1 

.2 

-.1 

-1.

4 

-1.5 

-1.4 

-.2 

-. 1

-.3

n.a. 

-153 

n.a.

n.a.

-154

-163 

-162 

-143 

-14

i5  -151 

-160 

-155 

-148

a--actual

p--projection

*--calendar  year

n.a.--not  available

Note:  Details  may not  add to

totals  due  to  rounding.

Mid-Session Review of  the Fiscal  1989  Budget  (July 28,  1988).
The Ecomonic  and Budget  Outlook:  An  Update (August,  1988).
Ancludes  social  security (OASDI)  recei  ts,  outlays  and  surplus  respectively.  The  OASDI  surplus  is excluded  from the
on-budget  deficit and shown  separately as  off-budget  , as  classified  under current  law.
Checks  issued  less  checks paid,  accrued  items  and  changes  in  other  financial  assets  and  liabilities.
HEB  is the NIPA measure in  current  dollars  with cyclically-sensitive  receipts  and outlays  adjusted to  a 6 percent
unemployment  rate.  Quarterly  figures  for  change  in  HEB  and FI  are not at  annual  rates.  Change  in HEB,  as  a percent of
nominal  potential  GNP,  is reversed  in  sign.  FI  is the  weighted difference of discretionary federal  spending and  tax
changes (in  1982  dollars),  scaled  by real  federal  purchases.  For change  in  HEB  and FI,  (-) indicates restraint.

DOMESTIC  FINANCIAL  DEVELOPMENTS

Recent  Developments

Although  federal  funds  have  continued  to  trade  around the  8-1/8

percent  level  reached shortly before  the  August  FOMC meeting, most other

market  interest  rates  have  declined on  balance over  the  intermeeting

period.  Market  participants  generally interpreted the  August employment

report,  in  particular, as  portending somewhat  less  economic  strength

than previously had been anticipated, which--combined with  softer oil

prices--suggested to  many a less  worrisome  outlook for  inflation and

diminished prospects  for  further monetary tightening.  Interest  rates

are  down as  much as  3/8  of  a percentage  point  for  the period--with the

notable exception  of the  three-month  Treasury bill rate,  which appears

to  have  been boosted  by recent  increases  in  the  supply  of  bills.  Broad

stock price  indexes  have  increased  about  2 percent,  aided by the

declines  in  interest  rates.

The  monetary aggregates  continued  to  slow  in  August.  Growth of  M2

fell  to around  a 2 percent  annual  rate,  as  depositors reacted to

increasing opportunity costs  of  holding monetary assets,  while M3

expansion dropped to about  a 4 percent  rate,  as  banks adjusted to

slowing core  deposit  inflows  in  part  by increasing their  reliance  on

managed liabilities  not  included  in  the  monetary aggregates--especially

borrowings  from their foreign  branches.  M2  and M3  are  estimated to  have

expanded at  6-1/4  and 7 percent annual  rates  from the  fourth  quarter

I-15

I-16

through August,  leaving these  aggregates,  respectively, near  and

somewhat  above  the midpoints of  their  4-to-8  percent target  ranges.

The composition  of monetary growth was  somewhat  more  consistent  in

August  than  in  recent  months  with the  steepening  deposit yield  curve,  as

growth  in  small time  deposits  picked up  and  liquid household deposits

contracted slightly.  Over  the  summer, the  composition  of  deposit  growth

by type of  depository  institution has  changed as  well.  In  particular,

small  time deposit  growth at  thrift  institutions has  been much weaker

than at  commercial  banks--a  reversal  of  the experience  over much of  the

post-deregulation period--and may  reflect  less aggressive  bidding  for

funds  by troubled thrifts  as  a result  of  pressure by  regulators.

Bank credit  growth remained moderate  last month  as  a rebound  in

holdings of  government  securities  was  partly  offset by  slower  growth of

business  loans.  To  some  extent,  this  slowing likely reflected a shift

in bookings  away  from domestic  offices to  foreign branches  of  U.S.  banks

as  the  prime-LIBOR spread  widened after the August prime  rate  increase,

as  well  as  a rebound  in  commercial  paper outstanding,  which had dropped

sharply in  July.  Public bond offerings  by nonfinancial  corporations

picked up  a little  in August,  but  remained relatively light.  A sizable

share  of  bond issuance  in this  quarter has  been in  the  junk  bond market,

which  appears to have  been  little  affected by the  charges recently

brought  by the SEC  against  Drexel Burnham Lambert,  although the market

has  not yet  been tested by  any large  new issues.

The  apparent moderation  in  overall  business borrowing in  recent

months  in  the  face  of  what  is  estimated to  be  an  appreciable  financing

I-17

gap  likely  is due  in  part  to  some  slackening  in  the pace of  net  share

retirements  from  the  record  pace  of  the  second  quarter.  In  contrast  to

the  uptick  in bond  issuance,  new equity  offerings  by nonfinancial

corporations  again fell off  appreciably in August,  likely in  response to

the  dropoff  in  share  prices  early in the  month.

Issuance of  municipal bonds  slowed  in August,  as  offerings  of  bonds

for  new capital  fell off and refunding bonds  remained near  the  weak  July

rate.  However,  sales  of  short-term notes  surged, primarily reflecting a

large  offering by the  state  of  California.

After  being near balance in  the  second quarter, the  federal  deficit

is  estimated to be deepening to about  $39  billion  in the  third quarter,

bringing the  figure  for  the  fiscal year to about  $158  billion.  Net  cash

borrowing from the public is  likely  to total about  $42  billion  for  the

quarter, with the  increase  from the  second quarter  largely accounted for

by  a swing from net  runoffs  of  bills  last  quarter to net  issuance of

about  $16-1/2  billion.  (An accelerated pace  of  special note  issuance by

the  FSLIC also is  adding to outlays and borrowing this  quarter.)

Limited available  evidence suggests  that  households have  cut  back

their pace  of  borrowing in  the  third quarter.  Residential mortgage

originations  appear to have  slowed in July, as  new home  sales  and

turnover  of  existing homes  have  been curtailed by  rising mortgage

interest  costs,  although the  effects of  rising rates  may have  been

moderated by the availability of  ARMs.  The  proportion of  conventional

mortgages  closed  with adjustable  rates  at  FSLIC-insured  institutions has

continued to  climb,  reaching  61  percent in  early August.  Lenders appear

I-18

to have  been pricing ARMs  even more  aggressively in  recent months,  in

attempts to  increase market  share.  Consumer installment  credit  expanded

at  less  than a 5 percent  annual  rate  in July,  down  from an average  9-1/2

percent pace in the  second quarter, mirroring a sharp slowing in  auto

loans  and  revolving credit;  commercial  bank  figures  for August,  although

a bit  stronger than in July, suggest  continued  subdued consumer

borrowing.

Outlook

The staff's  economic and  financial  forecast  is  similar to that

presented in  August.  The projection once  again assumes that  the  Federal

Reserve will  continue to tighten money market  conditions  over the  next

few  quarters to  contain inflationary pressures.  Bond  rates, too,  are

expected  to rise  appreciably in response to the firming  stance  of

monetary policy, which  seems to be  largely unanticipated in the  current

structure  of  rates--owing perhaps to  a more  optimistic view than the

staff's  of what  degree  of  restraint  likely will  be  required to  damp

aggregate demand.

Expansion of domestic nonfinancial  sector  debt  is  expected  to pick

up to an  annual  rate  of  about  9 percent over the balance  of the year,

reflecting an acceleration of  federal borrowing.  For  the year, the  debt

aggregate  is  projected to expand about  8-3/4  percent,  slightly below the

center  of  its monitoring range.  Debt  growth is  projected to  edge  down

to an average  8 percent rate  over  1989.

Net  Treasury borrowing in the  fourth  quarter of this year  is

expected to be  about equally divided between bills  and  coupon

I-19

securities;  if the  Treasury does  not  receive  renewed authority to  issue

long-term bonds,  still more  funds  likely will  be  raised in  the  bill

sector,  and this pattern will  tend to  sustain the  flatter yield  curve

that  has  emerged recently.  In  addition to stepping up its  borrowing in

the  fourth  quarter, the Treasury is  expected to draw down  its  cash

balance  by about  $26  billion to help  finance  a widening deficit.  Growth

of  federal  debt  is  expected to slow  a bit  in  1989  from this year's pace.

Borrowing by  state  and local  governments is  projected to remain

relatively  subdued over the  projection horizon.

The  corporate  financing  gap is forecast  to widen further over  the

next  few quarters  as  internal  funds  slip  below the record pace reached

in  the  first  half  of  1988,  while capital  expenditures  continue to  rise,

albeit  at  a somewhat  slower pace.  Aggregate needs for  external  funds

are  expected to moderate,  however, in  response to  an appreciable  slowing

in net  equity  retirements  as  fewer  deals  look  attractive  in an

environment  of  higher  interest  rates  and slower  growth.  The  expected

rising trend of interest  rates  is  likely to  encourage  continued reliance

on bank loans  and commercial  paper, and the  ratio of short-term to total

business debt  is  projected to  continue to  rise.

The  pace  of  household borrowing is  expected to  drift  lower  over  the

projection period.  Mortgage borrowing  should  continue to subside  as

housing activity weakens  further  in  response to  rising mortgage  rates.

In  addition, higher  interest  rates and  sluggish growth  in  personal

disposable  income  are  expected to  restrain expenditures on  consumer

durables and consumer borrowing.

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS

Recent  Developments

The  trade-weighted  foreign  exchange value  of  the  dollar  against

other G-10 currencies  rose  in  response  to  the  favorable  July merchandise

trade  figures,  and on balance has been little  changed  since  the  August

FOMC  meeting.  The  dollar  declined slightly  against  the  mark  and other

EC  currencies,  while  showing  little  net  change  against  the  yen.  The

dollar's  advance  after  the  August  9  discount  rate  increase  persisted

into  late  August, but  slowed as  the  Bundesbank  and other  European

central  banks  raised discount rates  by  1/2  percentage  point and  Bank of

England dealing  rates  rose by  a  full  percentage point.  The  release  in

early September  of softer-than-expected U.S.  employment  data  for  August

added  to  downward pressure  on the  dollar,  as  market participants  seemed

to  revise  their views  on the  likelihood of  further  tightening by  the

Federal  Reserve.

during the  intermeeting period, particularly  as  the  mark  strengthened

Pressures  within  the  EMS  intensified

I-20

I-21

against  the  dollar.

After  a very strong first  quarter,  economic  activity  in major

foreign industrial  countries  slackened  in  the  second quarter,  and

economic performance diverged.  In Germany,  real  GNP  declined slightly

in  the  second quarter,  while French  growth  slowed to  a moderate  pace.

Industrial  production, housing starts  and export volume  fell  in Japan

and comments  by government officials  indicate  that  real  GNP  is  expected

to  have  fallen  in  the  second quarter.  In  contrast,  real  GNP  accelerated

in  Canada and  the United Kingdom  in the  second  quarter.  Germany

recorded another  large  trade  surplus  in June, bringing  the  cumulative

surplus  for  the  first half considerably above  the  year-earlier rate.

Japan's cumulative  surplus  (through August)  is  down somewhat  from last

year's  rate,  despite  an upturn in  export volume  during  the  summer.  In

the  United Kingdom there were  record trade  and current account  deficits

in July, and  the  cumulative  deficits  so  far  this  year  (not annualized)

substantially  exceed the  totals  for the  full  year  1987.

Final  IMF  Executive  Board approval  of a new stand-by  arrangement

for Brazil has  occurred following successful  syndication  to  creditor

banks  of  a financing package,  and the  first  of  six  tranches  has been

drawn.  However,  the new  Brazilian constitution to be  promulgated

October  5 requires  that  all major budgetary and financial  decisions  and

international  financial  agreements be  approved by the  congress,  greatly

increasing  the  difficulty of achieving  future  agreements.  The  incomes

I-22

policy implemented  in Argentina in early August appears  likely  to  reduce

the  rate  of inflation, at  least  temporarily;  it  still  remains  uncertain

whether  the  government will achieve necessary  fiscal  reforms.

Postponement of  disbursement  dates  for World Bank  loans  has  led to

delays  in  disbursement of  the  $500  million U.S.  Treasury  and BIS bridge

loans  agreed to  in principle  in August.

Preliminary data  for July  show  a nominal U.S.  merchandise  trade

deficit of  $9.5  billion on a CIF basis,  down significantly  from the

favorable second-quarter  rate.  Details will be  included  in  the

Greenbook Supplement.  The U.S.  merchandise trade  deficit  in  the  second

quarter was  $120  billion at  a seasonally  adjusted annual  rate  (balance

of payments basis),  substantially smaller  than in  the previous  quarter.

Real  merchandise exports  rose  in  the  second quarter  at  a 17  percent

annual  rate with notable  increases  in civilian aircraft,  industrial

supplies and consumer  goods.  Agricultural exports  also  rose.  The

volume  of  non-oil  imports  declined in  the  second quarter,  reflecting in

particular  lower  imports  of  automotive products  and  consumer goods,

while  imports  of  capital  goods  rose  strongly  (largely due  to  increases

in Airbuses and  semiconductors).  The  rise  in  oil  imports  in  the  second

quarter was  due  to  a greater  than normal build-up  of  inventories  in

anticipation of higher prices.  However,  with  improved prospects  for

peace  in  the  Persian Gulf, prices  have fallen  sharply in  recent  weeks.

Receipts  on both travel and passenger  fares  increased  for  the

eighth consecutive  quarter,  helping to  boost net services  receipts by

I-23

$3.5  billion, while  direct  investment  income,  excluding  capital  gains

and losses,  rose  by $4.3  billion.

Foreign official  reserve  assets  in the United States  were

essentially unchanged in July,  after declining  in June.

Partial information  for August indicates  additional

reductions  in G-10  official holdings  at  the  FRBNY.  Private foreign

residents  (mainly Japanese, but  also German  and British)  added $2.9

billion net  to  their holdings  of U.S.  Treasuries  and $4.4 billion net to

portfolios  of U.S.  corporate  bonds  and stocks,  in both cases  these  net

purchases were well  above  the  pace  in  the  first half of  the  year.

Outlook

The  staff projection for  the  foreign exchange value  of  the dollar

against other  G-10 currencies  is  unchanged from  the  August Greenbook.

After  remaining around recent  levels  for  the  balance of  1988,  the  dollar

is  expected to  decline  moderately in 1989.

Economic  activity  in major  industrial countries  is  expected  to

rebound from its  second-quarter  lull,  and to  grow  to  an  annual  rate  of

around 2 percent over  the  forecast horizon.  This  pace  is  somewhat below

the  unexpectedly strong average  for  the  first  half of  the year,  and

reflects  in  part policies  to  restrain  expansion  implemented in  several

I-24

countries.  In developing countries,  economic activity  is  expected to

recover  somewhat  in 1989.

The  staff expects oil  import prices  to  recover  from the  depressed

level  in  the  third quarter,  and to  average about  $15.50  in  1989.  There

is  a substantial band of uncertainty around  this projection, related  to

the  ending of hostilities between Iran  and Iraq,  and the  projection is

well  within the band.  To  illustrate  the margin of  uncertainty, if  Iran

and Iraq  should add another  2 mb/day of oil  to  the market without

comparable reductions  from other OPEC  states,  the  oil price  might well

drop to  around $10  during 1989.

The U.S.  trade  deficit  is  projected to  narrow to  close  to  $90

billion  at  an annual  rate  by the  fourth quarter of  1989.  More  than half

of  the projected improvement of  $75  billion, measured from the  fourth

quarter of  1987,  has  already been realized  in  the  second quarter,  as

non-agricultural  exports have expanded strongly, and both oil  and non-

oil  imports have changed relatively little.  The  slower  rate  of

improvement projected  for  the  trade  deficit over  the balance  of  this

year  and next reflects  mainly an  expected resumption of growth  in non-

oil  imports  in both nominal  and real  terms,  together with some  gradual

slowing  in  the  growth of non-agricultural exports  from the  exceptional

pace of  the past two  years.

The U.S.  current account  deficit is  expected to  decline to  an

annual  rate  of about  $105  billion by the  fourth  quarter of 1989.  The

expected  improvement  is  about  the  same  as  for  the  trade account;  rising

net U.S.  interest payments,  resulting from the  upward movement in dollar

I-25

interest  rates  that  underlies  the  forecast,  are  expected to  be  offset  by

increases  in net receipts  from U.S.  direct  investments  abroad  and other

services.

Improvement  in  the  nominal trade  and current  account positions  is

expected to  be  accompanied by  a larger  improvement  in  real net  exports

of  goods  and services,  as  import prices  rise  faster  than  export prices

in  1989.

Strictly Confidential  (FR)
Class  II FOMC

Outlook for  U.S.  Net Exports  and Related Items
(Billions of  Dollars, Seasonally Adjusted  Annual  Rates)

1. GNP  Exports and  Imports  1/

1987-  1988-P  1989I-P 

ANNUAL  1919 

Q3- 

-7

Q4-

Ql- 

1988

Q2- 

Q3-P 

Q4-P

QI-P 

1989

Q2-P 

Q3-P 

Q4-P

Current  4, Net

Exports of G+S
Imports of G+S

Constant  82  t, Net
Exports of G+S
Imports of G+S

-123.1  -90.2  -67.0
428.1  518.8  607.5
551.1  609.1  674.5

-125.2  -125.7  -112.1  -88.6  -80.7  -79.6 
487.8  508.0  530.0  549.5 
599.9  596.6  610.7  629.1 

440.4  459.7 
565.6  585.4 

-76.6  -72.5  -64.3  -54.6
573.9  596.1  618.5  641.3
650.5  668.6  682.8  695.9

-128.9  -92.1  -64.5
427.8  508.6  577.3
556.7  600.6  641.7

-130.7  -126.0  -109.0  -90.1  -86.4  -82.8 
486.2  499.7  516.3  532.4 
595.1  589.7  602.7  615.1 

440.9  459.2 
571.6  585.2 

-77.8  -70.9  -61.2  -48.2
550.8  568.2  585.7  604.6
628.4  639.0  646.9  652.7

2. U.S.  Merchandise Trade  Balance 2/

-160.3  -121.5  -101.0

-158.7  -164.8  -140.7  -119.7  -114.0  -111.4  -109.2  -105.3  -98.5  -91.0

Exports

Agricultural
Non-Agricultural

Imports

Petroleum  and Products
Non-Petroleum

249.6  322.2  375.7
46.3
220.1  283.6  329.5

29.5 

38.5 

409.9  443.6  476.8
44.1
367.0  404.3  432.7

39.3 

42.9 

259.6  272.1 
33  1  30.5 
226.5  241.6 

418.3  436.8 
45.2 
367.2  391.7 

51.0 

301.2  318.7  328.1  340.8 
40.7 
265.1  279.9  289.6  300.0 

38.5 

38.8 

36.1 

355.2  368.3  382.1  397.4
50.1
311.6  323.6  335.5  347.3

46.6 

44.7 

43.6 

441.9  438.4  442.1  452.2 
38.5 
402.1  397.5  404.0  413.6 

40.9 

39.8 

38.0 

464.4  473.6  480.6  488.4
46.2
422.2  4,.  8  436.5  442.2

42.Z 

43.8 

44.1 

3. U.S. Current Account  Balance

-154.0  -135.5  -114.2

-167.9  -134.1  -147.8  -133.3  -136.0  -124.7  -121.2  -118.5 -112.2  -104.8

Of Nhich, Net  Investment  Income

20.4 

-5.3 

-5.7

4.3 

50.2 

4.6 

-7.0  -15.4 

-3.4 

-2.9 

-5.3 

-6.7 

-8.0

4. Foreign Outlook 3/

Real  GNP--Ten  Industrial  4/
Real  GNP--NonOPEC  LDC 5/

Consumer  Prices--Ten  Ind.  4/

2.9 
4.2 

2.1 

3.2 
3.4 

2.5 

2.1
3.7

3.0

5.2 
3.6 

1.7 

3.5 
3.3 

2.4 

4.6 
3.1 

1.5 

1.2 
3.3 

4.0 

2.2 
3.5 

2.7 

2.1 
3.8 

3.1 

2.2 
3.9 

2.5 

2.2 
3.8 

3.4 

2.2 
3.7 

2.6 

2.1
3.5

3.4

National  Income and Product Account  data.
International  accounts  basis.
Percent change,  annual  rates.
Heighted  by multilateral  trade-weights of G-10 countries  plus Switzerland;  prices are not  seasonally adjusted.
Weighted  by share  in  NonOPEC  LDC  GNP.
Projected




==== GREENBOOK | 1988-09-20_fomc19880920gbpt219880914.txt ====

Prefatory Note 

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 

available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain. 

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 

gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.    

1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Confidential  (FR)  Class  III  FOMC

September  14,  1988

RECENT  DEVELOPMENTS

Prepared  for  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee
By  the  staff  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Section 

Page

DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS 

II

Employment  and unemployment.......................  ........... 
...... 
Industrial  production and capacity utilization.................... 
Agriculture...............................  .......................... 
Personal  income  and consumption................................... 
Autos and trucks .................................................. 
Business  fixed investment........................................ 
.
Business  inventories.............................................. 
Housing markets................................................... 
Federal  sector .................................................... 
State  and  local  government  sector................................. 
Prices............................................................ 
Wages  and labor  costs............................................. 

............................... ............. 

Tables
Changes in employment.............................................. 
Selected unemployment  rates........................................ 
Industrial  production.. 
Capacity utilization in industry.................................. 
Personal  income..................................... .............  .. 
Real  personal  consumption expenditures............................ 
Sales  of  automobiles and light  trucks............................. 
Business  capital  spending indicators.............................. 
Surveys  of  plant and equipment  expenditures....................... 
Changes  in manufacturing and trade  inventories.................... 
Inventories relative to  sales..................................... 
Private  housing activity .......................................... 
Monthly budget  totals  for  fiscal years  1987  and 1988.............. 
Recent  changes  in  consumer prices................................. 
Recent  changes in producer prices................................. 
Price  indexes for  commodities and materials....................... 
Selected measures of  labor costs  in the nonfarm business  sector... 

Charts
Nonresidential construction and contracts......................... 
Manufacturers'  inventory-to-sales  ratios.......................... 
Private housing  starts............................................ 
Total motor vehicle  registrations per paved mile................... 
School-age population..........................  .................. 
Index weights  .................................................... 
.
Recent  inflation trends.......................................... 
Wages  and labor  costs............................................. 

1
4
6
8
8
11
15
18
21
24
26
31

2
2
5
5
9
10
10
12
12
16
16
19
22
27
27
28
32

13
17
19
25
25
28
29
33

Appendix
A new measure of  discretionary fiscal  policy...................... 

A-1

DOMESTIC FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS 

III

Monetary aggregates  and bank  credit............................... 
Business  finance................................................... 
Treasury and  sponsored agency financing........................... 
Municipal  securities................................  ............. .
Mortgage markets................................................... 
Consumer credit...................................  ................ 

Tables
Monetary aggregates.............................................. 
Thrift  and commercial  bank pricing  of  retail  deposits

and  small  time deposit  growth.................................. 

Commercial  bank  credit  and short-  and intermediate-term

business  credit................................................ 

Gross offerings of  securities by  U.S.  corporations................ 
Treasury and agency  financing.......................  ..... .... .... 
Gross offerings  of municipal  securities........................... 
Mortgage  activity at  all  FSLIC-insured institutions................ 
New issues  of mortgage-backed pass-through securities

by federally  related  agencies................................. 
Average ARM index values and initial  rate  spreads................. 
Consumer  credit................................................... 
Consumer  interest  rates........................................... 

.

Charts
Share of  ARMs  closed with  initial  rate discounts.................. 

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS 

IV

U.S. merchandise trade............................................ 
U.S.  current  account.............................................. 
U.S.  international financial  transactions......................... 
Foreign exchange  markets.......................................... 
Developments  in the  foreign industrial  countries................. 
Economic  situation in major developing countries.................. 

Tables
U.S. merchandise trade:  monthly data.............................. 
U.S. merchandise trade:  quarterly data............................ 
Oil  imports....................  .................................... 
U.S.  current  account............................................... 
Summary of  U.S.  international transactions........................ 
International  banking data........................................ 
Selected official  and market  interest  rates....................... 
Major industrial  countries

Real  GNP  and industrial  production............................. 
Consumer  and wholesale prices ................................... 
Trade  and  current  account balances.............................. 

Charts
Weighted average exchange value  of  the U.S.  dollar................. 

3
7
9
12
13
17

2

4

6
8
10
13
14

14
16
18
18

16

1
4
5
9
12
21

1
2
3
4
6
8
10

14
15
16

10

DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS

Sorting through the  volatile monthly data, there  are  some  hints

that  the anticipated mild second-half  deceleration in economic  activity

may be  in train.  Meanwhile, there has  been little  evidence of a change

in underlying wage  and price  trends.

Employment  and  Unemployment

Nonfarm payroll  employment  rose  about  220,000  in both July and

August,  on a strike-adjusted basis.  While below the extraordinarily

rapid pace  of the  first  half, these  are nonetheless  strong  gains,

amounting to  2-1/2  percent growth at  an annual  rate,  a figure  well in

excess  of  what  can be  sustained by underlying trends  in labor force

growth.  On balance  this year,  increases  in payroll  employment have

exceeded considerably the growth  in employment  recorded in the household

survey;  the  gap constitutes  something of  a puzzle  at  this point,

although  it  likely  reflects,  at  least  in part,  an increase in multiple-

job holders.

In  July and August, the pace  of  hiring at  trade and  finance  and

services  establishments and at  contract  construction sites  slowed

considerably.  In addition, manufacturing employment  edged  down 5,000

last  month, after posting four months  of large  increases. 

While

small declines  were widespread, there were increases  in the machinery,

electrical equipment,  and chemical industries,  where domestic  and export

sales  have been  strong.  The average workweek in the private  nonfarm

1. The  increase  in  July, initially  reported at  68,000,  was revised

down  to  45,000.

II-1

II-2

CHANGES IN  EMPLOYMENT1
(Thousands of  employees;  based on  seasonally adjusted  data)

Nonfarm payroll  employment 

Strike-adjusted 

Private  employment 
Manufacturing 

Durable 
Nondurable 
Construction 
Trade 
Finance and  services 

Total  government 

Total  employment3  
Nonagricultural 

1988 

1987 

Q1 

Q2 

June 

1988
July 

Aug.

------- Average Monthly Changes-------

286 
283 

258 
38 
21 
16 
21 
68 
114 
28 

257 
252 

340 
343 

346 
345 

302 
19 
7 
12 
25 
114 
128 
38 

326 
46 
35 
12 
39 
81 
141 
20 

120 
123 

305 
345 

568 
571 

539 
54 
38 
16 
71 
108 
279 
29 

823 
773 

200 
220 

249 
45 
48 
-3 
17 
85 
86 
-49 

41 
81 

219
216

153
-5
2
-7
3
42
107
66

121
15

Total  workweek  (hours) 

34.7 

34.7  34.8 

34.7 

34.9 

34.6

Aggregate hours  of production

workers  (percent change) 

.3 

.3 

.5 

.8 

.8 

-.7

1. Average  change  from final month of preceding period to  final  month of

period  indicated.

2. Survey of  establishments.  Strike  adjusted data  noted.
3. Survey of  households.

SELECTED UNEMPLOYMENT RATES
(Percent; based on  seasonally adjusted  data)

1988 

1987 

Q1 

Q2 

June 

1988
July 

Aug.

Civilian, 16  years  and older 

6.2 

5.7 

5.5 

5.3 

5.4 

5.6

Teenagers 
20-24  years old 
Men, 25  years and older 
Women,  25  years  and older 

White 
Black 

16.9 
9.7 
4.8 
4.8 

16.0  15.0 
8.7 
4.1 
4.3 

9.0 
4.4 
4.4 

13.6 
8.4 
4.1 
4.2 

15.2 
8.5 
3.9 
4.5 

15.8
8.4
4.4
4.4

5.3 
13.0 

4.8 

4.6 
12.5  12.0 

4.5 
11.5 

4.7 
11.4 

4.9
11.3

Fulltime workers 

5.8 

5.3 

5.1 

4.9 

5.0 

5.3

Memo:

Total  National1 

6.1 

5.6 

5.4 

5.2 

5.4 

5.5

1. Includes  resident  armed  forces  as  employed.

II-3

sector  dropped back  last month, and coupled with the  employment  gains,

resulted  in  a decline in  aggregate  hours  of  production and

nonsupervisory workers.  Nonetheless, the July-August  average of

aggregate hours  remains  almost  3/4  percent above  the  second-quarter

level.

In  the household survey, the  civilian unemployment  rate  rose  0.2

percentage  point  to  5.6 percent  in August,  returning  to its  May  level.

Increases  in  unemployment  rates  of  around 1/2  percentage point  were

recorded  for  adult  men and teenagers,  while rates  for  adult  women and

young adults  were  essentially unchanged.  Although the decline  in

manufacturing employment  in  the payroll survey was  small,  in  the

household survey the unemployment rate  in  manufacturing rose  0.4

percentage point,  probably accounting  for much of  the  increase  in

unemployment  for  adult males.  Together, the  decline  in  aggregate hours

and the  higher unemployment rate  suggest  somewhat more moderate  GNP

growth  for  the third quarter than the  staff had  anticipated in  the last

forecast.

Since March, the civilian  jobless  rate  has  hovered  at  a level  about

equal  to  its  1979  low,  after  falling almost  1-1/2 percentage  points

over the preceding year and a half,  suggesting considerable  tightening

of  labor markets.  However,  in assessing the extent  of  tightness, an

evaluation of  alternative measures of  labor  market  conditions  is  useful.

The  Conference Board's index  of  national  help-wanted advertising also

suggests  that  current  labor market  conditions are  similar to  those  that

prevailed in  1979.  This  index was  at  its  peak  in  1979,  and after

II-4

falling sharply  through the  early  1980s  has  now  risen to its  1979  level.

Further corroborating evidence  is provided by data  from a Bureau of

National Affairs  survey of  personnel managers,  showing that  strong labor

demand has  led  to  shortages  in  some  occupations.  The  percentage of

firms  reporting that  production or  service  jobs  are  difficult  to fill

has  about  doubled  since  the beginning of  1987,  to  13  percent,  while the

percentage  reporting difficulties  in  filling  clerical  jobs  has moved up

from 8 percent  at  the end of  1986 to  12  percent  in the  second quarter of

this year.

Industrial  Production and  Capacity Utilization

Total  industrial  production is  estimated to  have  risen 0.2  percent

in  August  after  a sharp  increase  in  July;  the  level of  output  in  August

was  about  6-1/2  percent  above  the second-quarter average,  at  an annual

rate.  Output  of business  equipment  rose  at  a slower  rate  than earlier

this  year,  as  strong gains  in manufacturing equipment  (including machine

tools)  were offset  by a second month of  weak output  of  computers.

Production of consumer  goods  increased moderately, driven by a

substantial  rise  in  residential  electricity generation--owing to

unseasonably warm temperatures--and a rebound in  assemblies of  light

trucks.  Auto  assemblies were  little  changed last month, while output  of

clothing continued weak.  Among materials, output  of  basic metals  and

chemicals  rose  further  in August,  while  production of  paper and textile

materials, parts  for  consumer  goods,  and coal  declined.

Total  industrial  capacity utilization was  little  changed in August.

Although the  operating rate  at  utilities moved up  sharply owing to

II-5

INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION
(Percent change  from preceding period)

Total  Index 

Products 

Final  products 

Consumer goods 

Durable goods 

Automotive products 
Home goods 

Nondurable goods 

Equipment 

Business equipment 
Defense  & space equip. 

Intermediate  products 

Construction  supplies 

Materials 

Durable  goods 
Nondurable  goods 
Energy materials 

1986 

1987 

Q1 

Q2 

June 

1988 

1988
July 

Aug.

-------- Annual rate-------- 

----Monthly  rate----

1.0 

5.8 

3.9 

4.6 

.3 

1.0 

1.8 
.8 
3.3 
4.2 
.5 
7.0 
3.1 

-2.1 
-1.1 
5.0 

5.4 
5.0 

-.2 
-.5 
5.7 
-5.2 

4.9 
4.6 
3.2 
4.2 
4.4 
4.0 
2.8 

6.3 
7.0 
1.9 

5.9 
4.7 

7.2 
8.0 
8.1 
4.5 

6.3 
6.0 
5.8 
-6.1 
-4.5 
-7.3 
10.1 

6.4 
9.3 
2.6 

7.1 
10.9 

4.4 
5.2 
4.1 
13.2 
23.3 
6.2 
1.2 

6.4 
11.8 
-9.2 

.2 
.4 
.2 
-.3 
.0 
-.4 
.4 

.6 
.9 
-.5 

2.0 
1.8 

-.4 
-1.1 

.3 
3.8 
-2.1 
-4.7 

4.7 
8.3 
3.7 
-2.0 

.4 
.1 
.2 
1.2 

.6 
.5 
.5 
.1 
-2.3 
2.0 
.6 

.5 
.6 
.5 

.8 
.2 

1.7 
1.4 
1.9 
2.1 

.2

.2
.2
.2
.1
.9
-.4
.3

.1
.2
-.3

.4
.3

.3
.3
-.1
.7

CAPACITY UTILIZATION  IN INDUSTRY
(Percent of  capacity;  seasonally adjusted)

1967-87  1973  1978-80 
Average  High 

High 

1988 

Q1 

Q2 

June 

1988
July 

Aug.

Total  index 

81.5 

88.6 

86.9 

82.4 

82.8 

83.0 

83.6 

83.7

Manufacturing 

80.6 

87.7 

86.5 

82.7 

83.2 

83.3 

83.9 

83.8

Primary processing 
Advanced processing 

81.7 
80.1 

91.9 
86.0 

89.1 
85.1 

86.9 
80.7 

86.8 
81.5 

86.6 
81.7 

87.8 
82.1 

Durable manufacturing 

Primary metals 
Fabricated metal products 
Nonelectrical machinery 
Electrical machinery 

Nondurable  manufacturing 
Textile mill products 
Paper and  products 
Chemicals  and products 

78.7 
87.4 
79.6  101.9 
85.0 
77.8 
89.0 
78.1 
85.7 
78.1 

83.5 
85.0 
88.5 
78.9 

88.8 
92.1 
95.6 
88.6 

86.3 
97.1 
87.4 
86.0 
89.9 

87.0 
88.3 
92.7 
82.9 

80.4 
84.7 
81.9 
78.7 
76.9 

85.9 
91.1 
95.4 
85.3 

81.5 
85.7 
82.8 
81.0 
77.4 

85.6 
90.0 
94.5 
86.3 

81.7 
85.8 
83.2 
81.7 
77.4 

85.5 
89.7 
93.8 
86.6 

82.3 
89.5 
84.3 
82.1 
78.1 

86.1 
89.6 
95.3 
88.0 

Mining 
Utilities 

86.7 
86.9 

92.8 
95.6 

95.2 
88.5 

80.3 
82.0 

81.4 
79.7 

81.0 
80.2 

83.0 
80.7 

87.8
82.1

82.3
91.0
84.4
82.0
78.1

85.9
88.2
93.9
88.4

82.9
82.4

Industrial  materials 

82.2 

92.0 

89.1 

82.5 

83.0 

83.2 

84.4 

84.5

II-6

unusually hot  weather, the  utilization rate  for manufacturing edged down

after  four  consecutive months  of  increases.  Since last  December,

capacity utilization in manufacturing has  increased about  1-1/4

percentage points to  approximately 83-3/4 percent--midway between the

average operating rate  during the  1967-87  period and the peak  rates

posted between  1978  and 1980.

The  rate  for  advanced processing industries  leveled off  at  82.1

percent  in August  and now stands  about  2 percentage points  above the

rate at  the  end of  last  year.  A principal  contributor to this  increase

has  been  nonelectrical machinery, where utilization dropped back  in

August,  but  still  has  climbed more  than  4 percentage points this  year.

Primary processing industries  have  been operating close to  capacity

throughout  this year,  and the utilization rate  in August was  87-3/4

percent.  This  high rate  has been associated with  reports  by purchasing

managers  of price increases  for a number  of  important  industrial

materials, such as  various chemicals, paper,  aluminum, steel  products,

and plastic  resins,  that  continue to be in  short  supply.

Agriculture

Additional drought  losses  in August  appear to  have  been relatively

slight,  as  the  Agriculture Department's September  crop  report  showed

only small  revisions  in the  production estimates  for most  crops.  Based

on conditions  as  of the  start  of  September,  the agency is  projecting

that  U.S.  production of  corn will total 113.4  million metric tons this

year,  compared with  a projection of  113.8 million metric tons  in August.

The  estimate  for  wheat,  at  49.3  million metric tons,  was  revised down

II-7

slightly  from a month ago,  while the projection for  soybeans was

virtually unchanged.  For  all  three of these  crops, the  1988  harvest

will be  substantially below that  of  a year  ago,  reflecting markdowns

that  were  reported in  the July and August  crop data.  Large year-to-year

declines  also are apparent  for  a number  of  other feed crops;  in

contrast,  production of  several  other crops--including cotton, peanuts,

tobacco,  and  sugar  cane--is expected to be  about  the  same,  or  somewhat

higher, than a year ago.

With the  current growing  season  beginning to wind down, market

focus  in agriculture  is  likely to  shift  more to the  demand  side  in

coming months.  At present,  the USDA generally is projecting that  this

year's price  runup for  farm crops  will  result  in only small  reductions

in  domestic  and foreign use  and that,  consequently, most  of  the

production shortfall  will be  reflected in  a steep  drawdown of

inventories.  By the end of the  current marketing  season,  stocks  of the

major  crops are  expected to be  much tighter, relative to consumption,

than  has  been the  case  in  recent  years.  Crop prices, therefore,  are

likely to remain  sensitive to changing market  conditions  over the  next

few months.

Based on the August  crop  report,  the Commerce Department  had pegged

agricultural  losses  from this year's drought at  about  $14-1/2  billion,

consisting of  $13  billion in crop  losses  and $1-1/2  billion in  livestock

losses  (all figures  in  1982 dollars).  Given the  September crop  report

it appears  likely that  the  BEA figure will  be  revised only  slightly.

II-8

Personal  Income  and Consumption

Personal  income  growth was strong  in  July,  led by a jump  in  wages

and  salaries of  nearly $25  billion--about  12  percent  at  an  annual  rate.

This  increase may be  revised down, given the downward  revision in

payroll  employment  in  July,  but  the trend  in  income  growth clearly has

remained  robust.  With  farm income  falling, total  nominal disposable

personal  income moved up  at  about the  same  rate  as  in  the  first  half of

the  year.

August  retail  sales will  be  released on  September  15,  along with

the  usual  revisions  for  the prior two months.  At  this point,  consumer

spending  in July  is  estimated to  have  been about  flat,  but  given an

especially  large  gain in  June,  was  more than  2 percent  (annual rate)

above  the  second-quarter average.  Consumption of  durable goods  other

than motor  vehicles, which had  risen appreciably in  the  first  half,  is

estimated to  have  dropped 1 percent  in  July,  and outlays  for nondurables

remained sluggish.  In  contrast,  spending  on  services has  remained at  a

high level,  boosted by the  effect  of  hot  weather on outlays  for

electricity.  Meanwhile,  recent  survey  data indicate  that  consumer

confidence  has  improved;  the Conference Board  index moved up  last  month

and the  Survey Research Center's index rose  appreciably in August,

reaching the  highest  level  in more  than two years.

Autos  and Trucks

Sales  of  new cars  and trucks  remained at  relatively high  levels  in

August.  Domestically produced  autos  sold  at  a 7.3 million unit  annual

rate  last  month--a  healthy pace,  although down a bit  from the  average

II-9

PERSONAL  INCOME
(Average monthly  change at  an  annual rate;
billions of  dollars)

1988 

1988

1987 

Q1 

Q2 

May 

June r  

July

Total personal  income 

26.3 

15.6 

20.0 

21.3 

25.4 

25.2

Wages  and salaries 

Private 

Other  labor income 

Proprietors'  income 

Farm 

Rent,  dividends  and
interest 

16.8 
14.5 

7.1 
4.8 

17.6 
15.6 

14.5 
12.5 

18.9 
16.9 

24.5
22.5

1.0 

1.4 
-.6 

.6 

.7 

.6 

1.0 

1.1

4.9 
5.1 

-2.7 
-5.4 

2.9 
.5 

-.6 
-3.6 

-5.7
-8.1

Transfer payments 

2.1 

8.1 

.6 

-.6 

1.9 

6.1 

-.2 

4.9 

4.8 

5.3 

4.5

2.2

Less:  Personal contributions
for  social  insurance 

Less:  Personal  tax and nontax

payments 

Equals:  Disposable  personal

income 

1.1 

4.8 

1.1 

1.0 

1.2 

1.3

4.5 

-6.7 

.0  -63.6 

-.3 

4.6

21.8 

22.3 

20.0 

84.9 

25.7 

20.6

Memo:  Real  disposable  income 

7.5 

11.4 

4.4 

56.7 

13.6

r--Revised.
p--Preliminary.

II-10

REAL PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES
(Percent change  from preceding period)

1988

19871 

Q1 

Q2

May 

1988
June 

July

----Annual rate----

----Monthly rate---

4.5 

2.7

.9 

-. 1

-2.4
-6.6
1.0

14.7
17.3
12.7

8.4
10.0
7.2

1.0 
1.6 

.9 

.0 
2.0 
-.3 

.6

-2.4

1.0

.4 
1.9 
.2 

-. 4
.5
-1.0

-. 5
-2.2
-. 3

.8 

.2

4.5 

4.2 

4.3

Personal  consumption

expenditures

Durable goods

Motor vehicles
Other

Nondurable goods

Gasoline
Other nondurables

Services

Memo:

Personal  saving  rate

(percent)

1. Annual  changes are Q4/Q4.
e--Staff estimate.

SALES OF  AUTOMOBILES AND LIGHT TRUCKS
(Millions of units  at an  annual  rate, FRB  seasonal)

Autos  and light  trucks' 

Autos 
Light  trucks 

Domestically produced 2  

Autos 
Light  trucks 

Imports 
Autos 

Japanese 
Korean 
European 

Light trucks 

1987 

Q1 

Q2 

June 

1988 

15.0 
10.3 
4.7 

11.0 
7.1 
3.8 

4.0 
3.2 
2.2 
.3 
.7 
.8 

15.6 
10.8 
4.8 

11.8 
7.6 
4.2 

3.8 
3.1 
2.1 
.5 
.6 
.6 

15.6 
10.8 
4.8 

11.8 
7.6 
4.2 

3.8 
3.2 
2.2 
.5 
.5 
.6 

15.9 
11.1 
4.9 

12.1 
7.9 
4.3 

3.8 
3.2 
2.2 

.5 
.6 
.6 

1988
July 

15.4 
10.4 
5.0 

11.9 
7.5 
4.4 

3.5 
2.9 
2.1 
.3 
.5 
.6 

Aug.

15.4
10.2
5.2

11.9

7.3
4.6

3.5
2.9
2.1
.3
.5
.6

1. Components may not  add  to totals  due to  rounding.
2. Includes vehicles produced in  Canada and Mexico  for  General Motors,

Ford,  and Chrysler.

II-11

over the  first  seven months  of the  year.  Meanwhile,  sales  of  domestic

and  foreign light  trucks  surged to  a 5.2 million  unit  pace--the  fastest

monthly  selling rate  on record  for these vehicles.  In  contrast,  sales

of imported cars  remained at  the  relatively low rate  of  2.9 million

units.

A major  factor  in  the  near-term outlook for  autos  is the  relatively

comfortable  level of dealer inventories,  which have made major end-of-

model  year  incentive  efforts unlikely.  This  contrasts  with  the  pattern

of the  past  three years  in which auto production outstripped sales  for

much of the model  year.  This  left  dealers  with excessive  stocks  near

the  ends  of model  years,  leading to massive  year-end incentive programs

that  created dramatic  fluctuations  in sales.  This  experience  now weighs

heavily in the FRB  seasonal  factors, which expect  a speedup in sales  in

August  and September,  followed by a steep decline  in October,  reflecting

the  "payback period"  that  typically  accompanied the end  of the incentive

programs.  Thus,  sales  in August  probably were  understated and in

September will be  artificially weak on a seasonally adjusted  basis,

while October and November may appear  strong.

Business Fixed  Investment

Real  outlays  for business  equipment  continued to expand  in  July,

although at  a pace well  below the  20  percent  annual  rate posted in the

first  half  of  this  year.  Nominal  shipments of nondefense  capital  goods

rose  to a level  1-1/2  percent above  the  second-quarter average.

2. Because BEA's  seasonal  factors have  shifted less  in  response to
this  recent  behavior,  sales  data adjusted on a BEA basis  should more
accurately  reflect  underlying activity.

II-12

BUSINESS CAPITAL  SPENDING INDICATORS
(Percentage change  from preceding comparable  periods;
based on  seasonally  adjusted data)

1987 
Q4 

1988 

Q1 

Q2 

May 

1988
June 

July

Producers'  durable equipment

Shipments of  nondefense capital  goods 

Excluding  aircraft  and parts 

Office  and computing  equipment 
All  other  categories 

.8 
.6 
-1.9 
1.3 

4.8 
3.9 
5.6 
3.4 

3.8 
4.3 
6.6 
3.7 

2.2 
1.7 
-1.5 
2.6 

.5 
.5 
4.3 
-.4 

.5
.2
-2.1
.9

Shipments of  complete  aircraft' 

-21.8 

34.4 

4.4 

35.4  -30.2 

n.a.

Orders  of  nondefense capital  goods 

Excluding aircraft and parts 

Office and computing  equipment 
All  other categories 

2.6 
.8 
-2.8 
1.7 

6.1 
4.3 
5.3 
4.1 

1.1 
3.4 
8.6 
2.1 

-6.6 

.2 

-4.8 
1.5 

12.5 
-.1 
3.6 
-1.0 

.9
1.7
1.2
1.8

Nonresidential  structures

Construction  put-in-place 

Office 
Other  commercial 
Public utilities 
Industrial 
All  other 

2.2 
-5.5 
2.6 
-3.1 
-.1  -8.4 
-8.8 
3.4 
-2.6 
-2.2 
5.2 
-2.0 

2.8 
4.3 
5.8 
1.6 
7.9 
-3.2 

3.1 
4.6 

-1.2 

.0 

.5  -2.2 
5.2 
1.2 
3.0  -11.6 
1.9 
1.9 

.6
2.8
-.7
3.9
-.8
-3.6

Rotary  drilling  rigs in use 

-3.7 

-2.1 

6.7 

-2.0 

-.7  -2.3

1. From the Current  Industrial  Report  (CIR) titled  "Civil Aircraft and
Aircraft Engines."  To  estimate PDE  spending for  aircraft, BEA uses the
aircraft  shipments  shown  in  that  report,  not the  corresponding M-3  series.
The CIR does  not provide  information  on  aircraft orders.

Surveys of  Plant and Equipment  Expenditures
(Percent change from previous year,  current  dollars)

1. All Business 

2.  Manufacturing 

3. 

Durable 

4. 

Nondurable 

5.  Nonmanufacturing 

S  Commerce 

Planned for  1988
Commerce 

1987 

(July-Aug.)  (Apr.-May) 

McGraw-Hill
(Apr.-May)

2.7 

2.2 

2.7 

1.8 

3.0 

10.6 

12.1 

9.9 

14.2 

9.7 

10.7 

12.1 

9.5 

14.5 

9.9 

9.9

13.2

9.5

16.7

7.9

* As  estimated in  the July-August  Commerce Department survey.

II-13

Nonresidential  Construction  and Contracts <1>

TOTAL

=  Constructlon (C)

-------- = Contracts(CN)

Index. Dec.  1982  =  100, ratio  .caie

1980 

1982 

1984 

1986 

1988

OFFICE

OTHER  COMMERCIAL

1984 

1988 

1988

INDUSTRIAL

(CN)

-

* 

--

• 

< 

I\ 

#

g

I

1986

INSTITUTIONAL

1984 

1986

1988

1984 

1986 

1988

<1>  Six-month  moving average  for ai  srie  s*hown.

175

150

125

100

75

50

280

230

180

130

80

160

140

120

100

80

II-14

However,  shipments  of  office  and  computing equipment,  which are

magnified in importance  in the translation to  real  terms owing to their

low deflator, fell  in  July and  remain  at  about  their second-quarter

3
average. 

As  a consequence, the  recent  robust  quarterly increases  in

computer purchases  probably will  not be  repeated in  the current  quarter,

although advances are  still expected.  Looking ahead, orders  for

nondefense  capital  goods  continue to show  gains,  though once  again  not

at  the  exceptional pace posted  earlier in the year.  Excluding aircraft

and parts,  the  July  level  of orders  was  up 1-3/4  percent  from the

second-quarter average,  and appears consistent  with  some  deceleration in

equipment  outlays  in the  second half.

Recent  indicators  of  real  spending for  nonresidential  construction

have been mixed.  Petroleum drilling activity, as measured  by the number

of  rigs  in use,  showed renewed declines in July  and  early August,  after

a temporary upswing  in the  second  quarter.  In contrast,  construction

put-in-place, which  covers  all  nonresidential  structures except  oil and

gas  wells,  rose  in  July to  a level  about  3/4  percent above the  second-

quarter average.

The  composition of building activity has  been  somewhat  surprising

in  recent months.  Industrial  construction, after rising  strongly in  the

3. As  expected, the  annual  revision to the  Census  M3 data  last month
smoothed the pattern of  shipments  of  office  and  computing  equipment,  but
the  average growth  rate  over the past  year and a half  was  little
changed.

4. The  initially reported figures  for nonresidential  construction put-

in-place are  subject to  large  revisions.  Indeed, the  latest  report
substantially weakened nominal June  spending, and  we  expect  a downward
revision to  second-quarter nonresidential  construction of  about  $2
billion  in  constant  dollars.

II-15

spring, has  fallen back  in  recent months,  even as  factory  utilization

rates have  continued to  rise.  Meanwhile, the  level  of  office building

has  been well maintained this  year, in the  face of  high  national-average

vacancy rates.  As  shown in the chart,  the  six-month moving average of

the value of  new  construction contracts--a broad  indicator of  future

building--has generally trended down  since the beginning of  this  year,

suggesting that  outlays  will  show  little  improvement  into  1989.  The

chart  also  shows  that  the decline  in  contract  awards  has  been widespread

among the major components  of nonresidential construction.

The  latest  Commerce Department  survey of  business  plans for  plant

and equipment  outlays  indicates  a 10.6 percent  rise  in nominal outlays

this year, with particular  strength expected  in the manufacturing

sector.  These  plans,  which were  collected  in  July and August,  were

similar to those  reported  in the  spring  survey.

Business  Inventories

Nonfarm business  inventory accumulation slowed  quite  a bit  in  the

second quarter.  Manufacturing  and trade inventories  rose  (in constant

dollars)  at  an annual  rate  of $19  billion in the  second quarter,

compared with a $40  billion rate  in  the  first  quarter.  Current-cost

data  for  July indicate that  inventory investment  remained moderate  in

the manufacturing and wholesale  sectors.

The slowing in  the second-quarter  stock accumulation  was most

notable in the  non-auto trade  sector.  For  wholesale  and retail

establishments other than auto dealers,  inventories in  constant  dollars

were  little  changed during the  second  quarter, compared with  a $34.3

II-16

CHANGES  IN  MANUFACTURING AND TRADE  INVENTORIES
(Billions of  dollars  at  annual  rates;
based on  seasonally adjusted data)

Current  cost basis:

Total 

Total  ex.  auto 
Manufacturing 
Wholesale 
Retail 

Automotive 
Ex. auto 

Constant  dollar basis:

Total 

Total ex.  auto 
Manufacturing 
Wholesale 
Retail 

Automotive 
Ex. auto 

1987 
Q4 

82.4 
68.2 
29.0 
23.8 
29.6 
14.2 
15.3 

57.6 
44.4 
14.4 
18.1 
25.1 
13.2 
11.9 

1988 

Q1 

Q2 

May 

1988
June 

July

39.7 
61.3 
22.3 
26.5 
-9.1 
-21.6 
12.5 

39.9 
50.0 
15.8 
22.7 
1.5 
-10.1 
11.6 

56.5 
44.4 
21.1 
13.1 
22.4 
12.2 
10.2 

19.0 
8.6 
5.7 
-.1 
13.4 
10.4 
3.0 

57.8 
36.0 
25.7 
-1.3 
33.5 
21.9 
11.6 

22.6 
3.1 
10.1 
-11.4 
23.9 
19.5 
4.4 

66.6
59.9
22.7 
19.0 
25.0
6.7

18.3

15.3
10.5

1.5
-.3
14.0

4.8 
9.2

18.7
9.9

--

INVENTORIES  RELATIVE TO  SALES
(Months supply;  based on  seasonally adjusted data)

1987 
Q4 

1988 

Q1 

Q2 

May 

1988
June 

July

2
Range  in 
preceding 12  months:

Low 

High

Current  cost basis:

Total 

Total ex.  auto 
Manufacturing 
Wholesale 
Retail 

Automotive 
Ex. auto 

Constant  dollar basis:

Total 

Total ex.  auto 
Manufacturing 
Wholesale 
Retail 

Automotive 
Ex.  auto 

1.48 
1.46 
1.56 
1.21 
1.56 
1.74 
1.50 

1.48 
1.46 
1.59 
1.22 
1.51 
1.65 
1.47 

1.58
1.28

1.53 
1.51 
1.62 
1.30 
1.64 
2.06 
1.55 

1.53 
1.51 
1.62 
1.32 
1.59 
1.93 
1.53 

1.53 
1.49 
1.61 
1.27 
1.65 
2.06 
1.54 

1.52 
1.49 
1.61 
1.29 
1.61 
1.93 
1.52 

1.53 
1.51 
1.62 
1.31 
1.60 
1.76 
1.55 

1.52 
1.51 
1.62 
1.32 
1.57 
1.73 
1.53 

1.51 
1.49 
1.58 
1.30 
1.62 
1.86 
1.55 

1.51 
1.49 
1.59 
1.32 
1.59 
1.82 
1.53 

1.51 
1.48 
1.58 
1.30 
1.60 
1.84 
1.53 

1.52 
1.50 
1.59 
1.32 
1.58 
1.81 
1.52 

1.50
1.47
1.56 
1.28 
1.61
1.86
1.54

1.51
1.49
1.58
1.31
1.59
1.82
1.52

1. Ratio  of  end-of period  inventories  to  average monthly sales  for the  period.
2. Highs  and lows  are  specific to  each  series  and are not  necessarily  coincidental.

Range  is  for the  12-month period preceding the  latest  month for which data  are
available.

II-17

Manufacturers'  Inventory  to  Sales  Ratios
(Current cost data)

TOTAL 

Months 

MATERIALS  AND  SUPPLIES

2.1 

-

Months
-

0.75

1.9 

F 

0.65

1.7 

July

-

0.55

I 

I 

1982 

1984 

I 

I 
1986 

I 

1.5 

1988 

I 
1982 

I 
1984 

I 

I 
1986 

I 

1988

0.45

WORK  IN  PROCESS 

Months 

FINISHED  GOODS

0.7 

-

Months
-

0.75

S0.65 

-

0.65

v- 

0.6 

-

-

0.55

1982 

1984 

1986

0.55

1988

1982

1984

1986

1988

0.45

II-18

billion runup  from January to March.  Lower  levels of  imports  in  the

second quarter,  and relatively  flatdomestic production of  home  goods

and  consumer  nondurables earlier this  year,  suggest that  the reduced

pace  of  inventory investment  reflects  efforts on the part  of  retail  and

wholesale  establishments to  control  stockbuilding.  The  slower

accumulation has  helped to stem the  rise  in  inventory-sales ratios  at  a

few types  of  retail  stores--in  particular, apparel  and general

merchandise--where  those  ratios  reached historically high levels  earlier

this year.

In  the manufacturing  sector,  inventory investment  also  slowed in

the  second quarter;  with production strong over that  period, however,

the  slowing may have  been unintended.  The  recently revised  constant-

dollar  data show  that  inventories  at  all  stages  of  processing in  the

manufacturing sector  were  low  relative to  shipments  at mid-year.

Inventory-related indicators  for the  industrial  sector--the high  level

of  new factory orders, the  backlog  of  unfilled orders,  and  relatively

low  inventory-shipments  ratios  for most major industries--suggest  that

stockbuilding could pick  up  a bit,  particularly in  those  industries  in

which production remained strong through August.

Housing Markets

Housing  starts  rose  2-1/2  percent  in  July to a 1.49 million unit

annual  rate,  owing entirely to  a rebound in multifamily  construction

from the  low  June  level.  Single-family  starts, at  1.08  million units,

were  little  changed and matched the  average pace of  the  first  half of

II-19

PRIVATE HOUSING ACTIVITY
(Seasonally adjusted annual  rates;  millions of  units)

1987  1987 

1988 

1988

Annual  Q4 

Q1 

Q2r  

May r 

June r  Julyp

1.53  1.4 
1.38  1.46 
1.62  1.53  1.48  1.48 

1.44 
1.39 

1.49 
1.45 

1.41
1.49

All  units
Permits 
Starts 

Single-family units

Permits 
Starts 

Sales

1.02 
.98 
1.15  1.09  1.10  1.06 

.96 

.98 

New  homes 
.67 
.69 
Existing homes  3.53  3.39  3.25  3.64 

.63 

.62 

.98 
1.00 

1.00 
1.09 

.99
1.08

.68 
3.59 

.72 
3.82 

.69
3.63

Multifamily units

Permits 
Starts 

.51 
.47 

.47 
.44 

.40 
.38 

.48 
.42 

.45 
.39 

.49 
.37 

.42
.41

p--preliminary estimates.
r--revised.

PRIVATE HOUSING STARTS
(Seasonally adjusted  annual  rate)

Millions
of  units

-12.4

2.0

1.6

1.2

.8

.4

1981 

1982 

1983

1984 

1985 

1986 

1987

1988

II-20

the year.  However, mortgage interest  rates moved up  in August,  and  some

weakening  of  demand  for  single-family homes  can be  expected.

New and existing home  sales  fell  approximately 5 percent  in July

from the  surprisingly high level  recorded  in June, to  a level more in

line with  single-family starts.  Sales  in the  single-family sector  in

July appeared generally consistent  with mortgage market  conditions

during the  early summer  and  recent  assessments  of market  conditions  by

consumers  and builders.

In  the multifamily sector,  starts  strengthened in July to about

410,000 units  at  an annual  rate,  a pace  close to the  average  for the

year  to date.  At  its  current  rate,  multifamily construction remains  40

percent below  the  annual  average  of 650,000  units during the  1984-86

period.  This falloff  accounts  for  nearly all  of  the  decline  in total

housing starts  in the past two years,  from an annual  average  of  almost

1-3/4  million units  in the  1983-86  period to an annual  rate  of  1-1/2

million units thus  far  in 1988.  Apart  from the  less  favorable  tax

climate  for  residential income  properties,  the multifamily rental

vacancy rate  has  remained at  an historically high  level,  holding down

potential  profitability.

In  contrast,  the pace of  single-family starts  has  remained close  to

the  levels  of the mid-1980s.  Household formations,  which  averaged  1.4

million units  annually  over the  1983-87  period, underpinned overall

building activity.  Moreover,  single-family construction was  stimulated

by gradual  improvements in  housing  finance  costs and housing

affordability, which released demand pent  up  from  the  previous housing

II-21

downturn.  That  pent-up  demand probably had dissipated by  the  first  half

of  1988,  but  housing  finance  costs  and affordability  levels  were more

favorable  than  in much of  the  1983-87  period.

Looking ahead, the  coming of  age  of  the  "baby bust"  generation

should  result  in  a slowdown in  the  overall rate  of  household formation,

to  1.2 million by  1990.  Abstracting  from macroeconomic  developments,

the  projected decline  in young adult  households  implies  continued weak

demand  for multifamily units  over the next  several  years.  However,

continued household growth  among those aged 30-54  should help bolster

the demand for  single-family homes,  all  else  equal.

Federal  Sector

The  total deficit  for the  current  fiscal  year through July was

essentially unchanged  from the  same  period of  FY1987.  The  deficit  for

FY1988  remains uncertain,  however,  because of  differences  in  special

factors  affecting the budget  at  the end of  the  fiscal year.

In  FY1987,  receipts  in  September were boosted by the  expiration of

a "safe  harbor" that  had allowed corporations  to  defer some  estimated

tax  payments  from earlier in the  year.  This  year, a more limited safe

harbor for  corporate payments  concentrated  corporate  receipts  in  June,

and no  special boost  to  September  receipts  is  expected.

On the  outlay side,  spending  in  late FY1987  was  reduced by the

concentration of  asset  sales  and  loan prepayments  in  September, as  well

as  shifts  in  the timing  of  some  expenditures.  In  FY1988, asset  sales

are being distributed more  evenly throughout  the  fiscal  year,  and there

are  no  other  special  shifts  in the  timing  of  outlays.

II-22

MONTHLY BUDGET TOTALS  FOR  FISCAL YEARS  1987  AND  1988
(Billions of  dollars;  not  seasonally  adjusted)

Revenues 

Outlays 

Deficit

1987 

1988 

1987 

1988 

1987 

1988

October-December 

190.0 

204.9 

254.8 

287.1 

64.7 

82.2

January-March 

193.7 

207.9 

252.2 

245.3 

58.5 

37.4

April 

May 

June 

July 

122.9 

109.3 

84.0 

95.6 

38.9 

-13.8

47.7 

59.7 

83.3 

82.3 

35.6 

22.6

82.9 

99.2 

83.6 

89.9 

.6 

-9.3

64.2 

60.7 

86.6 

83.6 

22.3 

22.9

Total,  fiscal  year to

date

701.5 

741.7 

844.4 

883.7

142.9 

142.0

II-23

However, the  recent  flurry of actions by the  FDIC and FSLIC to

restructure  bank and  saving  institutions  is  adding substantially to

outlays;  the  spending is  in the  form of  either direct  cash assistance  or

the issuance  of agency notes--both of which  are  recorded as  outlays  in

the budget.  How many of these  restructurings will  be completed by the

end of  this  month, and their exact  cost,  remains  a major  source  of

uncertainty  for  FY1988  deficit  calculations.  On the other hand, the

effect  of this  summer's drought  on CCC  loan activity may reduce

expenditures  in  late  FY1988;  high  grain prices  have made  it  advantageous

for  farmers  to repay CCC loans,  permitting them to reclaim their  crop

collateral  and to  sell  the crops  in the  open market.

Turning to FY1989, the Office  of Management  and Budget's

preliminary sequester  report,  issued on August  25,  projects  a deficit  of

$144  billion for  the coming  fiscal year,  on a Gramm-Rudman accounting

basis.  This  is  slightly  less than  the $146  billion trigger that  would

force  automatic  spending cuts  to reduce  the deficit to the  $136  billion

Gramm-Rudman target.  The recent  OMB figure  differs  from the projection

published at  the time  of the Mid-Session Review of the  Budget  primarily

because  of  the addition of  the  estimated  $3.9  billion cost  of  the

Drought Relief Bill  enacted in  early August.  OMB will  issue its  final

sequester report  on October  15.  It will take  into  account the

additional  legislative  and  regulatory actions taken by  that date,  but

5. Much of the  legislation  implementing the  1989  budget  must  still  be

enacted;  to date,  only two of the  thirteen  regular  appropriation bills
that  fund discretionary programs have  been  signed by the President.
However, action  in Congress on the  remaining bills  is well  advanced and
(Footnote continues  on  next  page)

II-24

is  required by  law to  use the  same  economic and technical estimating

assumptions as  the preliminary report.

In  contrast to OMB's  estimate, the  CBO's update of the Economic  and

Budget  Outlook  and an advisory sequestration report,  issued  on August

19,  projects  a Gramm-Rudman baseline deficit  of  $153  billion for  FY1989.

The  CBO deficit  estimate  is  higher than OMB's estimate because  of less

favorable  economic assumptions and different  technical estimating

assumptions  for  some  programs.

State and  Local Government  Sector

State  and local  government  spending appears to have  expanded on

balance  so  far  in  the third quarter.  Employment  rose  50,000  in August,

nearly offsetting the large  decline  in July.  Real outlays  for

construction increased 5 percent in  July, the  largest monthly advance

since January  1986,  and now  stands  2-1/2  percent  above the  second-

quarter average.

Spending on the two largest  components  of  state  and local

construction--highways  and educational  facilities--is 10-1/2  percent

higher for  the  first  seven months of  the year  than for  the comparable

period  last  year.  In the  case  of highways, total motor vehicle

registrations  relative to miles  of paved  roads  continue to increase,

suggesting growing pressures  to expand and  repair  roads  and bridges.

Demands  for expanded  educational  facilities have apparently  followed the

changes  in the  number  of school-age  children,  shown in the  chart.

(Footnote continued  from previous page)
thus  far  appears consistent  with the  outlay estimates  used  for the
sequester  report.

II-25

TOTAL  MOTOR  VEHICLE  REGISTRATIONS  PER  PAVED  MILE

Vehicles per mile

1945

1952 

1959 

1966 

1973 

1980

1987

SCHOOL-AGE  POPULATION

(Average)  *

Millions

,

Grades  1-12

Grades  1-3

1980 

1981 

1982 

1983

1984

1985

1986

1987

* -- Population per grade based on data by age.

II-26

Births  fell  from the  late  1960s  into  the mid-1970s, but  they began to

rise  sharply  in  1977,  leading to crowded  classrooms  in  the early  grades.

These  cohorts will be  followed by even  larger  ones,  as  in  1987  births

reached their highest  level  in  24  years.

Prices

The  consumer  price index  for all  urban consumers  rose  0.4  percent

in  July.  The CPI  for  food  jumped  1 percent,  after  a 0.6 percent

increase  in  June.  Much of  the  July runup  in  food prices  appears to be

weather-related,  led by hikes  for poultry,  eggs,  and  fruits  and

vegetables.  Large  increases  also were  recorded for  cereal  and bakery

products,  fats  and oils,  and other  processed  foods,  but  meat  prices were

down.  The  PPI  for  crude  foods  was  up another  2.2 percent  in  August,  the

fourth month of  large  increases.  More  recently, spot  commodity prices

have moved up  further  for  cattle  and crops.  These  developments  suggest

continued upward pressures  on  retail  food prices  in  the near term.

Energy prices  were  up  0.3  percent  in  the July CPI,  mainly

reflecting  higher  gasoline  prices.  Moreover,  refinery prices of

gasoline  rose  sharply in  both the  July and August  PPI.  However,

domestic  crude  oil prices  fell  12  percent  from May to  August, and

gasoline  prices  are  likely to  turn down  in  coming months,  as  lower  crude

oil  costs are  passed  through to  the  pump.

Excluding food  and energy  items,  consumer  prices  rose  0.3  percent

for  goods  and  0.4  percent  for  services  in  July,  about  the  average pace

over  the preceding twelve months.  In  the  goods  component,  large

increases  for  cigarettes,  pharmaceuticals,  and  household cleaning  and

II-27

RECENT  CHANGES IN  CONSUMER PRICES
(Percentage change;  based on  seasonally adjusted data)

Relative
importance 
Dec.  1987 

1987 

1987 
Q4 

1988 

1988

Q1 

Q2 

June 

July

----Annual  rate---- 

-Monthly rate-

All  items2  

Food 
Energy 
All items  less  food

and energy 
Commodities 
Services 

100.0 
16.1 
7.6 

76.3 
25.8 
50.6 

4.4 
3.5 
8.2 

4.2 
3.5 
4.5 

3.2 
2.8 
-3.9 

4.4 
2.5 
5.0 

4.2 
1.4 
-4.9 

5.4 
4.7 
5.9 

4.5 
7.1 
4.2 

4.3 
3.9 
4.5 

.3 
.6 
-.2 

.4 
.2 
.5 

.4
1.0
.3

.3
.3
.4

Memorandum:

CPI-W3  

100.0 

4.5 

2.8 

3.5 

4.9 

.3 

.4

1. Changes  are  from final month of preceding period to  final month of  period

indicated.

2. Official  index for  all  urban  consumers.
3. Index for  urban wage earners  and clerical workers.

RECENT CHANGES  IN PRODUCER PRICES
(Percentage change;  based on  seasonally adjusted data)

1

Relative
Importance 
Dec.  1987 

1987 

1987 
Q4 

1988 

1988

Q1 

Q2 

July 

Aug.

----Annual  rate---- 

-Monthly rate-

Finished goods 

Consumer foods 
Consumer energy 
Other consumer  goods 
Capital equipment 

Intermediate materials 2  

Excluding energy 

Crude  food materials 
Crude  energy 
Other  crude materials 

100.0 
25.9 
9.6 
40.1 
24.4 

95.0 
82.5 

39.5 
41.9 
18.6 

2.2 
-.2 
11.2 
2.7 
1.3 

5.4 
5.2 

-1.9 
-5.7 
-9.6 
1.7 
-.7 

4.3 
7.2 

2.7 
6.0 
-18.5 
5.7 
3.2 

4.3 
8.2 

4.6 
9.4 
4.8 
2.4 
3.6 

7.4 
6.9 

.5 
.4 
.0 
.9 
.1 

.6 
.7 

1.8 
10.7 
22.6 

-4.8 
-15.2 
18.0 

17.7 
-24.1 
15.9 

30.5 
12.2 
-7.0 

1.5 
-5.4 
1.9 

.6
.4
2.2
.3
.4

.4
.4

2.2
.1
.9

1. Changes  are  from final  month  of preceding period to  final month of  period

indicated.

2. Excludes materials for  food manufacturing and animal  feeds.

II-28

PRICE  INDEXES  FOR  COMMODITIES  AND  MATERIALS1

Percent  change2

1988

Last
obser- 
vation 

1986 

1987 

August  9  to date

To 

August 9

1. PPI  for crude  materials3  

August 

-8.9 

8.9 

3.1 

n.a.

1a.  Ex.  food and energy 
1b. Ex.  food and energy,
seas.  adj. 

2. IMF  commodity  index 3  

2a.  Metals 
2b.  Nonfood agric. 

August 

August 

August 
August 
August 

1.8 

1.7 

-7.9 
-.5 
8.5 

22.6 

5.1 

n.a.

22.8 

4.8 

n.a.

30.8 
51.9 
47.5 

5.2 
13.4 
-12.9 

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

3. Commodity Research Bureau

3a.  Futures prices 
3b.  Industrial  spot prices 

Sept.  12 
Sept.  9 

-9.1 
5.1 

4. Journal  of Commerce industrials 

Sept.  12 

-1.4 

5. Economist  (U.S. dollar index) 

5a.  Industrials 

Sept.  6 
Sept.  6 

-4.7 
5.8 

11.7 
19.2 

10.7 

42.5 
62.6 

6.7 
4.8 

1.7 

10.3 
8.9 

-1.5
-2.2

.6

-.5
-1.3

6. Dow-Jones  Spot 

Sept.  12 

-8.9 

17.0 

-1.8 

1.4

1. Not seasonally  adjusted.
2. Change  is  measured to end of period, from last  observation of previous period.
3. Monthly observations.  IMF  index includes items  not  shown  separately.
n.a.--Not  available.
*Week  of  the August Greenbook.

Index  Weights

Energy
M

Food  Commodities
E

Precious  Metals

D

Others'
U

PPI  for  crude  materials

IMF  Index

CRB  Futures

CRB  Industrials

Journal  of  Commerce  Index

Economist

Dow-Jones

10 

12 

42 

43 

39 

19

57

62 

14 

14

100

88

50 

58 

50

17 

25

'Forest  products.  Industrial  metals.  and  other  industrial  materials

II-29

Recent  Inflation Trends

PPI  12-month  percent changes

Intermediate materials  ex. food & energy

r 

August

Finished goods ex. food & energy 

/

1 

/

/

~IIIIIIIIIIIIIIllIll

CPI  12-month  percent changes

A

f,^ 

"  N 

Services ex. energy

N--/x -_/ 

-

July

Commodities  ex. food & energy

1985

I 

1986

I  I  I  11111  I  1111 I I 

I111111111 I

1987

1988

II-30

paper products were  partly  offset by  a decline for  clothing.  Apparel

prices,  which had  risen sharply in  the  spring,  dropped back  in both  June

and July,  as  merchants made larger  end-of-season markdowns than  usual in

response to generally  sluggish demand.  Nevertheless,  apparel prices

have  risen more than  5 percent  above  their level  a year ago,  and further

increases  are  likely  this  fall.

At  the  producer  level,  prices of  consumer goods  other than  food  or

energy  rose  0.3  percent  in August,  after increasing nearly 1 percent  in

July.  Capital equipment  prices  edged up  in July and  rose  0.4  percent in

August.  The PPI  for  intermediate materials  less  food and energy rose

0.7  percent  in July  and 0.4  percent in  August, as  these prices  remained

on the  sharp uptrend that  has  been evident  over the past  year.  Prices

of  crude nonfood materials less  energy, which  receded in the  second

quarter, posted sizable increases  in  July and August.

However,  since  the pricing date  for the August  PPI, movements  in

spot  commodity prices have  been mixed.  Among industrial materials,

prices have  firmed for  copper,  tin, and  zinc, but  have  come  down  for

steel  scrap,  aluminum, and  cotton.  Prices  of precious metals  have  been

little  changed.  As  seen  in the  table,  the  available domestic commodity

price  indexes  also have  registered mixed and relatively  small net

changes.

To provide a longer-term perspective  on recent  inflation rates,  the

accompanying chart  shows  12-month changes  in major CPI  and PPI  series

(excluding food and  energy items)  from 1985 through the  most  recent

reporting period.  For  nearly all  of  the  indexes,  an acceleration of

II-31

prices  is  evident.  The  clearest  pattern of  price  acceleration has

occurred at  the  intermediate  level.  Prices  of  intermediate materials,

which had been  flat  or  declining in  1985-86, have  accelerated sharply

since  then, affected  by high levels  of  capacity  utilization and tight

world markets.  This  index  has  risen more  than  7 percent  over  the past

year.  At  the  finished goods  level,  domestic producer  prices had  shown

little  sign  of  acceleration until  early this  year, when  price increases

picked up  for  a wide range  of  goods.  The  latest  12-month  increase  in

this PPI  series  is  1 percentage point  above the  increase  for the

preceding year.  The CPI  for  commodities, which  slowed markedly in  1985-

86,  picked up  to  the  3-1/2  percent pace  during  1987  and, on average,  has

remained  at  that  pace over  the  course  of this year.  This  pattern was

associated in  part  with the  lagged effects  of movements in the exchange

value  of the  dollar  on  retail  prices  of  imported goods. 

In  contrast,

service price  inflation  has  been  roughly flat  over  the past  year.

Wages and  Labor  Costs

Few  additional  labor  cost data  have become  available  since  the last

Greenbook.  As  shown  in  the  chart,  available  measures  for the  first  half

of  1988  show  some  pickup in  the  four-quarter  rates  of  increase  in wages

and compensation.  The  hourly earnings  index for  production and

nonsupervisory workers  was up  0.1  percent  in August,  bringing the  rise

in  the  index to  3.1  percent over the past  year--about  1/2  percentage

point  more  than  in  the  preceding 12-month period.  In  addition,  revised

6. The  1985-86  rates  also were held down by  steep  declines  in  prices

of  used cars,  which  had a large  weight  in the  CPI  before  the  1987
revision.

II-32

SELECTED MEASURES OF  LABOR COSTS  IN THE NONFARM BUSINESS  SECTOR
(Percentage change  at  annual  rates)

September  1988 

1985 

1986 

1987 

Q1 

1988
Q2 

August

Monthly
rate

workers
2.3
1.7
2.2

2.8
1.8
3.1

3.2

3.5
2.7
3.1

2.1
3.6

3.1

3.4

Hourly earnings index,wages  of
Total private  nonfarm

Manufacturing
Contract  construction
Transportation  and

public utilities

Trade
Services

Employment  cost  index2
Compensation,  all persons

By  occupation:
White collar
Blue  collar
Service workers

By bargaining  status:

Union
Nonunion

production

3.1
3.3
1.6

3.0
2.1
4.2

3.9

4.8
3.2
3.0

2.6
4.6

Wages  and salaries,  all persons

4.1

Benefits,  all  persons

3.5

Major  collective bargaining agreements 3
First-year wage adjustments 
Total  effective wage change 

2.3
3.3

Labor  costs  and productivity,  all persons
Compensation per  hour 
Output  per hour 
Unit  labor  costs 

4.5
1.5
2.9

Manufacturing

Compensation  per hour
Output per hour
Unit  labor costs

-2.6
-3.0

4.2
-1.4
5.7

3.0
3.6
-. 6

4.1
1.9
2.1

1.6
3.4
-1.8

1. Changes are  from  final  quarter  of preceding
indicated at  a compound annual  rate.  Seasonally

period  to  final quarter  of  period
adjusted data.

2. Four-quarter  changes.
3. Agreements  covering 1,000  or more workers;  not  seasonally adjusted.

II-33

Wages  and  Labor Costs
Four-quarter  Percent  Changes

HOURLY  EARNINGS  INDEX

EMPLOYMENT  COST  INDEX

-7 

r-

COMPENSATION

WAGES AND  SALARIES

Production and nonsupervisory workers

I 

I 

I

Private  Industry workers

COMPENSATION  PER  HOUR

UNIT  LABOR COSTS

1983 

1984 

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988

1983 

1984 

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988

Nonfarm  business sector

Nonfarm business sector

II-34

data  show that  nonfarm compensation per hour--as  reported in  the

productivity and cost  data--rose  about  4-1/4  percent  at  an annual  rate

in  the  second quarter.  For the  four-quarter period ended in the  second

quarter of this year, nonfarm business  compensation per  hour  rose  4-1/2

percent,  while unit  labor costs advanced nearly 3 percent;  both of these

measures are  rising more  rapidly thus  far  this  year than in  1987.  A

similar pickup is  evident  in the manufacturing  sector, where hourly

compensation  rose at  a 3 percent  rate  in the second  quarter, and  3-1/4

percent over  the  past  year.  With  productivity growth of  2-3/4  percent,

unit  labor costs  turned up  slightly for the  four  quarters ending in

1988-Q2  after declining  1-1/4  percent  over the preceding four quarters.

APPENDIX 1

A NEW MEASURE OF DISCRETIONARY FISCAL POLICY

The Board staff  is  presenting for the  first  time a new budget
measure of discretionary fiscal  policy, dubbed FI  (for fiscal  impetus).
This  new measure has  been developed to help  interpret the  role  of
federal  budget  developments in the  short-run path of  aggregate
demand. 
should be derivable from a macroeconomic model.  The  model provides
guidance  in the selection and weighting of various aspects of federal
sector behavior, as they  influence aggregate  demand.

It is  premised on the view that  such a fiscal  indicator

The macroeconomics  literature offers  several  competing models  with

widely differing implications about  the  short-run  effects of fiscal
policy.  For example, models exist in which  it  is theoretically possible
for  tax cuts  to  increase, decrease,  or  not  affect  GNP.  However, FI  has
been derived from a simplified model of  aggregate  demand determination
in a growing economy that  attempts to capture essential  elements of the
staff's  judgmental GNP  projection  framework  and of the  Board's MPS
quarterly econometric model. 
increase GNP,  especially when  the cut  is  judged to be permanent.

In  this model,  a tax cut  does,  indeed,

By combining  information about  discretionary tax and spending

changes  (with appropriate  weighting),  FI  essentially quantifies the
magnitude of the shift  in the  IS  curve attributable directly to  fiscal
actions.  Indeed, a positive value  for  FI  indicates  that  fiscal  policy
is,  ceteris paribus,  increasing GNP  growth.

The new discretionary measure, FI,  is  similar  to the change  in the

high-employment budget  deficit,  the  traditional  summary measure of  the
stance of discretionary  fiscal  policy, because it  excludes  cyclical
influences on taxes and  spending.  However, FI  differs  from the change
in  the high-employment budget  in  some important  respects.  For  example,
FT  excludes  interest payments on the debt,  fiscal drag,  and built-in

1. Prepared by Darrel  S. Cohen, Economist,  Fiscal  Analysis  Section,

Division of  Research  and Statistics.

2. For a detailed discussion of the derivation  and implementation

issues  relating to the  new fiscal  measure,  see Darrel  Cohen,  "Models and
Measures of Fiscal policy,"  Economic Activity Section Working Paper
Series, No.  70.  Board of  Governors of  the Federal Reserve  System, March
1987.

3. FI  (in constant dollars) is  given by, AG-1 b.AT.,  where AG  is  the

discretionary change  in  real  government  spending, AT.  is the
discretionary  change  in  real  taxes of  type  i, and b. is  the  coefficient
weight associated with  tax i (e.g.,  for personal taxes b is  the marginal
propensity to  consume).  To express FI  in its derived percentage  form,
the above expression is  divided by the  level  of  discretionary real
government purchases.

II-A-1

II-A-2

trends  in  spending  (e.g.,  demographic  trends  in  social  security).
Furthermore, FI measures  discretionary spending and tax changes  in real
terms,  weights various tax and  spending changes  differently,  and
evaluates  them at  actual  -- rather  than at  high-employment  -- levels  of
economic activity.  Moreover, in line  with the life-cycle model  of
consumption, FI  gives  substantially less  weight  to temporary tax changes
(such as  the  one-time tax rebate  in  1975,  the temporary tax surcharge  in
the  late  1960s,  or the early-1987  surge in capital  gains  tax receipts
that  resulted from tax reform) than to permanent  ones  (such as  the tax
rate  reductions enacted in the 1981  Economic Recovery Tax Act).

A comparison of  the key properties  of FI  and the change  in  the
high-employment budget  is presented in table 1.  FI  (expressed as  a
percent  of discretionary government  purchases) and the change  in the
high-employment  budget  (expressed as  a percent  of  nominal  potential GNP)
are shown graphically  for  the period, CY1971  to CY1987,  in  the chart.
Underlying data  (both on a quarterly and calendar year basis) for  the
1980s  are presented  in table  2.

4. For example, the personal  income tax rate  changes  resulting  from
tax  reform receive  a coefficient  weight  of  0.7,  while the  repeal  of  the
investment  tax credit  receives a coefficient  weight  of 0.5.
Furthermore,  discretionary changes  in government  purchases  (such as
defense)  and transfer payments  (such as  those  resulting  from
Gramm-Rudman-Hollings  cutbacks) each  receive a coefficient  weight  of
unity;  transfers  receive the  same weight  as purchases  because the
marginal propensity to  consume out  of  transfer  income  is  1.0  in the MPS
model.

1.  A COMPARISON OF PROPERTIES  OF TWO MEASURES OF FISCAL POLICY

Fiscal  impetus
(FI)

Change  in
high-employment budget

Properties

1.  Units

Constant dollar  (or percent of
constant  dollar  government
purchases,  which makes measure
comparable to a real GNP  or
potential GNP  growth rate).

2.  Effects  of economy on

Minimal.

measure

3. 

Taxes

4.  Nondefense purchases

Includes  changes  in tax law
with each category receiving
a different  coefficient
weight;  tax changes are
evaluated at  actual  levels  of
economic  activity;  temporary
tax changes  receive a much
smaller weight  than permanent
changes;  indexed tax changes
are  included only in first
year;  extension of expiring
tax law  is not  included.

Includes  change  in these
purchases  (including compen-
sation of employees) in  real
terms;  however,  CCC is
excluded.

Current  dollar  (or percent  of
nominal potential GNP,  which
roughly converts  to real  terms
and  scales  for GNP  growth).

Affected especially by
prices  (nominal potential GNP
and indexed  spending programs)
and interest rates  (net
interest  on debt).

Includes  all  noncyclical
changes  in taxes  evaluated at
high-employment levels  of
economic activity  (i.e.,  it
includes  legislative  changes,
fiscal  drag, changes  due  to an
altered distribution of tax-
able  income, overwithholding,
etc.);  each tax category
receives  the same  coefficient
weight  of  unity.

Includes  total  change  in
current  dollars  (including
CCC).

1.  A COMPARISON OF PROPERTIES OF  TWO MEASURES  OF FISCAL POLICY--CONTINUED

Properties 

Fiscal  impetus 
(FI) 

Change  in
high-employment  budget

Includes  change  in real
defense purchases.

Includes  change  in nominal
defense purchases.

5.  Defense

6.  Grants

7.  Transfers  and subsidies

Roughly half of grants  are
classified  as  "purchases;"
the  change  in  real terms in
this  set  of grants  is included
in  FI.  The  remaining portion
is allocated to  "transfers and
subsidies,"  and only clearly
identifiable discretionary
program changes are  included.

Includes  discretionary program
changes  only.

8.  Interest

8.  Interest 

Not  included.
Not  included.

Includes  total  change.

Includes  noncyclical  changes
(due to  inflation, benefi-
ciary growth, program
changes,  etc.).

Total  change is  included.

MEASURES  OF  FISCAL  POLICY

Percent of  Potential GNP 
-20

2 

Percent of  Purchases

Change  in High-Employment
Budget

1 

Fiscal Impetus  Measure, 

\/ 

10

I\ 

\  A 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

I

i

£ 
0 

- /  

\> 
I 

/ 

\ 
-- 

\ 
\-7-- 
I 

\ 
^\----\ 
\ 

-

-
0
Stimulus
Restraint

110

I3 

1 
1971

ll 

1973

19717911891
1977 

1979 

1981 

1983

1985 

1987

II-A-6

2.  MEASURES  OF FISCAL POLICY1
(Historical Data:  1980s)

Fiscal impetus  (FI) 

Billions of 
1982  dollars 

Percent  of 
government 
purchases 

Change in
high-employment budget

Billions of 
dollars 

Percent  of
potential
GNP

1980 

1981 

1982 

1983 

1984 

Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4

Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4

Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4

Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4

Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4

1985  Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4

Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4

Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4

Q1
Q2

1986 

1987 

1988 

1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987

2.6
-. 3
1.0
-3.4

-17.9

4.2
-2.7
16.1

-. 3
3.4
24.2
7.3

2.3
-. 2
21.3
2.7

-. 4
7.0
-4.5
14.5

-2.0
2.8
16.2
-8.1

-6.7
4.7
2.7
-8.0

8.9

11.4

4.4
-1.7

.4
-. 9

3.5

-12.2
27.7
31.6
18.7
16.6
.1

16.5

.9
-. 1
.3
-1.2

-6.1
1.4
-. 9
5.4

-. 1
1.1
8.2
2.4

.8
-. 1
6.8
.9

-. 1
2.2
-1.4
4.4

-. 6
.8
4.7
-2.2

-1.9
1.3
.7
-2.1

2.4
3.1
1.2
-. 5

.1
-. 2

1.2
-4.2
9.3
10.6
5.9
5.0
.0
4.5

8.9
2.5
.2
-3.7

-13.7

-4.1
11.0
15.6

-9.1
-5.2
30.5
32.7

-15.8
-4.9
17.8
5.3

5.9

19.3
11.3
14.4

-21.6

51.3
-5.3
11.4

-3.0
25.8
-31.5
-26.0

11.7
-35.7
2.6
35.3

-. 9

-19.0

17.2
-9.4
26.7
29.2
41.2
38.4
12.8
-33.7

1. Annual  data are  for  calendar years.
indicates  fiscal  stimulus  (restraint).

A positive  (negative) sign

DOMESTIC  FINANCIAL
DEVELOPMENTS

III-T-1

SELECTED FINANCIAL MARKET QUOTATIONS 1
(Percent)

1987 

Jan.-Feb. 

lows 

Oct.  16 

1988 
FOMC 
lows  Aug  16  Sept.  13 

Feb 

Change  from:
FOMC
Aug  16

Short-term rates

Federal  funds
Treasury bills

3-month
6-month
1-year

Commercial  paper

1-month
3-month

Large negotiable CDs 4

1-month
3-month
6-month

Eurodollar deposits 5

1-month
3-month

5.95 

7.59 

6.38 

7.80 

8.13

5.30
5.31
5.35

6.93
7.58
7.74

5.59
5.77
6.10

7.06
7.54
7.69

5.81 
5.73 

7.94 
8.65 

6.41 
6.45 

8.26 
8.42 

5.85
5.80
5.78

7.92
8.90
9.12

6.44
6.49
6.55

8.24
8.55
8.85

7.17
7.40
7.46

8.07
8.17

8.11
8.22
8.49

6.00 
6.00 

7.79 
8.69 

6.60 
6.69 

8.31 
8.59 

8.26
8.39

Bank prime rate

7.50 

9.25 

8.50 

10.00 

10.00

Intermediate- and long-term rates

U.S.  Treasury  (constant maturity)
6.34
7.01
7.29

3-year 
10-year 
30-year 

9.52
10.23
10.24

7.28
8.11
8.32

8.84
9.35
9.40

8.52
8.94
9.01

.33

.11
-. 14
-. 23

-.19
-.25

-. 13
-.33
-.36

-.05
-.20

.00

-.32
-.41
-.39

Municipal revenue6
(Bond Buyer)

Corporate A utility

(recently offered)

Home mortgage rates7
S&L fixed-rate
S&L ARM, 1-yr.

6.92 

9.59

7.76 

8.18

7.98

-.20

8.78 

11.50 

9.63 

10.53e 

10.17e

9.10 
7.52 

11.58 
8.45 

9.84 
7.59 

10.57 
8.00 

10.53
8.14

-. 36

-.04
.14

1986 

1987 

1988 

Percent change from:

Year-end 

Record 
highs 

Lows 

FOMC 
Aug  16 

Sept  13 

FOMC
Aug.  16

Stock prices

Dow-Jones  Industrial  1895.95 
138.58 
NYSE Composite 
263.27 
AMEX Composite 
NASDAQ  (OTC) 
348.83 
1. One-day quotes except  as noted. 
2. Last business day prior to stock market 

187.99 
365.01 
455.26 

2722.42  1738.74  2021.51 
147.49 
125.91 
231.90  294.57 
375.66 
291.88 

2083.04 
151.15 
296.79 
382.38 
4. Secondary market.
5. Average for  statement week closest

3.04
2.48
.75
1.79

decline on Monday, October  19,  1987. 

to date  shown.

3. Average for two-week maintenance period 
closest to date shown except lows shown which 
are one-week average ending Feb.25 and Feb.10,  to date  shown.
e--estimate.
respectively.  Last observation  is  average 
to date for maintenance period ending 9/21/88.

6. One-day quotes  for Thursday.
7. Quotes  for week ending Friday closest

Selected  Interest  Rates*
(percent)

Short-Term

FStatement Week Averages

Daly

Federal  Funds

3-Month  Treasury  Bill

-s.^^

-- 1  9

--  8

-17

6 

-

1987 

1988

8/16
(August FOMC)

9/13

Primary  Mortgage
(weekly)

Corporate  Bond
(weekly)

-

30-Year  Treasury  Bond

(daHy)

-4  8

1987 

1988

*-Friday weeks through Septmnber 9, Wedneday  weeks through Septmnber 7.

8/16
(August FOMC)

9/13

DOMESTIC FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS

Federal funds  have  continued  to trade around the  8-1/8  percent

level  established shortly after the August  9 discount rate  hike.  Most

other market  interest rates  have  fallen  noticeably on balance  since the

last FOMC meeting, the  declines  amounting to  as much as  3/8  percentage

point.  Much of the drop occurred in response to the less  robust  August

employment  report,  which, combined with  weakness in oil  and other

commodity prices, was  perceived by many as  lessening the prospects  for a

near-term firming in monetary policy.

In  response to the upward trend in interest rates  over  recent

months,  growth of the broader monetary aggregates slowed a bit  further

in August,  with M2  and M3  growing at  annual rates of 2 and  4 percent,

respectively, while M1  was  flat.  From the  fourth quarter  of 1987

through August, M2  expanded  6-1/4  percent and M3  grew  7 percent,  placing

the  two measures  well  within the  FOMC's  annual  ranges.

Overall  credit  demands have  continued to ease  from the  second-

quarter pace, leaving debt growth, too, comfortably  inside the  1988

monitoring range.  Net  borrowing by nonfinancial businesses  apparently

remained  subdued in August  as  a small pickup  in bond offerings  was

accompanied by a slowdown in business  loan growth  at banks.  In the

federal  sector, Treasury net  borrowing  from the public  has  picked up

seasonally  in the  current  quarter.  Borrowing by  state  and local

governments  remains moderate,  reflecting  a dropoff in  offerings of  bonds

for  new  capital  as  well  as very  light  issuance  of refunding bonds.

III-1

III-2

MONETARY  AGGREGATES
(based  on  seasonally  adjusted  data  unless  otherwise  noted)

19871 

1988 
Q1 

1988 
Q2 

1988 
Jun 

1988 
Jul 

1988 

Growth
Q4 87-

Aug pe Aug 88p

------------ Percent  change  at  annual  rates---------------------

3.8 
6.8 
7.1 

6.3
7.7
7.5

9.8 
5.8 
7.7 

9.1
3.7
6.2

------------ Percent  change  at  annual  rates----------

5  1/4
6  1/4
7

Levels
--  bil.  $
Jul  88

2.8 

1.4 

3.9

9.2 

4.8

1 

504.1

8.7
-1.0

13.6

3.3

9.4 
-4.4 

8.4 
1.0 

7.7
10.4

5 
-2 

206.3
290.6

8.3 

10.6 

11.0 

17.1

0 

278.3

7.8 

8.3 

4.4

3 

2243.4

4.1 

-11.8 

3.0 

3.0 

-38.5

46 

78.4

19.3
7.2
2.8
13.7
8.7
-7.3
21.3

8.4

7.3
3.4
15.7

$

11.2 

8.5
11.2
3.4

3.0 
32.8 
13.8 

3.1
6.8
3.2
11.8
9.1
2.3
14.0

-14.5

9.0

11.1
6.2
3.0
4.8
1.7

6.8 

15.1 

7.5 
6.7 
8.8 

15.2 
23.4 
0.0 

-49.3
27.1
18.4

7 
4 
-3 
13 
2 
-2 
4 

229.5
958.7
548.9
409.8
972.4
404.1
568.3

10 

806.

510.0
341.7
168.3

84.8
123.0
93.9

-11 
-17 
72 

16.0

18.4
26.9
1.4

-20.9
7.9
12.9

44.0
6.6
-23.4

-30.6
25.1
19.4

----- Average  monthly  change 

in  billions  of  dollars----

1.5
2.3
-0.8

-6.1
5.3

7.9 
1.5 
6.4 

4.0 
2.4 

4.8 
4.1 
0.7 

-0.8 
1.5 

2.9 
-0.2 

0.3 

-0.4

-1.0 

-2.7

4.0
6.2

-2.2

2.2
-4.4

-1.8

599.5
406.7
192.8

11.2
181.6

8 

-4 

-4 

20.2

1.  Ml
2.  M2
M3
3. 

Selected components

4. 

Ml-A

5. 
6. 

Currency
Demand  deposits

7.  Other checkable  deposits

8. 

M2  minus  M12

9.  Overnight  RPs  and  Eurodollars,  NSA
10.  General  purpose  and  broker/dealer  money
market  mutual  fund  shares,  NSA

11.  Commercial  banks
12. 
13. 
14.  Thrift  institutions
15. 
16. 

Savings  deposits,  SA,  plus  MMDAs,  NSA3
Small time  deposits

Savings  deposits,  SA,  plus  MMDAs,  NSA 3
Small time  deposits

17.  M3  minus M2 4

Large  time  deposits

At commercial  banks,  net5
At  thrift  institutions

Institution-only  money market

mutual  fund  shares,  NSA

Term RPs,  NSA
Term Eurodollars, NSA

MEMORANDA:6

24. Managed liabilities at  commercial

banks  125+26)

25.  Large  time  deposits,  gross
26.  Nondeposit funds
27. 

Net  due  to  related  foreign
institutions,  NSA

Other 7

28. 
29.  U.S.  government  deposits  at  commercial

banks 8

1. Amounts  shown are  from  fourth quarter  to  fourth quarter.
2. Nontransactions M2 
3. Commercial  bank  savings  deposits  excluding  MMDAs  grew during  July  and  August  at  rates  of  9.6

is  seasonally  adjusted  as  a  whole.

percent  and 8 percent,  respectively. At  thrift  institutions,  savings deposits  excluding MMDAs  grew
during July and August  at  rates of 6.5 percent and 4  percent,  respectively.

4.  The  non-2M  component of M3  is seasonally adjusted as  a whole.
5.  Net  of  large  denomination  time  deposits  held  by  money  market  mutual  funds  and  thrift  institutions.
6.  Dollar  amounts  shown  under  memoranda  are  calculated  on  an  end-month-of-quarter  basis.
7.  Consists  of  borrowing  from  other  than  commercial  banks  in  the  form  of  federal  funds  purchased,  securities
sold  under  agreements  to  repurchase,  and  other  liabilities  for  borrowed  money  (including  borrowing  from
loan  RPs  and  other  minor  items).  Data  are  partially estil
Federal  Reserve  and  unaffiliated  foreign  banks, 

8.  Consists  of  Treasury  demand  deposits  and  note  balances  at  commercial  banks.
pe  - preliminary  estimate

III-3

Available data on the  household sector  suggest  some  slackening

in the  pace of mortgage  and consumer debt  expansion.

Monetary Aggregates and Bank  Credit

The slower  growth  in M2  last month reflected a sharp deceleration

in M1  that more than  offset  a small  pickup in its nontransaction

component.  Within M2,  overnight  RPs  and Eurodollars  rebounded while

retail  accounts weakened, likely reflecting higher market  interest rates

and opportunity costs.  The  slower M2  expansion and  some weakening in

its  non-M2 component  accounted for  the deceleration in M3.

In August,  the  composition of growth in the  retail-type components

of M2  appears to have become more consistent  with recent  movements in

interest rates.  Small time  deposits, which in June  and July had posted

unusually weak growth  in view  of the widening gap between their  own

rates and those paid on  liquid accounts, picked up to an  8 percent

annual  rate  last  month, while  growth in  savings deposits and MMDAs

weakened further.  There  appears, however, to have  been a significant

change  recently in both the  growth and pricing of  small time  deposit

accounts  at  thrift  institutions relative to those at  commercial banks.

Over most  of the  five-year period since  the deregulation of small  time

deposit  rates,  thrifts had priced more  aggressively than banks  and

consistently had experienced stronger growth in these deposits.  In each

of  the past  three months, however,  small  time deposit growth  at  thrifts

has been unusually weak and markedly below that  of commercial  banks.

III-4

Recent  data  suggest that  the  spread between thrift  and bank  rates

paid on  6-month retail CDs  had  fallen  by August  to less  than half  its

first-quarter level  and was the  narrowest  on record.  While the  falloff

in growth of  thrift  small time  deposits  could  simply  reflect  in part  a

shifting into bank  deposits,  it  may also  represent  a source  of weakness

in overall  growth of  small  time deposits  and M2, to the  extent  that  the

previous  high rates  had attracted funds  from market  instruments.

The  non-M2  component  of M3  slowed  in August  as  growth in  large time

deposits eased  somewhat.  A moderate  runoff in  large  CDs  at  thrift

THRIFT AND COMMERCIAL BANK PRICING OF  RETAIL DEPOSITS AND
SMALL TIME DEPOSIT  GROWTH

Thrift  6-month 
CD  rate  less 

Slope  of 

Slope  of 

thrift  deposit  bank deposit 

Small time  deposit
growth

bank  rate 

yield curve 

yield  curve  ThriftsI  Banks

--------------- Basis  points---------------

Percent,

s.a.a.r.

1987  Q3 
Q4 

1988  Q1 
Q2 

May 
June 
July 

41 
43 

53 
35 

34 
29 
27 

Augustpe 

23 

134 
180 

186 
165 

160 
171 
179 

192 

123
167

161
160

156
171
181

198

9.3
16.1

21.3
14.0

10.7
1.7
.4

7.5
14.8

13.7
11.8

6.6
6.2
8.8

13

1. Rate  paid by FSLIC-insured institutions less  that  paid by commercial
banks.
2. Rate  paid on  6-month  retail  CDs less  rate  paid on NOW accounts.
pe--preliminary estimate.
Note:  Interest  rate  data are  as  of  the  end of  the preceding month.  All
deposit  interest  rate  data  reflect  effective  annual  yields.

III-5

institutions,  apparently largely concentrated in the Dallas  Federal

Reserve  District,  contributed to the  slower growth  in aggregate large

time deposits.  Institution-only money market mutual  funds  and term RPs

continued to decline  last month, while term Eurodollars surged.

Commercial  banks  increased their borrowings  from foreign branches

last month to  fund  a mild pickup  in bank credit  to a 6-1/2  percent

annual  rate  of  growth.  The strengthening of bank asset  growth reflected

an increase  in holdings of U.S.  government  securities,  after a decline

in July.  Total  loans  increased at  a 7-1/4  percent rate,  down  somewhat

from July;  a drop  in business  lending was  partially offset  by a strong

turnaround in the volatile  security loan category, some  strengthening in

real  estate  lending, and faster  growth of consumer loans.  Consumer

loans  on bank balance  sheets  continue to be affected by the  issuance of

consumer credit-backed securities.  Adjusting for this  activity,

consumer loan  growth last month was  roughly 8 percent, about  3

percentage  points above the comparable  July figure, but  still  noticeably

below its  second-quarter pace.

Growth of business loans  at  U.S.  offices of  commercial  banks  fell

to a 1-1/2 percent  annual  rate  last month, with the  slowdown evident  at

both large  and  small  U.S.-chartered banks and at  U.S.  offices of foreign

banks.  Booking of  loans at  foreign branches  of large U.S.  banks picked

up,  likely reflecting  shifts  from prime-based domestic bookings to

LIBOR-based loans  at  foreign offices as  the prime-LIBOR spread widened

last  month after the  increase in the prime rate.

III-6

COMMERCIAL  BANK  CREDIT  AND  SHORT-  AND  INTERMEDIATE-TERM  BUSINESS  CREDIT
(Percentage changes at  annual  rates, based on  seasonally  adjusted data) 1

1--b  Q4
1986:04
to 

1988

1987:Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

June 

J
ruly 

Levels
bil.$
P
Aug.

P 
Aug. 

----------------------- 

ommercial Bank

Credit  -----------------------

1.  Total loans  and  securities

at  banks

2. 

Securities

3. 

4. 

U.S.  government  securities

Other  securities

5. 

Total loans

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

Business  loans

Security loans

Real  estate  loans

Consumer loans

10. 

Other loans

7.9

5.0

9.1

-1.3

8.8

7.5

1.0

18.1 

4.9 

-2.3 

11.9

8.9

11.1

10.6

4.9 

9.6 

12.9

13.5

-2

.7.2 

2.0

12.9

16.7

5.5

11.2

14.3

3.6 

9.4 

6.6 

5.1 

8.7 

-1.2 

7.2 

i

.2.7 

1.6 

-12.1

-6.2

-2

.8.7 

47.4 

10.8

10.4

5.4

13.8

12.3

I

11.6 

13.4 

7.2

13.2

5.3

11.9

3.5 

7.6

5.6 

-. 6 

2366.6

546.2

347.3

198.9

1820.3

601.5

39.5

631.9

343.2

204.2

---------  Short-

and Intermediate-Term Business Credit  ---------

11. 

Business  loans net  of bankers

acceptances

12. 

Loans  at  foreign branches2

13. 

Sum of  lines  11  & 12

14. 

Comnercial  paper issued by

nonfinancial  firms

15. 

Sum of  lines  13  a 14

7.6

-4.1

7.2

-1.6

6.0

16. 

Bankers ac etances:  U.S.  trade

2.3

17.0

14.4

12.8

115.8

4.1

-35.3

-48.5

5.2

16.6

12.5

10.8

1.4

56.8

3.1

12.2 

-7.8 

-23.3

16.0 

10.0 

6.5

597.9

19.9

617.8

90.4

708.2

related"'

13.3 

-11.6 

-9.5 

-10.9

-7.3 

n.a.

32.6

17. 

Line 15  plus bankers acceptances:

U.S.  trade  related

6.3

14.8 

9.0

18. 

Finance company loans  to business3  16.6

12.1 

8.7

n.a.

738.5

222.9

19. 

Total  short-  and intermediate-

term business credit  (sum of
lines  17  & 18) 

8.4

5.6 

14.2 

17.2 

6.7 

n.a.

961.4

961.45

1. Average  of Wednesdays.
2. Loans  at  foreign  branches  are loans  made to U.S.  firms  by foreign
3. Based on average  of data  for current  and preceding ends  of month.
4. Consists  of acceptances  that  finance  U.S.  imports, U.S.  exports,  and domestic  shipment  and  storage of  goods.
5. July data.
n.a.--not  available
p--preliminary

branches  of domestically chartered banks.

III-7

Business  Finance

Total borrowing by nonfinancial businesses  in August evidently

continued around the  reduced pace  registered in the preceding month.

Commercial  paper of  nonfinancial  corporations  increased  in August,  after

a steep decline  in  July, but  the sum of commercial paper outstanding and

overall business  loan growth  at  banks expanded at  only a 4 percent

annual  rate,  down  somewhat  from July and  substantially below the pace of

the  second quarter.  Gross public bond offerings picked up somewhat,

though they  remained low relative to the average pace  earlier  in the

year. 

To  some  extent,  the recent  slowdown in the growth of business

debt  likely reflects the dropoff  in the volume  of  share  retirements so

far  this quarter  from the record totals  in the  spring.  Few acquisitions

or  leveraged buyouts have  resulted in equity retirements of  a billion

dollars  or more  since  June.  Nonetheless,  there have  been numerous

smaller deals, which, along  with a continued excess  of  share  repurchases

over  new issues,  have kept  net  retirements  somewhat  above their  average

pace  of recent  years,  at  roughly a $100  billion annual  rate.

This continued restructuring activity has  helped  support  a large

flow of  junk bond financing.  New bonds rated below  investment  grade

have  been flowing  into bond portfolios at  an average  rate  of  $3 billion

a month since early  1986,  except  for  last  fall  and winter after the

stock market  crash.  Some  investors  withdrew  from the  junk market  during

1. One  uncertainty in  the assessment  of  business borrowing develop-
ments  is  the  lack  of  data on private placements.  Market  reports  suggest
that  private  placement activity has  been heavy, but  there is no basis
for  judging whether  recent  levels  have differed  from those in  earlier
months of  the year.

III-8

GROSS  OFFERINGS OF  SECURITIES BY U.S.  CORPORATIONS
(Monthly rates,  not  seasonally  adjusted, billions of  dollars)

1987 

Year 

1988

Ql 

Q2 

Junep  July  p

Aug.

Corporate  securities  - total1

24.08

23.56  24.94

29.98  17.09 

18.38

Public offerings in  U.S.

21.89 

22.17  22.35 

26.57  14.90 

17.50

Stocks--total 2
Nonfinancial
Utility
Industrial

Financial

Bonds--total1

Nonfinancial
Utility
Industrial

Financial

By  quality 3

4.45
2.32
.57
1.75
2.12

17.44
6.61
2.02
4.59
10.83

3.89
.76
.32
.44
3.13

3.64
1.63
.30
1.33
2.01

4.17
2.41
.25
2.16
1.76

4.40
1.70
.10
1.60
2.70

18.28
6.59
2.25
4.34
11.69

18.70
7.92
2.55
5.37
10.78

22.40
9.90
3.10
6.80
12.50

10.50
4.10
1.20
2.90
6.40

Aaa and Aa
A and Baa
Less  than Baa
No rating  (or unknown)

3.27
5.20
2.77
.07

Memo  items:

Equity-based bonds
Mortgage-backed bonds
Variable-rate notes

Bonds  sold abroad - total

Nonfinancial
Financial

Stocks  sold  abroad - total

Nonfinancial
Financial

.87
5.19
1.88

2.03
.94
1.09

3.83
7.06
1.33
.16

.13
5.47
1.44

1.34
.39
.95

.05 
.04 
.01 

3.10
7 16
2.85
.14

.37
4.12
1.35

2.40
.87
1.53

.19
.14
.05

3.04
8.84
4.74
.01

.77
3.50
.62

3.00
.87
2.13

.41 
.33 
.08 

1.20
2.20
3.10
.10

.50
3.00
.95

1.99
.80
1.19

.20
.20
.00

3.50
1.20
.20
1.00
2.30

14.00
5.20
.30
4.90
8.80

3.00
3.30
2.70
.10

.10
4.40
1.00

.85
.45
.40

1. Securities  issued  in the
Total  reflects  gross  proceeds
bonds.

private placement market  are  not  included.
rather than par value  of  original discount

2. Includes  equity  issues associated with  debt/equity swaps.
3. Bonds  categorized according to Moody's bond ratings or  Standard  and

Poors  if  unrated by Moody's.  Excludes mortgage-backed and asset-backed
bonds.

4. Includes  bonds  convertible into  equity and bonds  with warrants  that

entitle the  holder  to  purchase  equity in  the  future.

p--preliminary.

III-9

that  period, but  as  the  stock market  stabilized  and the economy's

prospects  brightened, demand  for  new issues  rebounded and  is evidenced

by the  narrowing to pre-crash widths  of yield  spreads  vis-à-vis

Treasuries.  Demand  for high-yield debt  increasingly has  been augmented

by  indenture clauses  limiting further  leveraging in any  subsequent

restructuring, and by assurances  that  future  interest costs on  some

of the  floating-rate bank  financing are hedged by  interest rate  caps or

swaps.  The  recent  legal difficulties of  Drexel Burnham Lambert, the

dominant  underwriter of  junk bonds,  reportedly have had little  net

effect  on the market as  a whole.

In  contrast to the moderate rebound in bond issuance,  new  equity

offerings  fell  off  sharply in August.  The  decline in  stock prices  early

in the month likely discouraged some  issuers.  Currently, share price

indexes are  a little  above their  levels at  the time  of  the August FOMC.

Treasury  and Sponsored Agency Financing

The outlook  for the  federal  sector  has  changed little  since the

August  FOMC meeting.  The  federal  budget  deficit is  projected to widen

to  $39  billion in the third quarter, after ending the  second  quarter

roughly in balance.  For the  fiscal  year as  a whole, the deficit  is

projected at  roughly  $158  billion.  The  staff expects the Treasury to

finance  its  current-quarter deficit mainly by  borrowing $42  billion,

net,  from the public.  Net  marketable borrowing of  $33  billion  is

expected  to be  split about  evenly between bills,  which had been  running

off  in previous quarters,  and coupon  issues;  other  special  borrowing

III-10

TREASURY AND AGENCY FINANCING 1
(Total for period;  billions  of dollars)

1988 

1988

Q2 

Q3e 

Jul. 

Auq~ 

Sep.e

Treasury  financing

Total  surplus/deficit  (-) 

.5  -38.9 

-22.9 

-22.7 

6.7

Means  of financing deficit:

Net  cash borrowing
from the public 

Marketable borrowings/
repayments  (-) 

Bills 
Coupons 

Nonmarketable 
Other borrowing 

18.7 

42.1 

3.7 

22.8 

15.6

11.3 
-10.4 
21.6 
6.4 
1.1 

32.8 
16.5 
16.3 
3.5 
5.9 

3.6 
.4 
3.2 
.7 
-.6 

17.1 
10.7 
6.4 
2.3 
3.5 

12.1
5.4
6.7
.5
3.0

Decrease  in the cash 

-16.6 

-.2 

15.6 

11.0 

-26.

balance

Memo:  Cash balance

at  end of period 

39.6 

39.8 

23.9 

13.0 

39.8

Other 3  

-2.7 

-3.1 

3.7 

-11.2 

4.5

Federally sponsored credit

agencies,  net  cash

borrowing 4  

FHLBs 
FNMA 
Far  Credit  Banks 
FAC 
FHLMC 
FICO 
SLMA 

3.6 

-. 5 
4.9 
-.4 
-

-2.5 
1.1 
1.0 

-- 

-- 
-- 
-- 
-
-- 
-- 
-- 

3.2

1.6 
.0
-1.2 
.5
.4p
.0 
2.0p

2.3

-.5

.9

1. Data  reported on a not  seasonally  adjusted, payment basis.
2. Securities  issued by federal  agencies under  special  financing

authorities  (primarily FSLIC).

3. Includes checks  issued less  checks  paid, accrued items and other

transactions.

4. Excludes mortgage pass-through  securities  issued by FNMA and FHLMC.
5. Financial Assistance Corporation, an  institution within Farm Credit

System, was created  in  January  1988 by Congress  to provide  financial
assistance  to Farm Credit  Banks.  It first  issued bonds  in  July  1988.

e--staff estimate.
p--preliminary.
Note:  Details may not  add to totals due to  rounding.

III-11

(mostly FSLIC notes described below) is  expected to contribute  $6

billion toward financing the  current-quarter deficit.  Considerable

uncertainty remains as  to whether the Treasury will  have the authority

to  issue 30-year bonds in the November refunding.  A technical

corrections bill  for the  1986 tax legislation, which contains a

provision to  repeal  the  limit  on the authority, has yet  to be taken  up

by  the full  Senate.

In  spite  of the publicity surrounding liquidations and mergers of

financially troubled savings  and loan associations, the rate  spread of

Financing Corporation  (FICO) obligations over Treasury bonds has

narrowed about  15 basis points  since  the last  issue was brought  to

market in late  July.  In the  last  two months, the FSLIC has  greatly

accelerated the pace  at  which it  is  resolving thrift  insolvencies, and

Chairman Wall  of the  Federal Home Loan Bank Board has testified that  he

expects this  rapid pace to extend through September.  Despite the

issuance of more than $2-1/2  billion of FICO bonds this  year, the

FSLIC's  cash resources  have not  been adequate to  provide the  financial

assistance necessary to complete these transactions.  The FSLIC instead

has  relied on the issuance of  adjustable-rate obligations  (FSLIC notes)

to augment  its  resources.  By the end of August,  FSLIC notes outstanding

had  reached $9.3  billion, compared with $5 billion at  the beginning of

2
this year. 

The issuance of  large amounts of FSLIC notes has

attracted considerable  attention from the public and Congress  and has

2. Outstanding FSLIC  notes include those issued to purchase  Income

Capital  Certificates  and Net Worth Certificates  as part  of  earlier
assistance  programs.  The  figures  cited in the text  do not  include a
$900  million FSLIC  note payable  to Federal Home Loan  Banks.

III-12

raised further  concerns about  the  ability of the  insurance fund to

handle  the remaining insolvencies without additional  financial

assistance.

The  improvement  in the FICO  spread  has been attributed to enhanced

demand associated with  stripping of the FICO securities  by several

dealers to  form zero  coupon issues;  there  has  been no stripping as yet

of  the  most  recent  30-year Treasury bond.  Spreads of  Federal Home  Loan

Bank  securities  over Treasuries have  remained relatively stable  over the

summer, while  spreads  on Farm Credit  System securities,  which had

widened  somewhat earlier  in the  summer, were  unchanged to down  slightly

at  the  System's last  offering  in late August.  The  yield on the  15-year

bond issued by the Financial Assistance Corporation, which was

established earlier this year to provide  aid to the Farm Credit  Banks,

has  risen  slightly relative to the  10-year Treasury rate,  reportedly

owing to a lack  of liquidity in the issue.

Municipal Securities

Gross  issuance of long-term tax-exempt  securities  slowed to  $6-1/2

billion in August and  is expected to  remain light  in September.  The

August  long-term volume  reflects a dropoff in offerings of bonds  for  new

capital,  combined with  a continued weakness in issuance of  refunding

bonds.  By contrast,  short-term issuance surged  to  $5-1/2 billion last

month, with about  $3-1/4  billion accounted for by the  state  of

California.  As  has been the case  since  last  winter,  long-term tax-

exempt  yields  have  continued to be  remarkably steady  compared with other

III-13

bond rates.  The tax-exempt to taxable  ratio has  remained  low by the

standards of recent  years.

(Monthly rates,  not  seasonally  adjusted, billions of dollars)

GROSS OFFERINGS OF MUNICIPAL SECURITIES

1986 

1987 

1987 

1988 

1988

Year 

Year 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

June 

July 

Aug. p

Total  offerings1 

14.39  10.44 

9.99 

8.68  11.73  17.16  11.08 

12.34

Long-term 

Total  tax-exempt  14.04  10.05 
8.53 
3.80 
4.73 
1.52 
.39 

12.25 
5.29 
6.96 
1.79 
.35 

Short-term 
Total  taxable 

Refundings 
New capital 

9.38 
7.84 
2.16 
5.68 
1.54 
.61 

8.46  11.41  16.98  10.98 
9.20  13.91 
7.94 
9.75 
3.05 
1.36 
4.98 
3.18 
4.89 
8.39 
8.93 
6.02 
1.23 
3.07 
2.21 
.52 
.10 
.18 
.32 
.22 

12.13
6.61
1.43
5.18
5.52

.21

1. Includes issues  for public  and private purposes;  also  includes taxable

issues.

2. Includes all  refunding bonds, not  just  advance  refundings.
3. Does  not  include tax-exempt  commercial  paper.
p--preliminary.

Inflows to tax-exempt  bond funds  in the  first  seven months of  1988

have been running  somewhat behind the pace of  a year ago.  Unit

investment  trusts,  however, have been active purchasers of municipal

bonds, with inflows  of about $4.7  billion thus  far,  up roughly  20

percent  on a year-over-year basis.  The  rebound in UITs  is  consistent

with reports  of demands by individual  investors for municipal  securities

as shelter  from taxes  and stock market volatility.

Mortgage Markets

Residential mortgage  lending activity appears to have  diminished in

July,  as rising mortgage interest  rates have contributed to  a slowdown

in sales  of new and existing homes.  The volume of mortgage  loans closed

at  FSLIC-insured thrift institutions  fell  to a seasonally adjusted $19.3

III-14

MORTGAGE ACTIVITY AT ALL FSLIC-INSURED  INSTITUTIONS
(Monthly averages,  billions  of  dollars,  seasonally adjusted)

Mortgage transactions 

Origina-  Commit- 

tions 

ments 

Sales 

Mortgage 
loans 

Total 

Mortgage-
backed
securities

Net  change  in
mortgage assets

1985 
1986 
1987 

1988-Q1  r 
Q2  r 

1988-Jan. 

Feb.  r 
Mar. r 
Apr. 
r 
May 
June  r 
July  p 

16.4 
22.2 
21.1 

18.6 
19.7 

17.4 
18.9 
19.5 
18.7 
19.5 
20.8 
19.3 

15.0 
19.8 
20.0 

17.8 
19.1 

18.6 
16.7 
18.0 
17.7 
19.0 
20.5 
18.5 

8.2 
14.1 
12.5 

7.7 
10.1 

6.1 
7.8 
9.2 
10.4 
9.4 
10.4 
8.3 

4.1 
4.7 
6.1 

2.6 
5.9 

5.7 
.7 
1.3 
5.8 
5.3 
6.5 
7.1 

4.2 
1.3 
2.6 

3.6 
3.4 

5.1 
3.9 
1.8 
2.8 
3.6 
3.7 
5.2 

-.1
3.4
3.4

-1.0
2.5

.6
-3.1
-.5
3.1
1.7
2.8
1.9

1. Net  changes  are  adjusted to  account  for  structural  changes  caused

by mergers,  acquisitions,  liquidations, terminations,  or  de  novo
institutions.

NEW ISSUES  OF MORTGAGE-BACKED PASS-THROUGH SECURITIES

BY FEDERALLY RELATED AGENCIES
(Monthly averages, billions  of  dollars)

Seasonally adjusted 
Total  GNMAs  FHLMCs  FNMAs 

Not  seasonally adjusted

Total 

ARM-backed

Period 

1985 
1986 
1987 

1988-Q1 

Q2  p 

9.0 
21.6 
19.7 

9.4 
13.1 

1988-Jan. 

8.7 
9.3 
Feb. 
Mar.  r 10.3 
Apr. 
r  12.9 
r  11.9 
May 
June  p  14.7 
July  p  12.6 

3.8 
8.2 
8.2 

3.7 
4.4 

4.4 
3.3 
3.3 
3.4 
4.2 
5.6 
4.9 

3.2 
8.4 
6.2 

2.6 
3.0 

2.4 
3.0 
2.5 
3.1 
2.4 
3.4 
3.3 

2.0 
5.0 
5.3 

3.1 
5.8 

1.9 
3.0 
4.5 
6.4 
5.2 
5.7 
4.3 

9.0 
21.6 
19.7 

8.5 
12.5 

7.9 
8.7 
8.8 
11.0 
11.1 
15.4 
13.5 

.3
.7
1.2

.9
3.0

.5
1.2
1.0
3.0
2.3
3.8
1.6

r--revised. 

p--preliminary.

III-15

billion  in  July.  Refinancings as  a proportion  of loans  closed  at

thrifts  declined to  16  percent, the  lowest  share  since  1985,  while new

commitments  to originate mortgages dropped to a seasonally adjusted

$18.5  billion.  A  decrease  in originations of  fixed-rate mortgages,

which  are more likely  to be  passed through to the  secondary market,  led

to  a decline in thrift  sales of mortgages into the  secondary market  and

thus  to a net  increase in mortgage  assets.

In primary markets,  mortgage interest  rates  are  little  changed, on

balance,  from their  levels at  the time  of the previous  FOMC meeting.

Reflecting the  sizable  initial rate  advantage  of ARMs  in recent  months,

the proportion of conventional mortgages closed with adjustable  rates

has  continued its upward trend, increasing for  the fifth  consecutive

month to  61  percent  in early August.  Lenders evidently have priced ARMs

more aggressively during  recent months,  in attempts to attract borrowers

to ARMs  and to  raise market  share.  Although the overall prevalence of

ARMs  closed with initial rate  discounts  has  been fairly stable  of late,

the proportion of ARMs  at  FSLIC-insured lenders carrying  discounts  in

excess  of 2 percentage points has  risen  steadily this year, to  a

historically high level  of almost  40  percent  in July  (see chart  on page

III-16).  The trend toward deep discounting of ARMs also  is  reflected in

spreads between initial ARM rates and common benchmarks.  The difference

between the  average initial ARM quote and the one-year,  constant

maturity  Treasury yield, the most prevalent ARM index, has  shrunk

dramatically since  the beginning of  1988,  though ARM rates actually  have

III-16

AVERAGE  ARM INDEX VALUES AND  INITIAL RATE  SPREADS
(Percent)

FHLB 11th

Initial 
ARM rate 
(2) 

One-year  District cost 
Treasury 
(3) 

of funds 
(4) 

ARM spreads

Treasury 
(2)-(3) 

11th District
(2)-(4)

11.49 
10.04 
8.42 

10.89 
8.43 
6.46 

10.50 
9.52 
8.24 

7.57 
7.80 
7.84 
8.07 

7.66 

7.85 
7.61 
7.52 
7.58 
7.71 
7.85 
7.84 

5.92 
6.77 
7.13 
7.24 

6.78 

6.99 
6.64 
6.71 
7.01 
7.40 
7.49 
7.75 

7.39 
7.25 
7.32 
7.55 

n.a. 

7.62 
7.65 
7.51 
7.52 
7.50 
7.62 
7.59 

.61 
1.61 
1.96 

1.65 
1.03 
.72 
.83 

.88 

.86 
.97 
.81 
.57 
.31 
.36 
.09 

.99
.52
.18

.19
.55
.52
.52

n.a.

.23
-.04
.01
.06
.21
.23
.25

Period 
(1) 

1984 
1985 
1986 

1987-Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 

1988-Q1 

1988-Jan. 
Feb. 
Mar. 
Apr. 
May 
June 
July 

SHARE OF  ARMS CLOSED  WITH  INITIAL RATE  DISCOUNTS

Percent

Monthly

All discounted ARMs

of 200 basis points

excess

I 

1986 
1986

Iiiiiiiit 

1987 
1987

111111111111111

1988
1988

III-17

increased since winter  relative to the  commonly used Eleventh Federal

Home  Loan  Bank District  cost-of-funds  index.

Lenders often attempt to  recoup  interest income  lost  from ARM

teasers by raising the  "margin,"  the markup over the  index rate  that

determines the borrower's  interest  rate  after expiration of  the discount

period.  Thus, the  lower the  initial rate on an ARM relative to  the

index, the  higher will be the  interest  rate  in  subsequent  periods.  ARM

borrowers, however,  are  shielded somewhat  from large  jumps  in interest

rates by  rate  caps, which typically limit  rate  increases  to 2 percentage

points per adjustment  period  and 6 percentage points  over the life  of

the  loan.

Consumer Credit

Consumer  installment  credit  outstanding grew at  a 4-3/4 percent

seasonally adjusted annual rate  in July, down  from the  revised 15-1/4

percent  June pace.  The abrupt  slowing in July reflected sharply lower

growth in  automobile loans,  particularly at  finance companies,  and in

revolving credit  at  commercial  banks;  in addition, all  other  installment

loans outstanding were about  flat after expanding  sharply in June.  The

slowing in the use of  installment  credit  in July is  consistent  with the

dropoff  in unit  sales  of new autos and with the  lackluster sales  of

other  (non-auto) types  of consumer goods during the month.

Measures of the quality of household debt  in the  second quarter

were mixed, though patterns differed from those  in the  first  quarter.

Delinquency rates  on commercial  bank credit  cards  edged down  from a

five-quarter high to 2.39  percent in the  second quarter, while  the rate

III-18

CONSUMER CREDIT
(Seasonally adjusted)

Percent  change 
(at annual rate) 

1988 

1988 

Memo:
Net  change 
Outstandings
(billions of  (billions of

dollars) 

1988 

dollars)
1988

1986 

1987 

Q1 

Q2r  June r  Julyp  Juner  Julyp 

Total  installment1 

10.4 

7.2  10.7 

9.5  15.2 

4.8 

8.05 

2.57 

Installment, 

excluding auto

Selected types

Auto 
Revolving 
All other 

Selected  holders

Commercial  banks 
Finance  companies 
Credit  unions 
Savings

institutions2  

Memorandum:
Total 

5.7 

6.2 

8.0  10.7  17.5 

6.7 

5.22 

2.02 

17.4 
11.8 
1.7 

8.6  14.4 

7.9  12.2 
16.8  15.9  17.3  25.9 
-1.5 
4.8  10.0 

1.2 

2.4 
14.2 

2.84 
3.65 
-.2  1.56 

.56 
2.04 
-.02 

8.5 
20.4 
5.9 

7.4  13.2  13.0  19.2 
4.8  11.4 
2.4 
1.9 
7.6  11.2  14.7 
6.4 

7.1 
-7.8 
9.0 

4.72 
.29 
1.03 

1.77 
-.94 
.64 

14.5 

12.4 

7.1  13.5  32.3 

16.4 

1.77 

.91 

Julyp

646.8

364.1

282.8
174.9
189.3

302.0
143.8
85.6

68.2

9.0 

6.1 

8.2 

7.6  10.3 

4.6 

6.09 

2.76 

715.6

1. Includes  items not  shown separately.
2. Savings and loans, mutual savings  banks, and  federal  savings banks.
3. Installment  plus noninstallment.
r--revised.  p--preliminary.
Note:  Details may not  add to  totals due to  rounding.

CONSUMER INTEREST RATES
(Annual percentage rate)

1985 

1986 

1987 

Apr. 

May 

1988
June 

July 

Aug.

At  commercial  banks1
New  cars  (48 mo.) 
Personal  (24 mo.) 
Credit  cards 

At  auto  finance cos.

New cars 
Used  cars 

12.91 
15.94 
18.69 

11.33 
14.83 
18.26 

10.46 
14.23 
17.92 

... 
... 
... 

10.55 
14.40 
17.78 

... 
... 
... 

... 
... 
... 

10.93
14.81
17.79

11.98 
17.59 

9.44 
15.95 

10.73 
14.61 

12.29 
14.82 

12.29 
14.81 

12.32 
14.83 

12.44 
14.99 

...
...

1. Average of  "most common"  rate  charged for  specified type  and maturity during the

first  week  of  the mid-month of each quarter.

2. Average  rate  for all  loans of each type  made during the month  regardless of

maturity.

III-19

on all  closed-end loans  at  banks  was  unchanged at  about  the midpoint  of

its  range in recent  years.  Auto loan  delinquencies  at  finance  companies

rose  to  2.21 percent,  the highest  quarterly  average since mid-1980.

Delinquencies  on home mortgages  increased, but  remained well below the

1985-86  highs.  Personal bankruptcy, filings, meanwhile, edged down  2-1/4

percent,  seasonally  adjusted,  from their record  first-quarter level;

nonetheless,  bankruptcy filings  for the  first  half of  1988 were  running

at  a pace almost  13  percent above that  in the  year-earlier period.

Consumer  loan rates  generally  increased between early May and early

August,  and if  banks  follow their  usual  practices, the mid-August

increase  in the prime rate  should result  in even higher  consumer loan

rates over the  next  few months.  In the  late  1970s and early 1980s,

state usury  ceilings effectively constrained banks  from raising consumer

loan  rates  in  response to  increases  in the prime.  Since the removal  of

these  constraints, spreads  of  consumer loan rates over prime generally

have averaged close to  levels prevailing in the mid to late  1970s.

Through the  first  three  quarters of 1988,  however, movements  in  consumer

loan  rates  at  banks have  lagged those of the  prime, and  spreads have

narrowed 50  to  85  basis points  for  selected categories.  Auto loan

spreads  have  narrowed the most,  perhaps reflecting  competition from

other  lenders.  Credit  card rates,  which are  typically slow to  react  to

changes in market  rates,  have shown virtually no movement,  while

personal  loan rates also  have changed little, owing perhaps to the

increased popularity of variable-rate home  equity  lines  of credit.

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS

U.S.  Merchandise  Trade

In July,  the  seasonally adjusted U.S.  merchandise  trade  deficit was

$9.5  billion  (Census basis,  CIF valuation),  compared with a  $13.2

billion  (revised) deficit  in June.  The  deficit  declined  as  imports  fell

sharply and  exports  rose  slightly.  This  is  the  first release  since  1979

in which both the  CIF and Customs  value  for  imports  were  reported

simultaneously;  on a  Customs  basis  the  July deficit was  $8.1  billion.

U.S. MERCHANDISE TRADE:  MONTHLY DATA
(Billions of dollars,  seasonally  adjusted, Census  basis)

Exports 

Imports 

Balance

CIF 

Customs 

CIF 

Customs

1988-Jan 
Feb 
Mar 

Apr 
May 
Junr 

Jul p  

24.5 
24.5 
26.9 

26.0 
27.5 
26.3 

35.8 
38.9 
38.6 

36.3 
37.2 
39.5 

34.3 
37.7 
36.6 

34.8 
35.7 
37.9 

-11.3 
-14.4 
-11.7 

-10.3 
-9.8 
-13.2 

-9.8
-13.2
-9.7

-8.0
-8.2
-11.7

26.5 

36.0 

34.5 

-9.5 

-8.1

r--revised
p--preliminary

Among  imports  the  largest  seasonally adjusted declines  from  June to

July were  in  consumer goods  and  capital  goods,  particularly power

generating machinery, ADP  equipment, and office machines.  Exports

showed  small  increases  across  all major  categories  with the  exception  of

automotive vehicles  and parts.  (Further discussion  of trade  through

July will be  contained  in  the  Greenbook  supplement.)

IV-1

IV-2

For  the  second quarter,  the  merchandise trade  deficit was  $120

billion at  a seasonally adjusted annual  rate  (balance-of-payments

basis),  substantially below the $141  billion first-quarter rate.  The

value of  exports  again  reached an all-time high, while  the value  of

imports  declined  slightly from its  record level  of the  first  quarter

(see  table below).

U.S. MERCHANDISE TRADE:  QUARTERLY DATA
(Billions of dollars,  annual  rates,  BOP basis,  seasonally adjusted)

Exports 

Imports

Total 

Total 

Ag. 

Av 

Nonag. 

.

nT 

Total 

l 

Oil 

Oil.. .

Non-oil

... 

..

Balance

- - - - - - - -- current dollars  - - - - - - - - - - -

216 
224 
250 

216 
228 
225 
227 

227 
239 
260 
272 

301 
319 

30 
27 
30 

29 
26 
27 
28 

26 
28 
33 
31 

36 
39 

186 
197 
220 

188 
202 
199 
199 

201 
211 
226 
242 

265 
280 

338 
369 
410 

358 
363 
372 
381 

387 
398 
418 
437 

442 
438 

50 
34 
43 

42 
31 
32 
32 

35 
40 
51 
45 

40 
41 

288 
335 
367 

317 
332 
340 
348 

352 
357 
367 
392 

402 
398 

-122
-144
-160

-142
-135
-147
-154

-159
-158
-159
-165

-141
-120

- - - - - - - constant  1982  dollars  - - - - - - - - - -

249 
263 
286 
299 

327 
341 

31 
34 
40 
35 

39 
40 

218 
229 
246 
264 

288 
301 

416 
420 
446 
459 

463 
459 

70 
72 
88 
81 

82 
85 

347 
349 
358 
378 

381 
374 

-168
-157
-160
-160

-135
-118

1985 
1986 
1987 

1986-1 
-2 
-3 
-4 

1987-1 
-2 
-3 
-4 

1988-1 
-2 

1987-1 
-2 
-3 
-4 

1988-1 
-2 

IV-3

Nonagricultural exports  increased to  all  areas  of  the world in  the

second quarter,  with the  exception of the  OPEC countries.  Agricultural

exports  to  developed countries  fell  slightly, while  those  to  developing

countries  grew  at  an annual  rate  of 138  percent  (partly explained by

shipments  of corn to  Mexico and wheat  to  Egypt).  Non-oil  imports  from

Japan and  Latin America  fell  slightly, while  those  from Canada, Western

Europe,  and Asian developing countries  rose.

In constant 1982  dollars,  exports  expanded at  a 17  percent  annual

rate  from the  first  to  the  second quarter,  a slower  rate  of increase

than  recorded during  the past year.  The strongest  increases were  in

exports  of  civilian aircraft,  industrial  supplies  excluding gold, and

consumer  goods.  Agricultural exports  rose  at  a 6 percent annual rate.

The volume of non-oil  imports declined by 7 percent at  an annual  rate  in

the  second quarter, reversing the  steady upward trend of  the  past year.

Decreases were recorded in imports  of industrial  supplies  excluding

gold, automotive  products,  and consumer goods.  Reflecting strength  in

U.S.  domestic  demand, imports  of capital goods  rose  strongly  (largely

due  to deliveries  of  several Airbuses  and an  increase  in  imports  of

semiconductors).

The volume  of oil  imports recorded  a 14 percent annual  increase  in

the  second  quarter due  to  a greater than normal building  of inventories.

OIL IMPORTS
(BOP basis,  seasonally adjusted, value  at  annual rates)

1987 

1987 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

1988
Q2 

May 

June

Value  (Bil.  $)  42.88 
17.33 
Price  ($/BBL) 
6.78 
Volume  (mbd.) 

51.04 
18.26 
7.66 

45.15 
17.46 
7.08 

39.83 
15.23 
7.14 

40.88 
15.14 
7.38 

43.55 
15.51 
7.67 

40.43
15.25
7.25

IV-4

The  increase  in  inventories  reflected an expectation that  oil  prices

would rise  in  the  second half of  the year.  Prices  of  oil  imports  were

higher in May  and June than  in  the previous  two months, but  prices  in

world markets dropped  sharply beginning in July.  The  lower world prices

reflected increased OPEC production  (especially by Arab  Persian Gulf

states)  that began at  the  end of May.  With increased prospects of peace

in  the  Persian Gulf, and  further production increases by OPEC, prices

have fallen  further in  recent weeks.

U.S.  Current Account

The U.S.  current account deficit decreased to  an annual  rate  of

$133  billion in  the  second quarter,  compared with $148  billion  (revised)

in the  first quarter.  The  improvement was more  than accounted for  by

the  $21  billion decrease  in  the merchandise trade  deficit.  Receipts  on

U.S.  CURRENT ACCOUNT
(Billions of dollars,  annual  rates,  seasonally adjusted)

Trade  balance 

Exports 
Imports 

1987 

1988

Year 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2

-160.3 
249.6 
409.9 

-164.8 
272.1 
436.8 

-140.7 
301.2 
441.9 

-119.8
318.7
438.4

Investment income,  net 

Direct  investment, net 

Capital  gains  or  losses1 
Other  direct investment 

Portfolio  income,  net 

Military, net 
Other  services,  net 
Unilateral transfers 

20.4 
41.8 
15.8 
26.0 
-21.4 

-2.4 
1.8 
-13.4 

50.2 
75.1 
44.7 
30.7 
-25.2 

-5.0 
3.1 
-17.5 

4.6 
28.7 
2.0 
26.7 
-24.0 

-4.1 
5.0 
-12.5 

-7.0
22.7
-8.2
30.9
-29.7

-3.5
8.5
-11.6

Current  account balance 

-154.0 

-134.1 

-147.8 

-133.3

1. Gains  or  losses  on foreign currency assets  owing  to  their

revaluation at  current  exchange  rates,  and other valuation adjustments.
Plus  =  gains;  minus =  losses.

r--revised

IV-5

both travel  and passenger fares  increased for  the  eighth consecutive

quarter,  helping to boost net  services by  $3.5  billion, while  direct

investment  income,  excluding capital  gains  and losses,  rose  by  $4.3

billion.  Capital  losses  on  direct  investment,  due  to  the  dollar's

recent appreciation, combined with higher net payments  on portfolio

investment to  swing  total net  investment  income  into  deficit  in  the

second quarter.

U.S.  International  Financial  Transactions

In  July, private  foreign residents  continued to  add  to  their

holdings  of U.S.  securities.  Net private  purchases  of U.S.  Treasury

securities  (line 3 on  the  Summary of U.S.  International Transactions

Table)  amounted to  $2.9  billion, adding to  the  $12.6  billion  in net

purchases  in  the  first half of  1988.  Japanese  residents  accounted for

most of  the net  purchases  in July;  however, earlier  in  the  year, net

purchases by residents  of  the United Kingdom and Germany were  also

large.

Net purchases  of  U.S.  corporate  bonds by private  foreign  residents

(line  2a)  amounted to  $3.4  billion  in July, adding to  the  $11.6 billion

in  net purchases recorded  in  the  first  half of  1988.  Again,  residents

of  the  United Kingdom  (including Eurobond underwriters),  Japan, and

Germany were  the  largest net purchasers.  However, issuance  of new

bonds, both domestic  and  Eurobonds, by U.S.  corporations has  been

depressed in  the  third quarter  to  date.

Private  foreign residents  also  added $1 billion to  their  holdings

of U.S.  corporate  stocks  in July,  equal  to  about  the  amount they  had

IV-6

SUMMARY  OF  U.S. 

INTERNATIONAL  TRANSACTIONS

(Billions  of  dollars)

Private  Capital

Banks
1.  Change  in  net  foreign

positions  of banking offices
in  the U.S.  (+  =  inflow)

Securities
2.  Private  securities

transactions, net  <1>
a)  foreign net purchases

(+)  of  U.S.  corporate  bonds

b)  foreign net  purchases

(+) of  U.S.  corporate  stocks

c) U.S. net purchases  (-)  of

foreign  securities

3.  Foreign  net  purchases  ()  of  U.S.

Treasury  obligations

Official  Capital

4.  Changes  in  foreign  official
reserves  assets  in  U.S.
(+  =  increase)

a)  By  area

G-10 countries  (incl.  Switz.)
OPEC
All  other  ountries

b) 

By  type

U.S.  Treasury  securities
Other <2>

5.  Changes 

in  U.S.  official  reserve

assets  (+  =  decrease)

Other  transactions  (Quarterly  data)

Foreign  direct  investment  (+) 

6.  U.S.  direct  investment  (-)  abroad  <4>
7. 
in  U.S.  <4>
8.  Other  capital  flows  (+  s inflow)  <3>  <4>
9.  U.S.  current  account  balance  <4>
10.  Statistical  discrepancy  <4>

MEM:

U.S.  merchandise  trade  balance  - part
of  line  9  (Balance  of  paments  basis,
seasonally  adjusted) 

1986 
Year 

1987 
Year 

1987
Q3 

Q2 

Q4

Q1 

Q2 

May 

June 

July

1988

22.3 

47.1 

-6.1 

31.2 

10.3

0.4 

14.4 

-3.9 

1.8

65.9 

36.6 

15.5 

11.5 

-6.9

-2.1 

11.2 

5.0 

3.4 

3.7

53.5 

26.4 

7.5 

7.5 

2.8 

2.6 

9.0 

4.3 

3.5 

3.4

18.0 

16.8 

8.7 

5.4 

-7.4

a 

1.0 

-1.1 

0.8 

1.0

-5.5 

-6.5 

-0.7 

-1.5 

-2.3 

-4.8 

1.2 

1.8 

-0.9  -0.7

4.0 

-7.3 

-2.3 

-2.8 

0.6 

7.0 

5.6 

5.3 

0.6 

2.9

33.5 

47.7 

11.6 

0.9 

19.9 

24.8 

6.4 

8.2

-4.0 

0.2

30.8 
-8.3 
10.8 

38.8 
-8.9 
17.8 

13.2 
-2.0 
0.5 

-5.7 
-1.3 
7.9 

15.6 
-2.9 
7.1 

17.7 
-1.6 
8.6 

-0.9 
-1.6 
8.9 

1.5 
-0.4 
7.2 

-5.6  -1.7
-0.8 
-0.1
1.9
2.4 

34.4 
-1.0 

43.2 
4.4 

11.1 
0.6 

0.8 
0.1 

19.2 
0.7 

27.7 
-2.9 

5.8 
0.6 

6.4 
1.8 

-3.0 
-1.1 

-0.6
0.8

0.3 

9.1 

3.4

* 

3.7 

1.5

_ 

0.2 

-0.4 

n.a.

-27.8
34.1
-9.1
-138.8
15.6

-44.5
42.0
4.8

-154.0
18.5

-6.2
7.2
4.7

-40.9
13.1

-7.9
15.0
-1.5
-42.0

-4.4

-19.7
11.7
-2.4
-33.5
16.3

-6.4
7.3
0.1
-36.9

4.3

-0.1
13.4
-1.9
-33.3
-15.7

-144.5 

-160.3 

-39.6 

-39.7 

-41.2 

-35.2 

-29.9 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a.

<1>  These  data  have  not  been  adjusted  to  exclude  oamissions  on  securities  tranactions  and  therefore,  do  not  atch  exactly  the

<2> 
<3> 

international  transaction  as  published  by  the  Depsrtant  of  Comerce.
data  on  U.S. 
Includes  deposits  in  banks,  o  mircial  paper,  ooptanoe,  borrowing  under  repurchase  agreemnt, 
Includes  U.S. 
official  transactions  not  ahoun  elsemter. 
the  Department  of  Caeroe  and  revision  of  the  data  in  lines  1  through  5  since  publication  of  the  quarterly  data  in  the
Survey  of  Current  Business.
Includes  seasonal  adjustment  for  quarterly  data.

overment  assets  other  than  official  reserves,  tranactions  by  nonbanking  onern,  and  other  banking  and

includes  aounta  resulting  fraa adju  tats 

and  other  securities.

In  addition,  it 

to  the  data  aade  by

<4> 
<*>  Less  than  $50  million.
NOTE:  Details  ay  not  add  to  total  because  of  rouding.

IV-7

added  in  the whole  first half of  1988  (line 2b).  Residents  of  Japan

accounted for  the bulk of the net purchases.

Banks  reported a substantial net capital outflow in  their

transactions with all  foreign residents  in July, partially reversing the

very large  capital  inflow reported  in  the  second quarter.  (See  line  1.)

However,  it  appears  that  domestic banking offices  continued to bring  in

funds, net,  from their  own foreign offices and  IBFs  on average  in July

and August.  (See  line  1 of the  International Banking Data Table.)

These  reductions  in net  claims  of U.S.  banking offices on their  own

foreign offices and  IBFs  in both the  second quarter  and the  first  two

months of the  third quarter coincided with more  rapid growth  of bank

credit  than core  deposits.

Foreign official  reserve assets  in the United States were virtually

uncharged  in July.  (See  line  4 of  the  Summary of U.S.  International

Transactions Table.)  G-10 reserves  did decline,

Partial  information for August  indicates  additional

reductions  in  G-10 official  reserve holdings  at  the  FRBNY  (about $4

billion).

OPEC  official  reserves  in  the United  States were  virtually

unchanged  in July, after  declining  $3 billion in  the  first  six months  of

1988.  The reserves held by other countries  in  the United  States

continued to  increase.

INTERNATIONAL BANKING  DATA
(Billions  of  dollars)

1985 
Dec. 

1986 
Dec. 

June 

1987 
Sept.  Dec. 

Mar. 

May 

June 

July 

Aug.  2/

1988

1.  Net Claims of U.S. Banking

Offices (excluding IBFS) on Own
Foreign Offices and IBFS 

(a)  U.S.-chartered banks 
(b)  Foreign-chartered banks 

2.  Credit Extended to U.S.

Nonbank  Residents  by  Foreign
Branches  of  U.S.  Banks 

3.  Eurodollar  Holdings  of

28.2 
32.4 
-4.2 

22.3 
31.7 
-9.4 

5.0 
16.3 
-11.3 

-7.8 
12.6 
-20.3 

-10.9 
15.2 
-26.1 

-5.6 
8.7 
27.8 
17.4 
-19.0  -23.0 

-4.8 
17.0 
-21.8 

-7.0 
14.6 
-21.6 

-14.5

8.0
-22.5

18.7 

16.8 

15.6 

17.1 

15.8 

19.1 

20.0 

19.7 

18.8 

20.1

U.S. Nonbank Residents  <1> 

111.1 

124.5 

135.7 

141.1 

132.6 

128.9 

135.5 

138.1 

137.8 

142.2

Includes  term  and  overnight  Eurodollars  held  by  money  market  mutual  funds.

<1> 
<2>  Through August  29,  1988.
Note:  These  data  differ  in  coverage  and  timing  from  the  overall  banking  data  incorporated  in  the  international
transactions  accounts.  Line  1  is  an  average  of  daily  data  reported  to  the  Federal  Reserve  by  U.S.  banking  offices.
Line  2  is  an  average  of  daily  data.  Line  3  is  an  average  of  daily  data  for  the  overnight  component  and  an  average  of
Wednesday  data  for  the  term  component.

IV-9

Data  released September  13  by  the Department  of  Commerce  indicate a

sharp  increase  in  foreign direct  investment  in  the United  States  (line

7) from  $7 billion  in  the  first  quarter  of  1988  to  $13  billion  in  the

second  quarter.  Much of  the  total was  accounted for by acquisitions  of

U.S.  companies.  U.S.  direct investment  abroad  (line 6) declined to

virtually zero  in  the  second quarter from an outflow of  $6 billion  in

the  first quarter.  There were  continued sales  of  assets  abroad by

Texaco  and repayments  of several  large  loans  by foreign affiliates of

other companies.  In  addition, reinvested earnings  were  depressed by a

$3 billion  swing from capital gains  to  losses  associated with the

appreciation of  the  dollar.  The  statistical discrepancy  in the  U.S.

international  transactions accounts  (line 10)  shifted  from $4 billion of

unrecorded credits in  the  first quarter  to  -$16 billion  in  the  second.

Alternative  data sources  indicate  that unreported increases  in U.S.

nonbanks' holdings  of Eurodollar  deposits  accounted for part  of the

omitted  outflows.

Foreign Exchange Markets

Since  the most recent  FOMC meeting  on August  16,  the weighted-

average  foreign-exchange  value of  the  dollar  in  terms  of other G-10

currencies has moved down  on balance about  1/4 percent,  as  shown in

Chart 1.  The  dollar has  declined most  against the  mark and other

related European currencies,  about  1 percent;  against  the  yen, the

dollar  rose  about  1/2  percent  on balance.  In  the  early part  of  the

intermeeting period the  dollar moved up

, as  market participants  continued to  focus  on signs

IV-10

WEIGHTED  AVERAGE  EXCHANGE  VALUE  OF THE  U.S.  DOLLAR

March  1973-100

June 

July 

August 

September

1988

Table  1

Selected Official and Market  Interest Rates

August  16

September 13

Germany

Discount
Lombard
28-day RP
3-month  interbank

France

Money-market  intervention
Seven-day RP
3-month  interbank

Italy

Discount
3-month  interbank

United Kingdom

Money-market  dealing
3-month  interbank

Japan

Discount
2-month bill  discount
3-month  gensaki

Canada

Discount
3-month  interbank

3.00
5.00
4.25
5.35

6.75
7.50
7.44

12.00
11.00

10.88
11.38

3.00
4.06
3.98

9.80
10.00

3.50
5.00
4.25
4.95

7.00
7.75
7.63

12.50
11.38

11.88
12.00

3.00
4.19
4.16

10.35
10.42

IV-11

of  strength in U.S.  demand  and the  likelihood of further U.S.

tightening.  Dollar  strength was particularly evident  against the  mark,

as  the  dollar-mark rate briefly reached 1.92  DM/$,  and the mark-yen

cross  rate  fell  below 70 Y/DM.  The  dollar more than  reversed these

early gains  in the  latter part  of the  period following increases  in

foreign official  interest  rates  and release  of U.S.  employment data  for

August that  indicated somewhat weaker U.S.  activity.  The dollar moved

up  sharply following  the  release on September  14  of U.S.  trade  figures

for July  which  showed a smaller than expected deficit of $9-1/2

billion.

During the  period, short-term interest  rates  on average moved

slightly against  the  dollar as many foreign  interest rates  moved up more

than did interest rates  on dollar assets.  An exception was  Germany

where market  short-term interest  rates  declined on balance  by 40 basis

points.  On August 25,  the  Bundesbank announced a 1/2  percentage point

increase  in the German discount  rate  to  3-1/2  percent, and German

officials  indicated that further decline  in  the mark would be  resisted.

Even though  the  Lombard rate  was not  increased as  some market

participants had anticipated and  the Bundesbank continued to  provide

liquidity at  an unchanged RP-rate  of  4-1/4 percent,  the mark began  to

strengthen, and German short-term market  interest rates  eased back from

high  levels  reached  in  a run-up  earlier  in  the quarter.

The  German discount  rate  change,  as  shown in  Table  1, was

accompanied by  similar increases  in official  rates  in other  European

countries  including a 1/2  point  increase  in  the  Italian  and Swiss

IV-12

discount rates  and a 1/4  percentage point  increase  in  the  Dutch discount

rate,  the  French money market  intervention rate,  and the  French  7-day RP

rate.  U.K. money market dealing rates  and base  lending rates  also  were

raised by a full percentage point  at  about this  time  to  combat  inflation

and downward pressure on  sterling.  Japanese  short-term interest rates

increased about  20 basis points  during the  intermeeting period, as

Japanese authorities  allowed the key 2-month bill  discount rate  to  edge

upward.  Long-term interest  differentials  against the  major  currencies

remained  about unchanged.

Of this amount  about  $1.3  billion was

sales by the Desk against marks,  divided equally between sales  for

System and Treasury accounts.

the period, particularly  in recent weeks  as  the mark strengthened;

Pressures within the  EMS  intensified during

Developments  in  the  Foreign  Industrial Countries

After widespread strength  in  the  first  quarter,  economic  activity

slackened  in  the  second quarter,  as  performances  of the major  foreign

IV-13

industrial nations diverged.  In  Germany, real  GNP declined  slightly  in

the  second quarter.  Industrial production, housing  starts,  and export

volume fell  in Japan, and comments by government  officials  indicate  that

real  GNP is  likely to  have  fallen  there  as  well.  French  growth slowed

to  a moderate  pace.  In  contrast,  real  GDP  accelerated in  Canada  and the

United Kingdom in  the  second quarter.  On balance  during  the  first half

of  the  year, real  growth was  fairly  strong in  the major foreign

industrial  countries,  and available  data for  the  third quarter generally

indicate  continued expansion.

Germany  recorded another peak trade  surplus  in June, while  Japan's

trade  surplus narrowed  in August.  In Germany, the  cumulative  trade

surplus  for  the  first half of the  year was  considerably above  the

surplus  for  the  first half of 1987.  In  contrast,  the United Kingdom

registered record trade  and current account  deficits  in July and has

recorded cumulative  deficits  that are  already much larger  than  last

year's  totals.

Although inflation remains  low in most  of  the major  foreign

industrial nations,  it  has  risen somewhat in  recent months,  especially

in  the United Kingdom.  Recent  concerns  about overheating, renewed

inflationary pressures,  and/or unwelcome  declines  in  the  exchange value

of  their currencies  led several monetary officials  to  raise  interest

rates.  On August  25,  the  Bundesbank raised its  discount rate  by 1/2

percentage point  and other European central banks,  including  the  French

and  Italian monetary authorities, followed suit.  On  the  same  day,  the

Bank of  England raised  its  money market dealing  rate by a full

REAL GNP AND INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION  IN MAJOR  INDUSTRIAL COUNTRIES
(Percentage change  from previous  period, seasonally  adjusted)  1/

Q4/Q4 Q4/Q4
1986  1987

1987 

1988

-----------  -----------
Q2 

Q4 

Q1 

Q3 

1988
-------------------
Mar.  Apr.  May 

June  July

Latest  3 months
from year  ago  2/

Canada

GDP
IP

France

GDP
IP

Germany

GNP
IP

Italy

GDP
IP

Japan

GNP
IP

1.2 
-. 3 

6.1
8.5

1.5 
2.5 

1.6 
2.5 

.8 
1.3 

1.0
.8

* 
-. 1 

* 
.0 

* 
1.2 

*n
* 
.2  n.a.

2.0 
-. 3 

2.7
3.6

.8 
.6 

.7  1.0

1.0 

.6

n.  a.
.3

* 
-. 9 

* 
1.0 

* 
1.9  n.a.

*

2.4 
.6 

2.3
1.7

1.4 
.1 

.7 
1.3 
.7  1.1 

-.2
.3

* 
-. 7 

* 
-. 7 

* 
.3 

* 
2.9 

*
-2.2

3.0 
2.8 

2.8
5.7

.9 
-2.8 

.3 
3.3 

.9 
2.7 

n.a.
2.0

* 
9.8 

* 
-9.6 

* 
1.6  n.a.

*

2.0 
-. 6 

5.5
8.1

2.0 
1.8 
3.6  3.4 

2.7  n.a.
-.2
3.2 

* 
.5 

* 
-. 9 

* 
-2.3 

* 
3.3 

*
-. 7

United Kingdom

GDP
IP

United  States

GNP
IP

4.4 
2.3 

4.3
4.1

1.9 
1.5 

.7 
1.0 

.7  n.a.
2.4

-.7 

* 
2.0 

* 
1.5 

2.0 
1.0 

5.0
5.8

1.1 
2.1 

1.5 
1.7 

.8 
1.0 

.8
1.  1

* 
.2 

* 
.5 

*
.9

.* 
.5 

* 
-. 9 

* 
.4 

*
,4

*
.8

1. Asterisk  indicates  that  monthly data are not  available.
2. For quarterly  data,  latest  quarter from year ago.

4.9
7.4

3.5
2.6

4.0
3.9

4.3
5.8

CONSUMER AND WHOLESALE PRICES  IN MAJOR INDUSTRIAL COUNTRIES
(Percentage change  from previous  period)  1/

Q4 

Q4Q4
1987

-----------------

1987

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

1988

-------------
Q2

Q1 

1988

---------------------------  Latest  3 months
from year  ago

Aug. 

July 

June 

May 

Canada

CPI
WPI

France

CPI
WPI

Germany

CPI
WPI

Italy

CPI
WPI

Japan

CPI
WPI

United Kingdom

CPI
WPI

United  States

4.3 
.3 

4.2
4.3

.9 
.5 

1.4 
1.3 

1.2 
1.4 

.7 
1.1 

.8 
1.1 

1.3
.8

n.  a.
n. a.

2.1 
-3.4 

3.2
2.6

.6 
.5 

.5
1.0

.5 
1.1 

1.0
n.a.

.2 
* 

.3 
* 

.3  n.a.
* 

*

-1.0 
-9.0 

1.0
-.7

.6
-.2

-. 1 
-. 5 

.0
.2

4.7 
-2.4 

5.2
4.6

1.3 
1.5 

1.0 
1.0 

1.1 
.8 

1.7 
1.2 

1.1 
1.1 

1.0
1.3

.3 
.5 

.3 
.3 

.3 
.2 

.4
n.a.

.1 

-9.1 

1.  1
-. 6

-.3 
-.7 

1.2 
-. 7 

-. 2
1.3

.4 
-.4 

-. 2
-1.2

3.4 
4.2 

4.1
3.9

1.2 
1.2 

1.5
1.  1

.2 
.5 

1.1 
1.1 

.5 
1.3 

2.4
1.5

n.  a.
.4

CPI  SA)
WPI  SA)

1.3 
-1.9 

4.4
2.5

1.3 
.7 

1.2
1.  1

.9 
.0 

.8 
.2 

1.2
1.  1

.3 
.4 

.3 
.4 

.4 
.5 

n.a.
.6

1. Asterisk  indicates

that  monthly data are  not  available.

3.9
4.1

2.6
2.9

1.0
1.  1

4.5
4.6

4.0
2.5

TRADE AND CURRENT ACCOUNT BALANCES OF MAJOR  INDUSTRIAL COUNTRIES  1/
(Billions of U.S.  dollars,  seasonally adjusted except  where otherwise noted)

1986 

1987

1987 

1988

---------------------------  -------------

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2

1988
---------------------------
Aug.

July 

June 

May 

Canada

Trade
Current  account

France

Trade
Current  account

Germany

7.1 
-6.7 

8.3
-8.0

2.4 

-1.4 

2.1 
-1.9 

2.3 
-2.1 

1.6 
-2.6 

2.1 
-1.3 

2.5
-1.8

.6 
* 

1.4 
* 

n.a. 
* 

n.a.
*

.1 
3.0 

-5.2
-4.1

-1.1 
-. 1 

-2.0 
-. 8 

-1.0 
-. 9 

-1.0 
-2.3 

-. 7 
1.3 

-1.0
n.a.

-.3 
* 

-.3 
* 

-.6  n.a.
* 

*

Trade  (NSA)
Current account  (NSA)

52.5 
39.7 

65.9
45.4

15.1 
11.4 

15.5 
10.9 

15.2 
7.8 

20.1 
15.3 

15.0 
8.6 

19.8
15.1

6.1 
4.5 

n.a. 
8.1 
5.5  n.a. 

n.a.
n.a.

Italy

Trade
Current account  (NSA)

-1.9 

2.6 

-8.9
-1.1

-1.0 
-2.3 

-2.8 
1.1 

-2.7 
1.6 

-2.5 
-1.6 

-2.8  n.a.
n.a.
-5.1 

-.2  n.a. 
* 

* 

n.a. 
* 

n.a.
*

Japan

Trade
Current  account  2/

82.4 
85.8 

79.5
87.0

23.8 
25.3 

19.5 
21.3 

17.8 
19.9 

18.3 
20.5 

20.8 
23.1 

16.7
17.6

5.1 
6.0 

5.2 
5.2 

6.2 
4.9 

5.5
n.a.

United Kingdom

Trade
Current  account

United  States

Trade  2/
Current  account

-12.4 
.1 

-15.9
-3.0

-1.7 
1.2 

-3.9 
-. 5 

-5.0 
-1.4 

-5.3 
-2.3 

-7.1 
-5.1 

-8.2
-5.4

-3.1 
-2.2 

-2.7 
-1.8 

-4.5
-3.7

n.  a.
n. a.

-144.5  -160.3
-138.8  -154.0

-39.9 
-37.6 

-39.6 
-40.9 

-39.7 
-42.0 

-41.2 
-33.5 

-35.2 
-39.8 

-29.9
n.a.

* 
* 

* 
* 

* 
* 

*r
*

1. The current  account  includes  goods,  services,  and private and
that monthly data are  not  available.
2. Annual  data are  subject  to revisions  and  therefore may not be

official transfers. Asterisk  indicates

consistent with quarterly and/or  monthly data.

IV-17

percentage point.  The  Bank  of  Canada has  increased its  key rates  about

80  basis points  in  the  list month.

Individual  country notes.  In Japan,  economic activity  slowed

dramatically  in the  second quarter.  The average  level  of  industrial

production  (s.a.)  was  down slightly  from its  first-quarter  average,

while housing  starts  continued to  fall  sharply.  In addition, export

volume  (s.a.)  fell  3.1  percent  from the  first  quarter.  Although  second-

quarter GNP data have not yet been released,  EPA officials have

commented that  real  GNP may have  declined, reversing some  of  the

vigorous  growth  in the  previous  quarter.

Economic  activity may be  rebounding in  the  third  quarter,  although

data  for  July provide  a mixed picture:  industrial production  (s.a.)

declined 0.7  percent after  a 3.3  percent  increase  in June,  but remained

above  the  second-quarter average  level.  Housing starts  (s.a.)  fell  0.4

percent, but  retail  sales  (s.a.)  rose  1.5 percent.  Export volume

increased, and  import volume  declined.  Unemployment  (s.a.)  increased

from 2.4  percent  in June  to  2.5  percent  in July, but the  ratio  of job-

offers-to applicants  continued  to  rise.  For  the  first  time  in  14 years,

job  offers  exceeded job  seekers  in June  and July.  Recent  data  on new

machinery orders  also  suggest continued  strength in  investment,  as

private orders  rose  25  percent  (s.a.)  in  the  second quarter.  Consumer

price  inflation remains low, with  the Tokyo  index  of  consumer prices

(n.s.a.)  in August 0.6 percent  above  a year ago.  Wholesale prices

(n.s.a.)  were  1.0  percent below year-earlier  levels  in August.

IV-18

The  trade  surplus widened  in July, but  then narrowed  in August  to  a

level  about  equal  to  the  second-quarter average.  The  cumulative  trade

surplus  for  the  first  eight  months  of  1988  was  $73.9  billion  (s.a.a.r.)

compared with $79.5  billion for  1987  as  a whole.  The  current account

surplus  through July was  $78.2  billion  (s.a.a.r.)  compared with $87

billion in  1987.

Real  GNP  in Germany  declined  in the  second quarter  after unusually

strong growth  in  the  first.  Following a surge  in  the  first  quarter due

to  unseasonably mild weather, construction activity  (s.a.)  declined  3.7

percent  in  the  second quarter,  and  on balance  grew 6.3  percent

(s.a.a.r.)  since  the  fourth quarter of  1987.  Private consumption

expenditures declined  2.2  percent  (s.a.a.r.),  while  government spending

increased  3.4 percent  (s.a.a.r.)  in  the  second quarter.  Net exports

increased  sharply. 

More  recent  indicators  suggest weakness  in  the

third quarter.  Industrial production  (s.a.)  declined 2.2  percent  in

July, offsetting most  of June's  surge.  The  volume  of total  new

manufacturing  orders  (s.a.)  was  flat  in July after  increasing  1 percent

in June  as  domestic  orders  rose  3 percent, but foreign orders  declined 2

percent.  In  addition,  the business  sentiment  index declined  in  July

after  increasing  six months  consecutively.  In  August,  the unemployment

rate was  8.9  percent  (s.a.),  unchanged from the  rate  for  the  previous

four months.

Consumer prices  were  flat  in August  after  declining 0.1  percent  in

July,  resulting in  year-over-year  inflation  of  1.1  percent.  Wholesale

IV-19

prices  increased 0.2  percent in August,  to  a level  1.0  percent above

last  August's  level.

The  trade  surplus  (n.s.a.)  increased sharply in June  to  $8.1

billion, bringing the  cumulative  surplus  to  $34.9  billion, up  from the

surplus of  $30.6  billion over  the  same  period in  1987.  The current

account  surplus  (n.s.a.)  also  rose  in June  to  a record high of  $5.5

billion boosting  the  cumulative surplus  to  $23.7  billion, compared with

a $22.3 billion  surplus  in  the  first  half of  last year.

Growth  in  the average  level  of M3  in July was  2.6 percent

(s.a.a.r.),  a dramatic  slowdown  from an average  growth rate  of  7.7

percent during  the  last  six months.  The average  level  of M3  in July

stood 6.8 percent  above the  target base  period of  1987-Q4, exceeding the

target range of  3 to  6 percent set  for  this year.  On August  25th  the

Bundesbank increased  its  discount rate  50  basis points  to  3-1/2  percent,

while leaving the  repurchase rate  unchanged at 4-1/4 percent.

In France,  real  marketable GDP grew by 2.4 percent  (s.a.a.r.)  in

the  second quarter  after expanding at a 4.9 percent  rate  in  the previous

quarter.  Consumption expenditures  fell  slightly, while  gross  fixed

capital formation surged,  in part due  to  increased housing  starts.

Consumer prices  rose  0.3  percent  in July, bringing the  12-month

inflation rate  to  2.7  percent which forced the  government  to  concede

that  it would not meet  its  2.5  percent  target.

The  foreign trade  deficit widened in July  as  a 1 percent fall  in

imports was  accompanied by a 3 percent decline  in  exports.  Despite  this

recent  deterioration, the  cumulative  trade  deficit  through July of  $2.3

IV-20

billion represents  an  improvement  from the  $3.6  billion deficit

registered for  the  first  seven months of last year.

In the United Kingdom, recent  data have  provided further evidence

of overheating.  The output measure of real  GDP  increased by 5.3  percent

(s.a.a.r.)  in  the  second quarter after rising by  2.7  percent in  the

first.  The volume  of retail  sales  (s.a.)  showed a 12-month increase  of

6.3 percent  in August, while the  unemployment rate  declined to  8.2

percent  (s.a.)  in July, the  24th consecutive  monthly decline.

Industrial production rose  0.4 percent  (s.a.)  in July to  a level  3.5

percent  above  that of a year ago.  Consumer price  inflation in  the  12

months  through July rose  to  4.8  percent, the  fifth consecutive monthly

increase  in  this  rate.  In August, producer prices  rose  to  a level  4.8

percent above  their year-ago  level.

The  trade  and current accounts both showed record deficits  in July.

The cumulative  trade  deficit through July was  $33.9  billion  (s.a.a.r.),

nearly  triple  the  $12.4 billion deficit rate  in the  same  period last

year.  On August  25,  U.K. monetary authorities  raised  their money market

dealing rates  by one percentage  point  to  11-7/8  percent just  after the

release  of the July  trade  figures.

Real  GDP in  Canada expanded at  an annual  rate  of  3.9  percent  in  the

second quarter,  up  from the  3.2  percent rate  posted in  the  first  quarter

of  1988.  Consumer spending  rebounded and rose  0.9  percent  after falling

0.1  percent  in  the  first  quarter of the  year.  Non-residential

investment  and exports  continued to  be buoyant.  Both  industrial

production and monthly  GDP reports  showed lower  growth rates  in June

IV-21

than  they had  in May, suggesting that,  at  least  in  the near  term, growth

may have  peaked.  In addition, the  unemployment rate  rose to  8.0 percent

in August from a second-quarter average rate  of  7.7  percent.  Consumer

prices  increased 0.6 percent  in July;  the year-over-year  inflation rate

was  3.8  percent.  Producer prices held steady, increasing 0.2  percent  in

July  to  a level  3.7  percent above  last July.

Canada's  trade  surplus  increased slightly in  June  from May and

April, resulting  in a cumulative  first-half  surplus  a bit higher than  in

the  first half of  1987.  On August  31,  Canada's  House  of  Commons passed

legislation to  implement  the proposed free  trade  agreement with  the

United  States  and  sent  the bill  to  the  Canadian Senate  for  approval.

In  Italy, recently  released data indicate  that  the  strong growth

recorded in  1987  continued in  the  first  quarter of  1988;  real  GDP rose

to  a level  3.1  percent above  the  first  quarter of  last year.  The  major

source  of  this  strength was  investment  spending, which grew 6.6  percent

from  its  level  a year ago.  Italy's  current account  deteriorated

considerably  in the  first  quarter;  the  deficit  of  $5.1  billion was more

than  twice  the  size  of that  in  the  first  quarter of  1987.  However,

recently released  trade  data for April  and May indicate  that  the deficit

may be  smaller  in  the  second quarter.  The cumulative  trade  deficit

through May was  $3.4  billion compared with a deficit of $2.5  billion in

the  same  period of  1987.

Economic  Situation in Major  Developing Countries

In Brazil  a new constitution has been completed and  the  successful

syndication to  creditor banks  of  a financing package  brought about  final

IV-22

IMF  Executive  Board approval  of  a stand-by loan agreement.  The Mexican

government announced on August 14  that  the  freeze  on  the exchange  rate,

public  sector prices,  controlled private-sector prices,  and minimum

wages would be  extended through November.  An  incomes policy implemented

in August appears  to  have  temporarily reduced inflation in Argentina.

Venezuela's  foreign exchange reserves  fell  by $440 million  in July.

Nigeria has reached a preliminary agreement  on a rescheduling with  its

commercial bank creditors.  Ecuador and  Peru announced anti-inflation

programs  which include  devaluations  and domestic price  increases.

Individual  country notes.  Brazil's  new constitution has been

completed and goes  into  effect on October  5.  Under this  constitution

all  major budgetary and  financial  decisions,  including  future  agreements

with the  IMF and foreign banks, must be  approved by the  legislature--

greatly increasing  the  difficulty of future  negotiations.

By August 18,  foreign banks had committed 95  percent  of $5.2

billion in new money proposed for  Brazil.  The achievement  of this

critical mass  of  financing permitted formal  IMF  Executive Board approval

of  an  SDR 1.1 billion  stand-by agreement on August  23.  Brazil  and the

banks are  expected to  sign their  agreement by the  end of  September.

Consumer prices  rose  21 percent  in August, following  a 24 percent

increase  in July.  Turmoil  in  the  financial markets,  due  to  the

inclusion of a 12  percent  real  interest  rate  cap  in  the  new constitution

and  to  increased  taxes  on  short-term investments,  sharply intensified

the  demand for  dollars.  As  a result, the  spread between the  parallel

IV-23

and official  dollar rates  jumped from about  50 percent  in  August to  75

percent at  the beginning of September.

Increased exports  of manufactured goods  resulted in  a trade surplus

for  the  first seven months  of  this  year of  $10.5 billion, more  than

double  the  $4.9 billion registered for  the  same period in 1987.  The

expansion of exports  contributed to  positive  growth of  industrial

production, which was  1.5  percent higher  in June  than a year before.

The Mexican government announced on August 14  that  the  freeze  on

the  exchange  rate, public  sector prices,  controlled private-sector

prices,  and minimum wages  would be  extended through November.  To  gain

organized labor's support,  the  government agreed to  eliminate  the value

added tax on processed foods  and medicines and to  reduce  income  taxes by

30  percent for individuals  earning up  to  4 times  the minimum wage.

Business  leaders pledged  to reduce prices by an average  of 3 percent.

This  announcement helped  to quiet  the  foreign  exchange market,

where nervousness had prevailed for  several weeks,  and  the  outflow of

capital underway since  late  May appears  to have  abated  somewhat.

The  trade  surplus  is  continuing  to  shrink.  In June  it was  about

$300  million, less  than one-third as  large  as  in June  1987.  Imports

exceeded  $1.6  billion, the highest  level  since March  1982,  and were  64

percent higher  than in June  1987,  while  exports were  nearly 3 percent

lower  than a year earlier.  Non-petroleum exports  in June  1988  were  11

percent higher  than in  the  same month  in  1987,  but  oil  exports were  25

percent lower, owing  to weaker oil  prices.

IV-24

The  CPI,  which had increased by 1.7  percent  in July, rose  by only

0.9  percent  in August,  the  smallest monthly  increase  since April 1978.

Interest  rates  have  changed little  since  early June, after  their

dramatic  decline  of  the previous  four months.  The nominal  annual rate

on  28-day Treasury bills  at the  September 6 auction was 41.8  percent.

This  is  slightly higher than at  the June  7 auction  (40.3 percent),  but

much lower  than on February 23  (151.7  percent).

The  incomes  policy implemented in early August in Argentina appears

to have  at  least  temporarily  reduced the  rate  of  inflation.  Inflation

is  projected to  fall  to  about  10 percent for  September--down sharply

from the  average monthly rate  of  27  percent  for July and August.

However,  it  remains  uncertain whether the  government will  achieve  the

fiscal  reform necessary  to  translate  these  gains  into a permanent

reduction in the  inflation rate.  Recent private  sector wage  agreements

have been relatively generous;  for  example,  the metal workers' union was

able to negotiate  a 47  percent wage  increase  for August/September.  But

so  far  industrialists  seem to be  adhering to  price agreements  with  the

government despite  increasing  costs.

The  Central  Bank has been selling dollars  through daily auctions

since  early August.  So  far,  demand has  been weak as  sales  of dollars  in

the  free  market have kept  the  austral price  of dollars near  the  Central

Bank's  minimum asking price  of  14.4  australs.  Interest  rates  on

interfirm and  interbank loans have  stayed around 10  percent  on a monthly

basis  since  early August.

IV-25

Due  to  the postponement of  projected dates  of  effectiveness for

World Bank loans,  disbursement of the  $500  million U.S.  Treasury and

Bank for International  Settlements bridge  loan that was  agreed  to  in

principle  in August has  also been delayed.

In Venezuela,  the  government has  failed  to  adjust to  falling oil

prices  and rising world interest  rates,  leading to  a widening of  the

current account  deficit and a more  rapid draw-down of foreign exchange

reserves.  In July total  reserves  minus gold dropped $440  million to

$4.5  billion;  reserves  were  $6 billion at  the beginning of  1988.  The

Venezuelan government met with some  of  its  commercial bank creditors

last  month to  discuss  the possibility of new long-term loans  to  help

stem  this  loss  of reserves.

Consumer  prices rose  2.4 percent in August and  stood 28  percent

higher  than a year ago.  Unusually favorable  food supply conditions

helped to  keep average monthly inflation for  the  first  five  months of

1988  down  to 0.4 percent, but recent  food price  increases  have pushed

the  CPI up  an average of  4 percent per month over the  last  three months.

Nigeria has  reached preliminary agreement with  its  creditor banks

to  reschedule $2.9  billion in principal payments  due  1986-91 over  20

years with three  years  grace at  a spread of  7/8  over LIBOR.  The

agreement also  reschedules  $2.45  billion in  letter-of-credit  principal

arrears  over 15  years with three years  grace  at  a spread of  13/16  over

LIBOR and  $381  million  in  interest  arrears  and commissions  over  1989-91.

The rescheduling provides no new money and  is  not  subject to  IMF

conditionality.

IV-26

Newly elected President Rodrigo  Borja of Ecuador announced a series

of measures  to  contain  inflation  and improve  the  current account

balance.  The measures  include:  a 56  percent  devaluation of  the  official

exchange  rate,  a 5 percent  surtax on all  import and export  transactions,

a doubling  of  gasoline prices,  a cap  on domestic  lending rates  of

interest,  and a compensatory increase  in the  minimum wage.

Peru announced a new program to  control  inflation, which reached 22

percent  in August.  The multiple  exchange  rate  system will be unified

with the  primary export rate  devalued by 47.5  percent.  As  subsidies  are

reduced to  help close  the  fiscal  deficit,  the  cost of gasoline  will

increase  almost 400 percent  and the price  of basic  food  items  will

double.  A compensating increase  in the minimum wage  is  planned, and

wages and prices  are  to  remain fixed for  120  days.

The Philippines met its  end-June 1988  economic performance targets,

the  central bank announced on August 31.  This allowed the  country to

draw  the  seventh and last  tranche under  an SDR  198  million IMF stand-by.




==== GREENBOOK | 1988-09-20_fomc19880920gbsup19880914.txt ====

Prefatory Note 

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 

available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain. 

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 

gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.    

1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
CONFIDENTIAL  (FR)
CLASS  III  - FOMC

September  16,  1988

SUPPLEMENT

CURRENT  ECONOMIC AND  FINANCIAL CONDITIONS

Prepared  for the
Federal Open Market  Committee

By  the Staff
Board of  Governors
of  the  Federal Reserve  System

Page

1

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS

THE  DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL ECONOMY

Retail  sales  and  inventories  . . . . .

Tables

Retail  sales  and inventories  . . . . .
Business  inventories  . . . . . . . . .
Inventory/sales ratios  . . . . . . . .

Erratum  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

THE FINANCIAL  ECONOMY

Tables

Monetary aggregates  . . . . . . . . .
Commercial  bank credit  and  short-  and
intermediate- term business  credit
Selected financial market  quotations

THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY

U.S. merchandise trade through  July

Table

U.S. merchandise trade  through  July

SUPPLEMENTAL NOTES

DOMESTIC  NONFINANCIAL ECONOMY

Retail Sales  and  Inventories

Total  retail  sales  edged down in  August after  little  change  in

July.  Sales  in  the control  category  were  flat  in August;  the  control

figure was  revised up  slightly  for  June to  0.9  percent,  but  was

unrevised for  July at  0.2  percent.  On balance,  the August  level  of

nominal  spending  for the  retail  control was about  1-1/4  percent  above

the  second-quarter average.

The  weakest category  in August  sales  was the automotive  group,

which  posted a decline  of  1.8  percent,  in  part  reflecting the decline  in

unit  sales  of  automobiles from  10.8  million units  in  July  to an

estimated 10.3 million units  in  August  at  an  annual  rate  (BEA basis).

In  addition,  furniture  and appliance  stores posted  a large  decline  in

sales  for a second month, after  strong gains  earlier this  year.  Sales

at  nondurable  goods  establishments were  generally lackluster.

On  a current-cost basis,  retail  inventories  fell  $2.1  billion  at  an

annual  rate  in  July after a $22.8  billion accumulation in the  second

quarter.  The July decline was  almost  entirely in  auto dealers'  stocks;

the  current market  value  of  nonauto retail  inventories  was  little

changed.  Most  types of  retail  establishments  reported small  inventory

changes  in  July.  For  stores  in  the G.A.F. grouping, inventory

1. The  retail  control  category, which excludes  sales  at  automotive

dealers,  building material and  supply  stores, and  gasoline stations,  is
used by  the BEA  in  constructing personal  consumption expenditures.

accumulation  slowed to  just  under $1 billion at  an annual  rate,  compared

with  increases of  $4.5  billion in the second  quarter and nearly

$8 billion  in the first  quarter.  On the whole, the  inventory-sales

ratios  for  stores  in this broad category have  edged down  somewhat  in

recent months.

For all manufacturing and trade,  the  current  market value  of

inventories  rose  $26.5  billion at  an annual  rate  in July, about  half  the

pace  seen  in the  second  quarter.  The  overall inventory-sales  ratio for

manufacturing and trade, at  1.50 months  in  July, was  unchanged from June

but  notably below the  1.53 average around the turn  of  the year.

RETAIL  SALES
(Seasonally adjusted percentage change)

Total  sales 

Previous estimate' 

(REAL)2  

Previous estimate 

Total  less  auto dealers,

nonconsumer stores,  and
gasoline  stations 
Previous  estimate' 

GAF3  

Durable 

Automotive dealers 
Furniture and  appliances 
Other  durable  goods 

1987 
04 

-.6 

01 

2.2 

-1.2 

2.3 

.5 

1.2 

.3 

-2.1 

-3.7 
-2.1 
2.2 

1.1 

4.9 

5.9 
5.7 
1.2 

1988 

02 

June 

Aug.

-.2

1988
July 

.1 
.5

-. 5
-.1

.2 
.2

.0

.6 
.4 

.3 
.2 

.9 
.6 

1.2 

-.3 

-.4

.6 

-.5 

-1.0

.5 
1.7 
2.0 

.2 
-2.1 
-.3 

-1.8
-1.2
.9

1.8 
1.7 

.7 
.6 

2.1 
2.0 

2.2 

1.8 

.4 
5.3 
2.2 

Nondurable 

.4 

.6 

1.8 

.6 

.5 

Apparel 
General merchandise 
Other  nondurables 

Memo:  Motor vehicle  sales5  

Autos 
Light  trucks 

-.3 
1.6 
-1.5 

14.7 
10.0 
4.7 

-1.0 
-.2 
1.1 

15.6 
10.8 
4.8 

2.0 
.8 
3.1 

15.6 
10.8 
4.8 

.7 
1.2 
2.9 

15.9 
11.1 
4.8 

1.4 
-.1 
2.1 

15.4 
10.4 
5.0 

.2

.4
-.4
-.9

15.4
10.2
5.2

Autos6  

9.9 

10.8 

10.6 

11.0 

10.8 

10.3

1. Based on  incomplete  sample  counts  approximately one month ago.
2. BCD  series  59.  Data are  available  approximately 3 weeks  following the
retail  sales  release.
3. General merchandise, apparel,  furniture, and  appliance  stores.
4. General merchandise excludes  mail  order nonstores;  mail  order  sales  are
also excluded in  the GAF  grouping.
5. Millions  of  units  at  an  annual  rate;  FRB seasonals.
6. BEA  seasonals.

--Data are  unavailable because  of  a future  release  date.

BUSINESS  INVENTORIES
(Change at  annual  rates  in  seasonally
adjusted current  cost;  billions of  dollars)

1987

Q3 

Q4

1988

1988

Q1 

Q2

Apr. 

May 

June 

July

Manufacturing  and trade

35.8 

82.4 

39.7 

56.9 

45.2 

57.8 

(Previous)

Manufacturing
Trade, total
Wholesale
Retail

Ex  autos
Durable
Auto

Nondurable

19.2
16.6
1.8
14.8

9.2
8.0
5.5
6.8

29.0
53.4
23.8
29.6
15.3
22.2
14.2
7.4

22.3
17.4
26.5
-9.1
12.5
-17.3
-21.6

8.2

21.1
35.9
13.1
22.8
9.9
15.9
12.8
6.9

14.9
30.3
21.6
8.7
.7
8.6
8.0
.1

25.7
32.1
-1.3
33.5
11.6
26.4
21.9
7.1

67.8
58.8

22.7
45.1
19.0
26.1
17.5
12.7
8.6
13.5

26.5

18.7
7.8
9.9
-2.1
.4
-2.2
-2.5
.1

Totals may  not  add because  of  rounding.

INVENTORY/SALES RATIOS

1987

1988

1988

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Apr. 

May 

r
June 

July

r

Manufacturing  and trade 

1  50 

1.53 

1.53 

1.52 

1.51 

1.51 

1.50 

1.50

Manufacturing 
Trade,  total 
Wholesale 
Retail 

Excluding auto 

r--Revised.
p--Preliminary.

1.61 
1.41 
1.23 
1.59 
1.51 

1.61 
1.46 
1.27 
1.65 
1.54 

1.62 
1.45 
1.31 
1.60 
1.55 

1.58 
1.46 
1.30 
1.62 
1.55 

1.59 
1.45 
1.30 
1.59 
1.54 

1.58 
1.45 
1.30 
1.60 
1.53 

1.56 
1.44 
1.28 
1.61 
1.53 

1.58
1.44
1.28
1.60
1.53

5

Erratum

The  sentence  in  Part  1 describing the  staff  CPI projection  for  1989

(page 1-9,  lines  4 to  6) should  read:  The CPI,  which  is  not  affected by

the  pay adjustment,  shows  a more  stable  rate  of  inflation of  around

4-3/4  percent  for the year.

MONETARY AGGREGATES
(based  on  seasonally  adjusted  data  unless  otherwise  noted)

1987 1

1988 
Ql 

1988 
Q2 

1988 
Jun 

1988 
Jul 

Growth
Q4  87-
Aug p  Aug 88p

1988 

------------ Percent  change 

t  annual  rates---------------------

6.2 
4.0 
5.4 

3.8 
6.8 
7.1 

6.3
7.7
7.5

9.1 
3.8 
6.4 

0.2
2.5
4.0

------------ Percent  change  at  ar

ual  rates--------- 

Levels
bil.  *
Aug  88p

2.8 

1.4 

3.9

8.7 
-1.0 

9.4 
-4.4 

8.4 
1.0 

9.2 

7.7
10.4

4.8 

8.2 
2.9 

0.7 

504.4

5.2 

-2.5 

207.2
290.0

13.6

3.3

8.3 

7.8 

10.6 

11.0

17.1 

-0.9 

278.1

8.3 

4.4

2.0 

3.3 

2250.1

4.1 

-11.8 

3.0 

3.0 

-38.5 

45.9 

81.4

5.8 
2.5 
1.8 
3.5 
3.5 
0.8 
5.6 

11.2

8.5

11.2

3.4

3.0
32.8
13.8

19.3 
7.2 
2.8 
13.7 
8.7 
-7.3 
21.3 

3.1 
6.8 
3.2 
11.8 
9.1 
2.3 
14.0 

-14.5 
9.0 
11.1 
6.2 
3.0 
4.8 
1.7 

3.1 
5.0 
2.2 
8.8 
1.6 
2.1 
1.3 

7.3 
3.8 
-2.8 
12.9 
2.3 
-1.8 
5.3 

230.9
961.7
547.6
414.2
974.7
403.5
571.2

8.4 

6.8 

15.1 

16.0 

9.4 

813.1

7.3
3.4
15.7

44.0
6.6

-23.4

7.5 
6.7 
8.8 

15.2 
23.4 
0.0 

18.6 
27.3 
1.4 

13.4 
21.4 
-2.9 

-30.6
25.1
19.4

-49.3
27.1
18.4

-20.9

7.9

12.9

-11.3
-19.5
71.6

515.8
347.9
167.9

84.0
121.0
99.5

----- Average  monthly  change  in  billions  of  dollars----

6.1 
3.5 
2.7 

2.9 
-0.2 

1.5 
2.3 
-0.8 

-6.1 
5.3 

7.9 
1.5 
6.4 

4.0 
2.4 

4.8 
4.1 
0.7 

4.0
6.2
-2.2

-0.8 
1.6 

2.2 
-4.4 

11.2 
6.8 
4.4 

7.9 
-3.5 

610.8
413.5
197.3

19.1
178.2

1.  Ml
2.  H2
3.  M3

Selected  components

4.  MI-A

5. 
6. 

Currency
Demand deposits

7.  Other checkable deposits

8.  H2 minus M12

9.  Overnight  RPs  and  Eurodollars,  NSA
10.  General purpose and broker/dealer money
market mutual fund shares, NSA

11.  Commercial banks
12. 
13. 
14.  Thrift  institutions

Savings deposits, SA, plus MMODAs,  NSA3
Small  time  deposits
I

Savings deposits, SA, plus IMDAs,  NSA
Small  time  deposits

17. M3  minus H2 4

18.  Large  time deposits
19. 
20. 
21.  Institution-only  money market

At commercial  banks, net5
At  thrift  institutions

mutual  fund shares, NSA

22.  Term RPs, NSA
23.  Term Eurodollars, NSA

MEMORANDA:'

24. Managed liabilities at commercial

banks  (25+26)

25.  Large  time deposits, gross
26.  Nondeposit  funds
27. 

Net due  to related foreign
institutions, NSA

Other7

28. 
29. U.S. goverrment deposits at commercial

banks"

0.3 

-0.4 

-1.0 

-2.7 

-1.8 

-4.4 

15.8

1.  Amounts  shomw  are  from  fourth  quarter  to  fourth  quarter.
2.  Nontransactions 
3.  Commercial  bank  savings  deposits  excluding  MMDAs  grew  during  July and  August  at  rates  of  9.6

2H is  seasonally  adjusted  as  a  whole.

percent  and  7  percent,  respectively.  At  thrift  institutions,  savings  deposits  excluding  HMDAs  grew
during  July and  August  at  rates  of  6.5  percent  and  5  percent,  respectively.

4.  The  non-M2  component  of  H3  is  seasonally  adjusted  as  a  whole.
5.  Net  of  large  denomination  tim  deposits  held  by  money  market  mutual  funds  and  thrift  institutions.

. Dollar  amounts  shown  under  memoranda  are  calculated  on  an  end-month-of-quarter  basis.
Consists  of  borrowing  from  other  than  commercial  benks  in  the  form  of  federal  funds  purchased,  securities
sold  under  agreements  to  repurchase,  and  other  liabilities for  borrowed  money  (including  borrowing  from  the
Federal  Reserve  and  unaffiliated  foreign  banks, 

loan  RPs  and  other  minor  items).  Data  are  partially  estimated.

8.  Consists  of  Treasury  demand  deposits  and  note  balances  at  commercial  banks.
p  - preliminary

COMMERCIAL  BANK  CREDIT  AND  SHORT-  AND  INTERMEDIATE-TERM  BUSINESS  CREDIT
(Percentage changes at  annual rates,  based on  seasonally  adjusted  data)1

1986:Q4
to 

1988

1987:Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

June 

July

Levels
bil.$
P
Aug.

P 
Aug. 

----------------------- 

Commercial  Bank Credit  --

---------------------

1.  Total loans  and  securities

at  banks

2. 

Securities

3. 

4. 

U.S.  government  securities

Other  securities

5. 

Total  loans

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

Business  loans

Security  loans

Real  estate  loans

Consumer  loans

LO. 

Other loans

7.9 

5.0 

9.1 

-1.3 

8.8 

7.5 

1.0 

18.1 

4.9 

-2.3 

7.8 

11.9 

11.1 

4.9

5.4 

6.8 

2.9 

8.6 

2.7 

8.9 

10.6 

-9.6

12.9 

13.5 

-17.2

2.0 

5.5 

12.9 

11.2 

3.6

9.4

16.7 

14.3 

12.7

6.7 

5.3 

8.7 

-.6 

7.2 

1.6 

76.6 

-12.1 

-6.2 

-18.7 

4

4.2 

10.8 

10.4 

13.8 

12.3 

11.6 

1

3.4 

7.2 

5.3 

5.4 

13.2 

11.9 

3.5

7.6

5.6 

.6 

2366.7

546.3

347.3

199.0

1820.4

601.5

39.4

631.9

343.2

204.4

---------  Short-  and Intermediate-Term Business

Credit---------

11. 

Business  loans  net of  bankers

acceptances 

7.6

2.3

17.0

14.4

12.8

1.4

12. 

Loans  at  foreign  branches 2  

-4.1

115.8

4.1

-35.3

-48.5

63.2

13. 

Sum of  lines  11  & 12 

14. 

Commercial  paper issued by
nonfinancial  firms 

15. 

Sum of  lines  13  & 14 

7.2

-1.6

6.0

5.2

8.8

5.7

16.6

12.5

10.8

12.2 

-7.8 

-23.3

16.0 

10.0 

6.5

3.1

9.4

3.9

16. 

Bankers  acceptances:  U.S.  trade

related 3,4 

13.3

-11.6

-9.5 

-10.9 

-7.3

n.a.

17. 

Line 15  plus bankers acceptances:

U.S.  trade related 

6.3

18. 

Finance  company  loans  to business  16.6

4.9

8.4

14.8 

12.1 

9.0 

8.7 

5.9

9.2

n.a

n.a.

597.9

20.0

617.8

90.4

708.2

32.6

738.5

222.9

19. 

Total  short-  and  intermediate-

term business  credit  (sum of
lines  17  & 18) 

8.4

5.6

14.2 

17.2 

6.7 

n.a.

5

961.4

1. Average  of Wednesdays.
2. Loans  at  foreign branches  are loans  made to
3. Based on  average of  data  for  current  and preceding ends  of  month.
4. Consists  of  acceptances  that  finance  U.S.  imports,  U.S.  exports,  and domestic  shipment  and
5. July  data.
n.a.--not  available

U.S.  firms by  foreign branches  of  domestically

chartered banks.

storage  of  goods.

--preliminary

SELECTED FINANCIAL  MARKET  QUOTATIONS  1/

(percent)

1987 

1988 

Change  from:

Jan-Feb 
lows 

2/ 
Oct  16 

Feb 
FOMC 
lows  Aug  16  Sept  15 

FOMC
Aug  16

Short-term  rates

Federal  funds 3/

Treasury  bills  4/

3-month
6-month
1-year

Commercial  paper

1-month
3-month

Large negotiable  CD's  4/

Eurodollar  deposits  5/

1-month
3-month

5.95

5.30 
5.31 
5.35 

5.81
5.73

5.85
5.80
5.78

6.00
6.00

7.59 

6.38 

7.80 

8.14

6.93
7.5A
7.74

5.59
5.77
6.10

7.06
7.54
7.69

7.94 
8.65 

6.41 
6.45 

8.26 
8.42 

7.92
8.90
9.12

6.44
6.49
6.55

8.24
8.55
8.85

7.79 

6.60 
9  6.69 

8.31 
8.59 

7.17
7.3
7.43

8.04
8.11

8.10
8.17
8.40

8.16
8.27

Bank  prime  rate

7.50 

9.25 

8.50 

10.00 

10.00

Intermediate-  and  long-term  rates

U.S.  Treasury  (constant

3-year
10-year
30-year

maturity)

6.34
7.01
7.29

9.52
10.23
10.24

7.28
8.11
8.32

8.51
8.91
9.00

0.34

0.11
-0.16
-0.26

-0.22
-0.31

-0.14
-0.38
-0.45

-0.15
-0.32

0.00

-0.33
-0.44
-0.40

-0.30

-0.36

-0.04
0.14

Minicipal  reverue  6/
(Bond  Biyer  index)

Corporate-A  utility
Recently  offered

Home  mortgage  rates  7/

Fixed-rate
AM,  1-year

6.92 

9.59 

7.76 

8.18 

7.88

8.78 

11.50 

9.63 

10.53 

10.17

11.58 
8.45 

9.84 
7.59 

10.57 
8.00 

10.53
8.14

9.10 
7.52 

1986 

1987 

1988 

Percent  change  from:

Record 
Year  end  highs 

Lows 

FOU 

Aug  16  Sept  15 

FCM
Aug  16

Stock  prices

Dow-Jones  Indistrial  1895.95 
NYE  Composite 
13.58 
AMEX  Ccosite 
26.7 
NASDAQ  (Tc) 
348.83 

2722.42  1738.74  2021.51  2092.28 
187.99  125.91 
147.49  151.60 
65.01  231.9  294. 
297.70 
55.26  291.88  375.66  382.70 

3.50
2.79
1.06
1.87

1/  One-day  quotes  except  as  noted. 
2/  Last  business  day  prior  to  stock  market  decline  on  Monday 

Oct.  19,  1987. 

4/  Secondary  market.
5/  Average  for  statement  week
closest  to  date  shown.

6/  One-day  quotes  for

3/  Average  for  two-week  reserve  maintenance  period  closest  to 

date  shown  except  laws  shmn  which  are  one-week  averages  ending 
Feb.  25  and  Feb.  10,  respectively.  Last  observation  is  average  7/  Quotes  for  week  ending
to  date  for  maintenance  period  ending  Sept.  21,  1988. 

Friday  closest  to  date  shown

Thursday.

e-estimate

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS

U.S.  Merchandise Trade  Through  July

In  July,  the  seasonally  adjusted U.S.  merchandise trade deficit  was

substantially  smaller than the  deficit  recorded  for June  and was the

lowest monthly deficit  recorded  since March 1985.  At  an  annual  rate,

the July deficit was  $110  billion, well  below the  $120  billion  annual

rate  deficit  recorded in  the  second quarter  (column 7 in  the  table that

follows).  Month-to-month changes  in  the  trade deficit  are  volatile;

nonetheless,  the July  figures  appear to be  part  of  a steady  improving

trend that  emerged at  the beginning of  the year.

Virtually all  of  the  improvement  in the  trade  deficit  in  July was

due  to  a reduction  in  imports.  Imports,  which  had risen  strongly in

June,  declined even more  in  July to  a rate last  recorded in  the  third

quarter  of  1987  (column 4 in the table).  Oil  imports  declined slightly

in  July with the volume  easing a bit  and the price of  imports  dropping

by  about  $0.45  per barrel  from June  levels.  Imports  of  other  industrial

supplies  decreased in  July  from the  stronger  levels  recorded  in May and

June,  and were less  than the  average  for  either the  first  or  second

quarters  (by 2 to  5 percent);  the  July decline was partly  in  chemicals

and partly  in various metals.  Imports  of  capital  goods  in  July declined

10  percent  from an  unusually strong  June  level,  returning to the  average

rate  recorded  in each of  the  preceding four months  (and the  average of

the  first  quarter).  Deliveries  of  large  jets  to  U.S.  customers  declined

from a high level  in  June.  The decline in imports  of  machinery was

spread over a broad  range  of  categories.  Imports of  semiconductors  in

July  were  an  exception, being only  marginally less than the  strong June

rate;  steady  increases throughout  the  year have  raised the value  of

these  imports  15  percent  between January and July.  Imports  of

automotive  products  from Canada  dropped  sharply in July  (these shipments

are  subject  to  sharp  seasonal  swings  in July and August).  While  imports

of  automotive  products  from the  rest  of  the world  increased somewhat  in

July,  the  rate  of  imports during the  last  four months was  less  than

during the  first  quarter.  Imports  of  consumer goods  dropped sharply  in

July to  a level  that  was  about  3 to  4 percent below the  average  for both

the  first  and  second quarters.  Nearly half  of the  decline was  in

apparel and  in  footwear,  which did  not  rise  as  strongly  this  July as  in

previous  Julys;  the  seasonal  factor  for  apparel peaks  in  July,  jumping

to  the  125  to  200  range  for various items.

The  value  of  exports in  July  was  lower  than the June  rate,  and

somewhat  under the  average  for the  second  quarter  (column 1 in the

table).  There  were increases  in  the value  of  agricultural exports  in

July;  higher  exports of  soybeans and corn  were  only partly offset  by

declines  in  wheat  and cotton  exports.  While  a 5 percent  increase  in

exports of  capital  goods  in  July was  from a relatively  low  June  level,

the  amount  of  exports  in July was  higher than the averages  for  either

the  first  or  second quarters  (by 2 to 5 percent);  about  one-fourth of

the  increase  in  July was  in exports  of  computers.  Exports  of  industrial

supplies  were  as  strong  in  July as  they were  in  June  (which was  about

4 percent above the  average  in the  first quarter).  Exports of  consumer

goods  in  July were  as  high as  in May and June  (and about  15  percent

11

above  the  first-quarter rate).  Exports of automotive products declined

sharply  in July to the  lowest  level  recorded  since last  July  (reflecting

strong  seasonal movements  only imperfectly captured  in  seasonal

factors).

U.S.  Merchandise  Trade
Billions  of Dollars,  Seasonally Adjusted Annual  Rates

Balance-

of-Payments  Accounts

Exports

Total  Agric.  Nonagric.
(2) 

(1) 

(3)

224
250

227
240
260
272

301
319

313
322
320
312

Total 
(4) 

Imports
Oil 
(5) 

Non-oil 
(6) 

Balance
(7)

369 
410 

34 
43 

387 
398 
418 
437 

442 
438 

426 
436 
453 
422 

35 
40 
51 
45 

40 
41 

39 
44 
40 
39 

334 
357 

352 
357 
367 
392 

402 
397 

387 
392 
412 
384 

-145
-160

-159
-158
-159
-165

-141
-120

-113
-113
-133
-110

Monthly Press  Release

Customs 
Value 
Balance 
(8) 

CIF
Value
Balance
(9)

-138
-152

-151
-149
-154
-154

-131
-115

-106
-99
-140
-97

-155
-170

-168
-170
-172
-172

-150
-133

-124
-117
-158
-11

data on a Balance-of-Payments  Basis  are estimates,  and  are  for Official  Use  Only.

--

Years
1986
1987

Quarters
1987  -

1988 

- 1
2

Months
1988 

- April
May
June
July

Note:  Monthly




