==== GREENBOOK | 1990-08-21_FOMC19900821meeting.txt ====

Meeting of the  Federal Open Market Committee

August  21,  1990

A meeting of the Federal Open Market  Committee  was  held in

the offices of the  Board of Governors  of  the Federal Reserve  System in

Washington, D.C.,  on Tuesday, August  21,  1990,  at  9:00  a.m.

PRESENT:  Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice  Chairman
Angell
Boehne
Boykin
Hoskins
Kelley
LaWare
Mullins
Seger
Stern

Messrs.  Forrestal,  Keehn, and Parry, Alternate Members

of the  Federal Open Market  Committee

Messrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents  of the
Federal Reserve Banks  of Kansas City, St.  Louis,
and Boston, respectively

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Assistant  Secretary
Gillum, Deputy Assistant  Secretary
Mattingly, General  Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs.  J. Davis, R. Davis,  Lindsey,

Rosenblum, Siegman, Simpson, and
Stockton, Associate  Economists

Mr.  Sternlight, Manager for Domestic  Operations,

System Open Market Account

Mr. Cross, Manager for  Foreign Operations,

System Open Market Account

Mr.  Coyne,  Assistant  to  the  Board, Board of  Governors
Mr.  Ettin,  Deputy Director,  Division of  Research and

Statistics,  Board of  Governors

Mr.  Slifman, Associate  Director, Division of  Research

and Statistics,  Board of Governors

Mr. Hooper, Assistant  Director, Division of  International

Finance,  Board of  Governors

Ms.  Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,  Division of

Monetary Affairs,  Board of Governors

Mr. Monhollon, First Vice  President,  Federal  Reserve

Bank of  Richmond

Messrs. Balbach,  Beebe,  Broaddus,  T. Davis, and  Scheld,

Senior  Vice Presidents,  Federal  Reserve Banks  of
St.  Louis,  San Francisco,  Richmond, Kansas City,
and Chicago,  respectively

Messrs. Fieleke,  Meyer, Miller  and Ms.  White,

Vice  Presidents,  Federal  Reserve Banks of
Boston, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, and New York,
respectively

Ms.  Rosenbaum, Research Officer,  Federal Reserve  Bank

of Atlanta

Transcript  of  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  Meeting  of
August  21,  1990

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Good  morning,  everyone.  We'll  start

with  a controversial  issue:  approval  of  the  minutes.

SPEAKER(?).  So  move.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Is  there  a second?

SPEAKER(?).  Second.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Without  objection.  Sam  Cross.

MR.  CROSS.  [Statement--see  Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Questions  for  Sam?

MR.  HOSKINS.  Sam, was  the  unwinding  of the  DM  warehousing

related  to  any  collateral  problems  that  we  have with  respect to  notes?
Why  did  the  Treasury do  that?  What  reason  did  the  Treasury  give?

MR.  CROSS.  Well,  I think  the  Treasury  is  interested, as  we
are,  in  not  having  these  [warehousing]  amounts  continue  indefinitely
and  be  too  big.  So,  when  the  conditions  were  such  that  it  was
possible to  make  some  arrangements  in  order  to  bring those holdings
down,  they were  not  reluctant  or  hesitant to  do  this.  It's  not
envisaged  as  a continuous  or  perpetual  facility.

MR. HOSKINS.  Are  we  looking  to  bring ours  down?

MR.  CROSS.  Our mark holdings?

MR. HOSKINS.  Yes.

MR.  CROSS.  We  don't  have  any plans  at  the  present  time.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Any  other  questions  for  Sam?  This  is

the  first  time  I recall  in  an  extraordinarily  long time  when there
have  been  no transactions.  When was  the  last  time  there  were  no
transactions  during  an  intermeeting  [period]?

MR.  CROSS.  Well,  I don't  think we  had  any  intervention

transactions  in  the  last  period.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  We  had  to  ratify some.

MR.  CROSS.  I'd  have  to  look it  up,  but  there  hasn't  been  any

exchange market  intervention  for  some months.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Well,  of that  I'm  aware.  But  quite

frankly,  it's  the  first  time  I recall  in  a very  long time  that  there
has  been  no  [need  for]  ratification.

MR.  CROSS.  We'll  check the  date.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  The  same,  of  course,  does  not  apply  to

Peter  Sternlight's  [area].

8/21/90

MR.  STERNLIGHT.  Shall  I proceed?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Yes,  please.

MR.  STERNLIGHT.  [Statement--see  Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Questions  for Mr.  Sternlight?

MR.  PARRY.  Peter, what  do  you  think the  number of  primary

dealers  will  be  a year  from now?  What  is  basically  happening?  I
assume  these  pressures  are not  likely  to  get  any better  in terms  of
profitability.

MR. STERNLIGHT.  Well,  the  experience  of the  opening  five  or

six  months  of this  year  is  a little better than  last  year.  I wouldn't
be  surprised to  see  some  further  decline  of  several  dealers.  There
are  still  more  than enough,  certainly,  to  serve  our  needs  and  the
needs  of  the market.  We  got  along nicely for  a decade  or  so  with  a
number  that  varied in  the mid-30s,  and  I think that  would be  a very
satisfactory kind  of number now.

MR. PARRY.  So  we  may get  back to that?

MR.  STERNLIGHT.  It's  possible  that we'll  have  some  further

decline  [in  the  number  of primary  dealers],  yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Further  questions?  If  not,  may  I have  a

motion to  ratify the  transactions  since  the  July meeting?

MR.  SYRON.  So  move.

MR. KELLEY.  Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Without  objection.  We'll  now move  on to
the  staff  report  on the  economic  situation.  I'd  like  first  to  call  on
Mike  Prell.

MR. PRELL.  Mr.  Chairman,  I was  away the  last  three weeks  and

missed much  of the  excitement.  For that  reason  I've  asked Dave
Stockton, who was  here  for  it  all  to  reach  the  exciting conclusion,  to
present  the  domestic  side  of the  outlook.

MR.  STOCKTON.  Thank you.  [Statement--see  Appendix.]

MR. TRUMAN.  [Statement--see  Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Thank you.  Questions  for  Messrs.

Stockton and  Truman?

MR. SYRON.  In  Part  I of the  Greenbook  you  talk about  the

revision  in  your  inflation forecast  and  say  that  it's  primarily
because  of the  oil  outlook.  I was  just  wondering,  since we  did have
some  other  figures that  came  in  before that--this  is  an  exercise  of
speculation,  I realize--if you had  been redoing  the  Greenbook and  [the
invasion by]  Iraq  had not  occurred,  what  rough  estimate  would  you have
had  in  terms  of the forecast  for the  change  in  inflation?

8/21/90

MR.  STOCKTON.  I think we  were  going to  estimate  something

roughly  on  the  order  of  .1 or  so  higher price  inflation both  in  1991
and  1992  as  well,  if we  had not  made  other  changes  to  the  outlook  path
to  offset that.  The  dollar  obviously was  going to  be  providing  a
little more  boost  to  domestic  prices.  And the  downward  revision  I
mentioned that  we  have made  to  our  estimate of  potential  output,  and
part  of that  is  a downward  adjustment  to  trend  productivity,  also
would have  implied  a bit  more  pressure on  prices than we  previously
thought.

MR.  SYRON.  Can  I just  follow up  on  that,  in  terms  of  the

downward  revisions?  You  revised  down  by  1/4  point,  I guess,  your
estimate  of  potential.  But  the  revisions we  saw  in the  actual  data
were  pretty  disturbing to  say the  least.  Were  there  any  special
factors  that  caused you not  to  revise  down  further?  Or  was  it  just
that  your  model  came  out  with  about  1/4  point  decline  in potential
given  the  data  that  we  have?  I was  a little  surprised  that there
wasn't  a greater  decline  in potential,  given  that  the unemployment
rate  remained the  same.

MR.  STOCKTON.  This  is  a very  imprecise  calculation.  But  the

important  point  to  remember about  the  downward  revision to  potential
output  is  that  we  extended that  downward  revision  to  potential  output
all  the  way back to  1980.  Therefore,  the  cumulative  effect  on  the
level  of  potential  output  by the  time we  get  to  1990  is  quite  large.
Essentially, what  we're  trying to  do  is  this:  Every  year when we
receive  the  GNP  revisions  we try  to  feel  around  to  [determine]  what
sort  of  underlying  trend  productivity would best  explain  the  course  of
activity  over  the  entire  business  cycle.  In  the  absence  of any
particular  reason  for  assuming that  there had  been  a pronounced break
in  the  growth  rate  of  potential  output  just  in  the  last  two  years,  we
essentially adjusted  the  entire  path  down  extending all  the  way back
to  the  previous  peak.  So,  in  terms  of the  level  of  slack  one  ends  up
with, while  it  appears  to  you that we  just  have  revised  down  1/4  of  a
percentage  point  in the  last  two  years  when the  real  GNP  figures were
revised  down much more,  that  might  have  implied  that  even then there
would have  been  somewhat  greater  slack.  The  cumulative  effect  of
having  revised that  trend  down  over  10  years  implies  that  [when]  we
get  to  the  end  the  slack  is  not  too  much  different,  but  we've--

MR.  SYRON.  How  sensitive  is  your model  to  short-term  changes

in  demographics--the  composition  of  the  labor  force?

MR.  STOCKTON.  It's  not  sensitive to  that  at  all.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  What  is  a concern  in  a sense  is  that

there's  very  little chance  that  the  demographics  are  wrong  in  that  you
get  pretty much  the  same  pattern  if  you  [unintelligible]  the  labor
force or  if  you  construct  the  labor  force  out  of  the  payroll  data  and
the  insured unemployment.  They both  show the  degree  of tightness  that
has  been  exhibited  by  the  sample  surveys  which,  from the  evidence that
we  see,  suggests  that  this  is  not  a statistical  anomaly  that's  going
to  get  revised  next  year.

MR.  PRELL.  We  will  be  taking  another  cut  at  this  when we  get

the  revisions  on the  employment  data  next  month.  We may  have
something  additional  to  report  then.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Parry.

8/21/90

MR.  PARRY.  I have two  questions.  Dave,  at  the FOMC

information  call  Ted  Truman  gave  us  some  useful  rules  of thumb  about
the  effects  of  a change  in  the  price  of  oil  on  real  growth  and  also  on
the  CPI  inflation.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  effects  on  inflation  are
rather  substantial;  I was  struck by  what  you  show as  a very  sharp
decline  in  the  fixed-weight  deflator  for  the  fourth  quarter  from 4.7
to  4.0  percent.  I know the  impacts  on  the  fixed-weight  deflator  are
different from those  on the  CPI.  But  even taking  that  into  account,
it  seems  to  me  that  that  is  a very  low number.  Could you  explain  that
and  indicate  what  contribution  oil  is  making to  that  number?

MR.  STOCKTON.  For  the  fourth-quarter  fixed-weight number?

Well,  the  principal  reason the  fixed-weight  deflator  does  not  show  as
large  an  effect  as  the  CPI  is  that,  while  obviously we  consume  more
energy than  we  produce,  the  weights  for  energy  are  several  percentage
points  different  in the  CPI  and the  GNP  fixed-weight.  And  that  is  the
principal  reason  for  the  difference.  There  may  be  some  slight
differences  in what  we  assumed  about  the  fourth  quarter  as  well.  We
have  a very  low  increase  from  the  federal  sector  in  the  fixed-weight
deflator  in  the  fourth  quarter,  which  is  helping  to  pull  things  down.

MR.  PARRY.  So,  it's  just  across  the  board--smaller increases

in  quite  a few  sectors?

MR.  STOCKTON.  I would  say  that's  true,  with the  difference

in  weights  between the  energy  share  in  the  CPI  and  the  energy  share  in
the  GNP  being the  biggest  factor.

MR.  PARRY.  Yes,  I heard.  The  second  point  is  that  I was

really  struck by  the  Commerce Department  revisions  of  compensation per
manhour  in  the  nonfarm  business  sector  for  1989.  In  the period  from
1984  through  [the  end  of]  your  forecast  the  lowest  compensation per
manhour,  excluding  1989,  is  3.7  percent;  in  the  forecast  it's  about
5.1  or  5.2  percent.  During  the  whole  year  [1989]  the  increase  was  in
the  2 percent  area.  It  just  seems  very  difficult  to  understand what
happened  in  1989  that  would make  those  numbers  believable.

MR.  STOCKTON.  Well,  the  first  thing  to  mention  is  that,  as

Mike  pointed  out,  we  have  not  yet  received  benchmark revisions  to  the
employment  or  hours  data.  We'll  receive  those  in  September.
Typically,  those  [benchmark revisions]  occur  in May  and  June  and  by
the  time the  revised  compensation  per  hour  figures  would  come  out  [the
Commerce Department]  would  already have  incorporated those  revisions.
They had  to.  And  as  a result,  we  really didn't  even  wish to  discuss
those  figures  in the  Greenbook because we  think  at  this  point  they  are
pretty meaningless.

MR.  PARRY.  Okay.

MR.  PRELL.  We  don't  want  to  offer  you the  great hope  that

that's  going  to  eliminate  all  of the  peculiarities  in  these  numbers.
This  series  just  seems  to  move  in  ways  that  are  inexplicable  at  times.
And  we  think the  ECI  data  are  a more  reliable  guide  than--

MR.  PARRY.  It  certainly  seems  to  be  that way  at  this  point.

8/21/90 

-5-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  The  ECI  data  are  far more  comparable

with  the  monthly average  hourly  earnings  numbers;  both  the  numerator
and the  denominator are  comparable.

MR. PARRY.  Yes.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  I guess  the  revision would  be  horrendous

on  the  compensation numbers.

MR. PARRY.  I think  so.  Thank you.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Boehne.

MR.  BOEHNE.  Let  me  compliment  you on  your  report.  I think
you  and  Ted  did  an  excellent  job  on what  is  a difficult  situation to
get  a hold  of.  Our whole  approach has  been one  of  gradually  opening
up  some  excess  capacity  and hoping  that  that  will  dampen  prices.  To
date,  at  best  we've  kept  prices  from accelerating.  But  if we
disaggregate  prices,  we  find more  progress  in  the  goods  sector  than  we
do  in the  services  sector;  and  the  goods  side  of the  economy  is  more
responsive  to monetary  policy.  That  raises  a very  fundamental
question as  to  how much  excess  capacity  one  really  has  to  open up  in
the  economy  to  generate the  kind  of  anti-inflation progress  [we  hope
for]  on the  services  side.  I'm wondering, now that  we  are,  say,  a
year  and  a half  or  so  into  this  strategy,  if the  staff  has  given  any
thought  to  whether the  whole  thing is  just  more  complicated than this
fairly  simple notion  of opening  up  some  aggregate  excess  capacity--
that  it  may not  be  all  that  simple and  that  the  fundamental  strategy
may have  some  flaws  to  it.

MR.  STOCKTON.  I guess  my basic  reaction,  of course,  is  to

agree with your  statement  that  the  process  is  considerably more
complicated than  just  opening  up  slack  and  having  inflation change  in
some mechanical  way.  The  labor  markets  are  extremely complex
phenomena,  so  it  is  going  to  be  more  complicated.  On  the  other  hand,
I would  look at  events  of the  last  several  years  as  more  a
confirmation of  that  basic  underlying  paradigm than  a contradiction.
That  is,  wage  inflation in  particular  had  been  on  a downtrend through
1986  with  the  unemployment  rate  above  6 percent--really  in  some  sense
it  was  somewhere  in the  7 to  6 percent  range.  As the  unemployment
rate moved  below that,  wage  inflation  turned  around.  And  over  the
last  year,  we've  had  the  unemployment  rate  at  5-1/4  percent  and we've
seen  some mild  acceleration.  We  have yet  really to  create,  at  least
on  the  labor market  side  in  our  view, any  slack  that would  be
sufficient  to  reduce  those  trends.  Now,  another  point  that  you made
that  I think  is  correct  is  that  we  have  seen  progress  in moving
[inflation]  back  down  again  on the  manufacturing  side  as  slack  appears
to  have  opened  up  in  terms  of  capacity utilization.  So,  I think the
recent  events  have  been  relatively  kind  to  that  particular  paradigm,
recognizing  that  there  are  developments  in the  agricultural  sector,
the  energy  sector,  and movements  of the  exchange  rate  that  at  times
clearly  influence  the  pattern  of  overall  price  developments.  But  at
this  point  I wouldn't  see  any  compelling  reason  to  abandon  the  basic
paradigm while  recognizing that  the  confidence  [intervals]  one  can
place  around the  estimates  of  what  slack  is  or  what  any  particular
level  of  slack might  actually  lead  to  are  quite wide.

8/21/90

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Well,  actually,  the  error here  is  in

participation  rates  in  the  labor  force.  If  you  substitute  historical
forecasts  of  labor  [unintelligible]  participation  rates,  the
unemployment  rate  opens  up  with  the  same  growth.  Presumably, the  wage
rate  following  previous  patterns  does  precisely what  the model  would
suggest.  So  I think the  problem we're looking  at  in  an  arithmetic/
analytical  sense  is:  What  is  going  on  in  the  participation  rates  in
the  labor  force  that  we  do  not  understand?  I'm not  saying  that's  the
sole  issue  but,  unless  we  can  answer  that  question, we're  caught  in
the  dilemma  whereby  at  these  growth  rates  we  don't  get  any  loosening
in  the  system.

MR.  PRELL.  We also  have to  keep  in  mind the  possibility  that

some  of  those  phenomena  that  might  be  affecting  labor  force
participation  suggest  that  the  unemployment  rate may  not  capture  all
of the  elements  that  are  affecting wage  behavior.  If  labor  force
participation  is  falling  off  because  people  don't  feel  the  job
opportunities  are  there,  that's  a  somewhat different  kind  of  slack in
the  system that  could  moderate wage  increases.  So,  it's  a very
complex  system.  But  I would underscore  the  point  that  there  doesn't
seem  to  be  evidence  contradicting  the  basic  view that  slack will
diminish  inflationary  pressures.  Indeed,  there  are  few other  channels
available  to  us  that  would  seem  really to  affect  the  inflation  rate.

MR.  BOEHNE.  Well,  there's  a fair  amount of  history in  this
country  and  other  countries  [suggesting]  that  a  recession will  bring
noticeable  relief on  inflation.  But  there is  not  a lot  of  evidence
that  suggests  that  this  gradual  approach  of  opening  up  slack but  not
having  a recession will  result  in  very much.

MR.  PRELL.  That's true  because we  haven't  had  extended

periods  of  slow growth.  So  the  question  is:  Is  it  the  slack or  is  it
the  sudden  shock  of  a decline  that  one  sees  in  a recession  that  really
explains that?

MR.  BOEHNE.  Right.

MR.  PRELL.  We  noted  that  fact  last  fall  when we  had  a

presentation on  inflation--that  there  was  uncertainty  about  whether
there  was  some  sort  of  nonlinearity in  the  system.

MR.  TRUMAN.  I wouldn't want  to  overinterpret  the

information, but  the  current  Canadian experience  is  that  they have  had
slow  growth  for  an  extended  period  of time,  not  a recession,  and  their
consumer  price  inflation has  begun to  bend  down.  The  year-over-year
rate  has  declined  by  about  1/2  percentage  point.  They  have  been
helped,  if  you want  to  put  it  that  way, by  a depreciating  dollar.  I'm
not  sure  how accurate  that  [linkage]  is,  but  it  is  an  example where  a
basic  strategy  that  is  essentially the  same--maybe  a little more
so--seems  to  be  producing  some  results  along those  lines.

MR.  FORRESTAL.  How long  have they been  following  it?

MR.  TRUMAN.  They've  been  at  it  for,  depending  on  how  you

count  these things,  about  a year  and  a half  or  so.

MR.  FORRESTAL.  Longer than  us?

8/21/90

MR.  TRUMAN.  Yes,  a little  longer.  They've had  slower

growth;  they  have  come  down  from  a higher  growth  [rate]  to
[unintelligible].  So  in  some  sense  there has  been more  deceleration
of  growth in the  period  and  their  unemployment  began to  turn  up  in
about  the  early  part  of this  year.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  But  their  unemployment  rate  was  much

higher?

MR.  TRUMAN.  Well,  as  I said,  I don't want  to  overinterpret

this.  It  is  generally accepted  that  they  have  a much less  flexible
economy than  ours  and,  therefore, their  natural  rate  of unemployment
should  be  higher.  Their market  mobility  and  so  forth is  tighter  and
they  have  complicated  laws;  that  is  one  explanation  for why  they
started  out  with  a somewhat  higher  inflation  rate.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Keehn.

MR. KEEHN.  The  budget  deficit  numbers  that  Peter mentioned,

particularly the  $300  billion,  are  a little higher  than  I had  heard.
That  is  a combination  of  lower  revenues  and  higher  expenditures,  I
presume.  On  the  expenditure  side,  is  it  mainly the  RTC-related
expenses  or  are  there other  categories  that  are  also  going  up?  If you
take  that  higher  number,  is  there  any way  that  we  can  finance  that
without  having  big upward  pressure  on  rates?

MR.  STERNLIGHT.  Maybe  I shouldn't  respond because  I haven't

seen  official  estimates  on  that  anywhere in  that  area.  But  as  I said,
that  assumes  a  soft  economy--skirting  along  the  edge  of  recession  or
in  some  of  the  private  estimates  an  actual  recession--so  there  is
definitely  a weakening  of  revenues.  No  budget package  had  the  thrift
bail-out  expenditures  greater  than  in  this  current  fiscal year.

MR.  PRELL.  Let  me try  to  put  this  in  the  perspective of  our

forecast.  For  fiscal  1991  we  have  a  $35  billion  deficit  reduction.
That's  smaller  than the  $50  billion they  still  are  talking about  but
perhaps  some  of the  people who  are  concerned  by  recent  developments
would  think that  maybe  even  $35  billion  is  in  question  at  this  point.
As  Dave  indicated,  just  before the  last  meeting  all  the  talk was
leading  us  to  think that  maybe  $35  billion was  too  pessimistic.  At
this  point,  it  looks  like  a healthy adjustment  given the  political
situation.  But  if you take  some  of that  out,  we  could  begin to move
closer  to  a  $250  billion deficit,  including  $70  billion  of RTC-related
[expenditures]  in  fiscal  1991.  If  you overlay  on that  a weaker
economic  picture--say,  with no  growth  or  a mild  recession over  the
next  year--then  it  could  easily move  toward the  $300  billion  level.
So  this  discussion  of  a $250-$300  billion deficit  is  not  inconsistent
with  the  kind  of  picture  that  we've depicted  in  the  Greenbook.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL.  Well,  Si  Keehn  just  asked  my question  about
the  budget,  but  perhaps  I could  also  ask  Ted  about  the  $25  oil  price
assumption.  Does  that  assume  increased  production by the  Saudis?

MR. TRUMAN.  Yes.  As  Dave  said,  we  assumed  essentially  a

shortfall  of 4-1/4  million  barrels  a day  from Iraq  and Kuwait.  And
then we  assumed  an  offset  of  2-1/4 million barrels  a day.  Partly  just

8/21/90

because we  felt  it  was  useful  to  write  down  figures  so  we  could  in
some  sense  check our  assumptions--and  I emphasize  assumptions--later
on  against  the  realities,  we  assumed  1-1/2  million  barrels  a day  in
Saudi  Arabia,  [300,000]  barrels  a day  in  Venezuela  and  200,000  barrels
each,  I think,  in  UAE  and  Nigeria  just  to  spread  it  around.

MR. FORRESTAL.  Also,  in  your  description  of the  real  GNP

targets,  you  said  something  about  a 50  percent  decline  in--

MR. TRUMAN.  No,  50  basis  points.

MR. FORRESTAL.  I'm  sorry,  a 50  basis  point  decline  in  the

funds  rate.  I didn't  quite  catch  what  you  said.  Could  you  say  that
again?

MR. TRUMAN.  Well,  in  order  to  achieve  this  real  GNP  target,
the model  made us,  if  I can  put  it  that  way,  reduce  the  funds  rate  by
50  basis  points  in  the  third  quarter.  That  was  sustained  and then
gradually the  gap  between  that  and  the  baseline  [unintelligible].  I
should  emphasize  [unintelligible]  we're  dealing  in  a  quarterly model,
so  we  moved  Iraq  back to  [3.0  million barrels  per  day]  in  some  sense.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Stern.

MR.  STERN.  Let  me  go  back  to  the  budget.  In  looking  at

developments  in  Iraq  and  Kuwait  and  trying to  understand the  economic
consequences  of  that  in the  forecast,  the  one  thing that  surprises  me
is  that  I,  at  least,  don't  catch  anything  on  the  military  outlays  and
what  that  is  likely to  mean  for  the  outlook.

MR.  PRELL.  Well,  I think you're  correct.  There  isn't  much

in  here.  We  have  really a trivial  increment  to  defense  spending  in
this  forecast  over  the  next  few  quarters,  partly  consistent  with the
oil  price  assumption that  things  are  presumably--

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Well,  one  thing that  is  happening is  an

increase  in  the  cost  of  fuel  and bottled  water.

MR.  STOCKTON.  Some  chartered airline  flights  as  well.

MR. PRELL.  I think  there is  also  some  effect  on  suntan

lotion  prices--the  sunblock  effect!  At  this  point,  it  seems  largely
to be  a matter  of  taking  some  things  out  of  inventory,  shifting
expenditures,  and  so  on.  If  this  results  in  major  deviations  from
what  we  had  anticipated  in  overall  personnel  and  additional  munitions
and  [supplies],  if we  maintain  a significant  presence  in the  Middle
East  over  the  coming  quarters,  then  we  might begin  to  talk about  at
least  several  billions  of  dollars.  One  could  read  into  comments  made
by  the  President  yesterday that  some  of  the  defense  reduction that
people  had  been  looking for might  not  be  achieved.  That  then  perhaps
would begin  to  chip  away  at  our  fundamental  fiscal  assumptions.  So,
there  is  clearly  upside  potential  here  on the  fiscal  front  for  some
lesser  restraint  than we  have  embedded  in  this  forecast.  I think
that's  a clear  risk.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Governor  Mullins.

8/21/90

MR. MULLINS.  Your  answer  on  the  defense  spending  is  that  the

increment  is  less  than  a couple  of Texas  S&Ls,  presumably?

MR.  PRELL.  That's  true.

MR. MULLINS.  I'd  like  to  get  some  insight,  Dave,  into  your

view of  consumer spending.  You mentioned that  the  second-quarter
retail  sales  were  a lot  better  than we  initially had  thought  and  that
one  reason was  that when you  start  from  a small  enough  base  it  looks  a
lot  better when  it  comes  up  to--I  guess  it  was  minus  .9 for  the
quarter  and  was  marginally positive  in  July.  You mentioned  in  the
projection that  household  real  consumption will  fall  but  not  quite  as
much  as  the  reduction  in  real  income.  Why  did  you make  that
assumption  and  how do  you  feel  about  the  impact  of  this  event  on
consumer  confidence  and whether  consumers  view this  as  transitory  or
more  permanent?

MR.  STOCKTON.  At  this  point  we made the  assumption that  most

but  not  all  of  the  decline  in  real  income  is  reflected  in  the
consumption  in  the  second  half because  we  assumed  that  some  households
will  be  uncertain  about  the  permanence  or  transitory nature  [of  the
decline]  and  probably will  be  assessing  and  adjusting their
consumption plans  accordingly.  That  is,  some  households  clearly will
think that  this  is  transitory  and  others  that  it  is  permanent  and  that
combination will  result  in  only  a partial  reduction  in  consumption in
response.  I should  say that  the  reduction  in  the  saving  rate  that  we
have  as  a consequence  of this  is  pretty small;  we  have  taken most  of
the  reduction  in  real  incomes  out  of  consumption.  On the  goods
consumption  side,  things  have  been  quite  weak and  we  expect  them to
get  weaker  in  the  second  half.  If you  look  at  the  past  year  and take
that  as  the  underlying trend  relative  to  the  second  half--which  shows
the  averages  through the  ups  and  downs  of  the  automobile  sector in  the
third  and  fourth  quarters  of  last  year  as  well  as  early this  year--the
place where  we  would  expect  to  see  a particularly  sharp  hit  is  in  the
automobile  sales  area  in  the  second  half  of  the  year.  The  only
support  that  we  really  are  getting  in  consumption is  on  the  services
side,  where  in  our  view  it's  a little  harder  in  the  short  run  for
households  to  adjust  consumption  of housing  services  or  medical
services  to  fluctuations  in  income.  And  that  in  essence  provides
somewhat  of  a base  on  the  consumption side  on which  we  get  relatively
meager  increases--about  a  percentage  point  in the  second half--in
consumption  growth.

MR.  MULLINS.  What  are  the  chances  that  this,  on  top  of the

other  shocks we've  had  to  consumer  confidence  in  residential  real
estate  values  and the  like,  really  could  cause  consumers  just  to  put
their  pocketbooks  away  for  a while?

MR.  STOCKTON.  I guess  that  is  clearly  a risk  in terms  of the
projection.  As  we  reported in  yesterday's briefing  [to  the  Board],  we
did  receive  some  weekly  information  from the  University  of Michigan on
consumer  confidence.  That  showed  a very  precipitous  fall-off  in  the
few  days  right  after  the  Iraqi  invasion  of Kuwait  and  then  some
rebound  throughout  the  course of  the  last  couple  of  weeks  to  a level
that  is  still  below where  it  was  prior  to the  invasion.  But  it  is  not
an  astronomical  fall-off  at  this  point.

8/21/90

-10-

MR. MULLINS.  But  do  you think  that  evidence would  be  roughly

consistent  with  what  you forecast  in  the  Greenbook  or  marginally more
pessimistic  or--?

MR.  STOCKTON.  Given  the  accuracy  with which  one  can  use

those survey  data  to  predict  consumption--and the  link  is  very, very
weak--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  You do  have  a proxy that  is  almost  as
good  and  probably even  better  than that,  which  is  the  10-day  [auto]
sales  figures.  In  a period  like  this,  to the  extent  that  you  get
consumer  shock,  it  is  going to  show up  in those  numbers.  Indeed,  if
you believe  our  seasonals,  as  distinct  from BEA'S,  there was  really
quite  a significant  fall  from  the  last  10  days  of  July to  the  first  10
days  of August.  Was  it  6.1  on our  seasonals?

MR.  STOCKTON.  6.1  or  6.2.  The  10-day  auto  sales  figures

have  the  advantage  of being very timely.  They have  a disadvantage,  of
course,  in  that  they  can move  around  for  reasons  of  seasonal
adjustment  problems  or  other  reasons  that  make  them a little  difficult
to  interpret.  We  did  call  around to  auto  dealers  in  the  wake  of the
price  increases  and  didn't  pick up  any  major  stories  about  a
significant  reduction in  showroom traffic,  so--

MR. PRELL.  There has  been  a consistent  drop-off  from  the
last  10  days  [of  a month]  to  the  first  10  days  in  these  seasonally
adjusted  figures.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  [On  our]  seasonals?

MR. PRELL.  I think  on  ours  as  well.  I just  don't  think

we've found  a way  of capturing  the  pattern,  particularly in  the
transplant  sales.  They have  this  tendency to  be  very  strong  in the
final--

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Well,  I'll  wait  for  the  second  10  days.

MR.  MULLINS.  I think it's  pretty  reasonable  that  people

might  not  want  to  buy  a car.

MR.  PRELL.  Well,  it's  not  entirely  clear.  We  have looked  at

the  historical  evidence  on  these  oil  prices,  and whether  people  don't
buy cars  or  whether  they shift  the  kind  of  cars  they  buy  is  not  as
clear as  one  would  think.

MR.  STOCKTON.  One  of the  reasons  that  we  delayed  the

fall-off in  auto  sales  in  the  projection  is  that we  think,  almost  no
matter what  happens  to  automobile  demand,  that the  auto  makers  at  this
point will make  it  through incentive  programs  [unintelligible]  to
clear  out  the  1990  models.  And  that  helps  hold  up  sales  a little  in
the  near term;  but  by the  fourth  quarter  we  show  a bigger  fall-off.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  They don't  have much  inventory.

MR.  STOCKTON.  They don't  have  much  in  inventories  and  that
[unintelligible)  they  won't have  any  buyers.  Our  current  assumption
is  that  there  isn't  going to  be  a precipitous  fall-off in  sales  in the
near  term that  would  require  them even  to  have to  go  through some  kind

8/21/90

-11-

of major  increase  in  incentive programs.  But  if that  were to  occur,
it  seems  quite  likely  that  they would  use  incentive  programs  to  [work
off]  whatever  inventories they  needed to.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Hoskins.

MR.  HOSKINS.  Yes,  I want  to  get  back to  your  simulation.  If

I understand  it  right,  you have  a neutral  policy  going  forward  to
generate essentially the  same  nominal  GNP.  It's  just  that  the
components  would differ;  you would  have  lower  output  and  higher
inflation.  You open  up  slack  in  the  economy  and the  inflationary
surge  is  temporary.  You  say that  you  don't  take  account  of
expectations;  you haven't  talked much  about  that.  I think  one  could
argue  that  with  interest  rates  going  up  around the  world--every  place,
really,  except  the  United  States--we  could  see  a deterioration  in
inflationary  expectations.  My  question  is:  What  do  you think  about
that?  And  secondly, what  does  that  do  to  your  real  forecast?

MR. TRUMAN.  Obviously, the  neutrality of  oil  prices  is  a

feature  of  the model.  Whether  or  not  it's  a feature  of history,  at
least  it's  captured  by  the  model.  And there's  no  particular
theoretical reason why  that necessarily  has  to  prevail  at  least  to  the
degree  it  has;  maybe  it  [unintelligible].  As  far  as  the  model  goes,
you're  correct  that  there  are  not  forward-looking  expectations  in  the
model,  though  it's  not  quite  clear  to  me  in  this  world with which we
are  dealing what  you would  ground  forward-looking  expectations  on
because  you have to  have  expectations  about,  among  other things,  the
oil  price  scenario  itself.  And,  as  has  been  discussed,  that  could  go
a variety  of different  ways.  When  we  ran  the  simulations,  we  did
adopt  at  least,  again  as  a mechanical  feature,  slightly  different
monetary policy  assumptions  abroad.  And  that  does  produce  some
depreciation of  the  dollar  and  gives  us  some  impetus  to  consumer  price
inflation  from that  source.  So  it  does  wash  through  this  way;  you
don't  get  a very dramatic  impact.  As  I tried  to  lay  out  our  judgment
about policy  responses,  I'm not  so  sure  that  other  than  in  Japan we
are  going to  get  any  particularly  pronounced  policy  responses.  I
think  it  is  true  that  the  market  is  expecting a more--and  I should
underline  "a more"--vigorous  resistance  to  inflationary  impulses  from
the  Bundesbank at  this  time.  Our  judgment  is  that  the market  is  wrong
or  maybe  overdoing  it.  And in  some  sense,  that's  what  we built  into
the  forecast.  To  the  extent  that  we  do  get  more  [policy  restraint]
abroad, then we  would  have  a more  vigorous  resistance  to  the
inflationary  impulses  from higher  oil  prices.  I think  that  would
manifest  itself  in  the  first  instance  in  exchange  rates,  and  that
clearly  is  a risk to  the  forecast.

MR.  HOSKINS.  Let  me  follow  up:  Assume  that  inflation

expectations  got  worse  and  go  back to  the  real  side  of  the  economy.
Presumably, you'd  be  forecasting  higher unemployment?

MR. PRELL.  Well,  it  depends  on  your--

MR. HOSKINS.  Right.  Well,  suppose  we  don't  accommodate

those  expectations.

MR. PRELL.  In  a sense,  the  only thing  that  would  change  is

inflation  expectations  and  that  would  drive  down  perceived  real
interest  rates.  That  would  affect  demand  for  goods  and  services  in  a

8/21/90

-12-

stimulative way,  conceivably.  It's  a very  complex  process  and  it's
going  to  depend  on  your  response  to  those--

MR.  TRUMAN.  Well,  I think the  point  you're  getting to  is

that  if  you  drove  that  process  far  enough,  that would  be  one
interpretation.  It  might  even be  minor.  But  in the  1970s  process  it
would  result  in  circumstances  in  which,  although in  the  short  run the
mechanics  of the model would  generate  lower  real  interest  rates  and  so
forth and  so  on,  in  the  longer  run you would  have  a higher built-in
level  of  inflation  and  all  the  associated dislocations  that we  believe
underlie  that.  So  it  could  get  us  on  a higher  plateau  of  inflation
[and  a lower]  long-run  potential  of the  economy  under those
circumstances  [than  we]  would  assume,  even  though in  the  short  run  it
might  have  stimulative  effects  as  Mike  described.

MR.  PRELL.  I think the  third  alternative  illustrates  this to

a degree  by  showing  the higher  level  of  inflation that  we would  have.

MR.  TRUMAN.  So  it's  relatively  optimistic  because,  as  Dave

said  and  as  President  Boehne's  question  implied  earlier,  in  some  sense
the  fundamental  forecast  accepts  that  the amount  of  slack that's  built
in  the  underlying forecast--given  no  further  shocks  from further  oil
price  increases--is  enough  to  begin to  bend  down inflation.  But  it's
postponed and  it's  at  a higher level.

MR. KOHN.  If  you moved  to  contain  nominal  GNP  growth  under

that  alternative,  two  things  would be  pushing up  nominal  GNP  growth--
both  prices  and  output.  And  if you tried  to  hold  nominal GNP  growth,
then  you'd have  more  price with the  adverse  inflation and
[unintelligible]  less  real  growth  for  that  nominal  GNP  growth.

MR.  HOSKINS.  Well,  I agree  with  what  you  said.  I guess  what

I'm  getting  at  is  that  markets  may now behave  somewhat  differently
with  respect  to  expectations  perhaps  than  they  did  in  the  1970s  in
that  they  in  fact  are  not  fooled.  And when we  have  higher  real  rates,
the  implication  seems  to  me to  be  higher  unemployment  quicker.  And  if
we  want  to  avoid  going  back to  the  1970s  [experience],  one  policy
response would  be  to  signal  the  markets  that  we're not  going  to
accommodate  it  and  in  the  long  run that  could  lower  our  costs
[unintelligible].

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor  Seger.

MS.  SEGER.  I have  a different  question about  what  I guess  I

would  call  a worst-case  scenario  or  "what if"  games.  Did you  try  in
your model  to  see  what  the  impact  would  be  if we  had  one  of  these
horrendous  sequesters that  I hear  kicked  around town--if  they knock
off $100  billion and  send  pink  slips  to  the  federal  employees  and
things  like  that?

MR.  STOCKTON.  We  have  not yet  run through  the  model

something  as  acute  as  a sequester  of  the  size  that  could occur  under
current  legislation.  The  reason we have  not  yet  done  that  is  that  the
dislocation would  be  so  enormous  that  at  this  point  it's  very
difficult  to  imagine  politically  in the  weeks before the  election that
either the  Administration  or  the  Congress would wish to  have  a
sequester  of $100  billion, which  is  about  the  size  that  we're  talking
about  here,  go  into  effect.  In  fact,  at  the  mid-session  review Mr.

8/21/90

-13-

Darman  issued  a  report  outlining  all  the  things  that would  occur  if
this  sequester  were  to  go  into  place,  including  that  30  percent  of the
prison  guards  would be  sent  home  and  people would be  let  out  of  jail
because  there  wouldn't  be  public  defenders  and  they  couldn't  get
access  [to  the  courts]. 
fairly  comfortable that  something  will  occur  in  the  time  [before]  the
sequester  to  delay,  if  nothing  else,  our  decisions  until  after the
election.

It  just  seems  so  extreme that  I guess  we  feel

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  You  will  admit  that the  government  would

improve  under  such  conditions!  [Laughter.]

MS.  SEGER.  What  is  the  decision  date  for  this?  Is  it  by

October  1 that  something  has  to  be  done  under  Gramm-Rudman?  Is  that
the magic  time?

MR.  STOCKTON.  By  October  1st  they  have  to  issue  their

sequester  report  and by  the  15th,  I think, the  cuts  actually have  to
be  in  place.

MS.  SEGER.  With  the  existing Gramm-Rudman  law,  what  would  it

take  to  derail  it?  Is  it  a forecast  of  two  quarters  of  real  GNP
growth  below  1 percent?

MR.  PRELL.  A  forecast  of  recession  or  the  experience  of two

quarters  of  less  than  1 percent  growth.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  And  we're  not  going to  get  less  than  1

percent  for  Q2  and Q3.

MR. PRELL.  Either  OMB  or  CBO,  I believe,  can make  that

forecast.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Are  you  sure  about  that?  Are  you  sure

that  CBO  could  unilaterally,  by just  an  arbitrary forecast  of  a
recession,  derail  Gramm-Rudman?

MR.  STOCKTON.  It  doesn't  derail  it;  it  simply  allows

Congress--

MR.  PRELL.  It  allows  for  a suspension.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  In  other  words,  it  automatically  puts  a

vote  on  the  table  for  suspension?

MR.  PRELL.  I'm not  sure  that  it's  automatic,  but  it  does

provide  for  the  Congress to  temporarily  suspend  [the  Gramm-Rudman
cuts].  They have  to  make  that  decision.

MS.  SEGER.  My  second  question  in  regard  to  worst-case

scenarios  involves  oil  prices.  Having  remembered  the  difficulties  of
the  1970s  and  1980s  in  getting  even  the  direction  of  oil  prices  right,
what  would be  the  impact  on  the  economy  of,  let's  say,  a tremendous
additional  acceleration  in  oil  prices  to  $35  a barrel  because the
Iraqis  also  take  over  Saudi  Arabia  or  some  other  major  producer?  Have
you  tried  any  of  these  scenarios  in  your model?  I'm not  saying these
are  terribly  likely outcomes  or high  probability  assumptions  but--

8/21/90

-14-

MR. TRUMAN.  Well,  there  are  some nonlinearities  involved  in

this,  but  in  that  range  the models will  tell  you that  you would  get
proportionally the  same kinds  of  responses  or  a little more.  Instead
of  losing  1/2  percentage  point  of  growth,  we would  lose  another  1
percentage  point  plus  of  growth  over the  next  four  quarters--at  least
abstracting  from the  dislocation  effects,  which  I would  argue  and  I
think  you would  argue  probably  would be  there.  So,  the  models would
suggest  that  a $35  oil  price  rather than  a $25  oil  price  for  a
sustained  period is  going  to  cut  another  percentage  point  or more  off
of growth.  And  given  the  level  of growth that we  have,  that  would  put
us  near  zero  or  below.  We  all  know that  when we make  up  numbers,  a
smooth  forecast will  show  something  like  zero  but  that  probably is
going to  mean  several  quarters  of  negatives--on that  order  of
magnitude.

MS.  SEGER.  What  else could  we  face  that would  throw our

forecast  into  the  trash can?

MR. PRELL.  Put  it  in the file  cabinet?  [Laughter.]

MS.  SEGER.  Trash  can  is  more  appropriate.

MR.  PRELL.  There  always are  innumerable uncertainties.  I
think we've  just  layered  over the  normal  ones.  There are  some very,
very  big  imponderables  at  this  point.  I might  just  say--and  this
might  seem  silly  normally,  but  just  to  close  the  loop  entirely  on  this
Gramm-Rudman  issue--if there  were  a declaration  of war,  that  would
suspend  the  Gramm-Rudman  [provisions].

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  And the  probability  of that  is  not  zero.

MR.  PRELL.  That's  why  I raised the  point.  It's  not

inconceivable.

MS.  SEGER.  Well,  thank you  for  playing  my  game with me.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  If  there  are  no  further  questions, who

would  like  to  start  the Committee  discussion?

MR. GUFFEY.  Mr.  Chairman,  I would  like  to  ask  a question  of

the  staff with  respect  to  the  forecast that  has  been  laid  out.  To
give  us  the  export  numbers  that  are  contained  in the  staff's  forecast,
it  seems to  me  that  the forecast  assumes  that  growth  in  other
industrialized  countries will  continue  fairly strong.  I know there
has  been discussion of  it  already, but  given  the  uncertainty about  the
oil  situation and  the  reactions  of Germany  and  Japan  for  example with
respect  to  their  interest  rates,  how  comfortable  are you that  we will
maintain  exports  at  the  level  that  you  are  projecting?

MR. TRUMAN.  Well,  that's  one  of the  conditional  dimensions
of the  forecast.  We're  reasonably  comfortable,  given  the  particular
oil  price  scenario that  is  built  in  here.  In  the  baseline  scenario we
think there would  be  a spurt  in  inflation,  some  reduction  in  growth,
and  some  reduction  in  exports  in  the  short  run--over the  next  several
quarters.  But  then these  economies--at  least the  continental  European
economies  and  Japan--in  general would  be  relatively  robust.  There  is
still  the phenomenon  of  rebuilding  in  eastern Europe  and  East  Germany
that  is  driving  those  economies  and  it  should help  sustain  exports,

8/21/90

-15-

In  Japan  in  particular,  as  I mentioned  in my presentation,  there  has
been  quite  a lot  of  rise in  short-term nominal  interest  rates,  so  they
call  it monetary  restraint  and  as  always  there's  a question  of
calibrating the extent  that  that  is  going to  bring  about  adjustments.
And  the  big drop  in the  stock market  in  Japan  [unintelligible]  as
well.  So  I suppose  we  could  see--it's  not  outside  the  realm of
possibilities--half  the  growth that we  now  expect  in Japan.  That
would have  some  implications  for the  forecast.  But  I think  it's  no
more  uncertain than  anything  else  that  we  put  before  you  in  this
export  [unintelligible]  policy.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Who  would  like  to  start  off?  Si.

MR. KEEHN.  Mr.  Chairman,  reporting  first  on  the  conditions

in  the  District  prior  to the  Middle East  events,  I must  say  I
certainly was  surprised,  positively, by  the  resilience  of  the  Midwest
and  the  ability  of  the  District  economy  to  rise  above the  national
trend,  at  least  so  far.  Certainly, the  GNP  revisions  reduced  our
baseline forecast  at  least  somewhat,  but  pre-Middle East  events  we
continued  to  have  a positive  expectation  for the  economy.  We  forecast
continued  improvement this  year  and  into  next  year.

I have  a couple  of  specific  comments.  The  steel  business

continues  to  be  good.  A company  I talked with  is  currently operating
at  a level  of  85  percent  of  capacity;  their  order  books  are  full  for
the  third  quarter;  the  fourth-quarter  orders  are  coming  in  well;  and
they  have not  experienced the  normal  summer  slowdown  that they
generally do  each  year.  They  continue  to  look  for  shipments  this  year
of  83  to  84  million  tons,  which is  about  equal  with  last  year.  And
even  prior  to  the  Middle East  events,  there  was  something  of a boomlet
going  on  in  steel  used  in energy-related  activities.  Demand for  sheet
and  bar  continues  to  be  good.  The  only  significant  change  in  their
order  book is  that  they  do  see  a downturn  in  the  demand  for heavy
structural  items  that would  go  into  commercial construction.  Recent
price  increases  in  the  steel  industry have  been  sticking,  but  on
average  they  are  still  at  this  time  some  6 percent  under  last  year.
In the  construction  area,  on  a year-to-date  basis  both  nonresidential
and  residential  construction  in  the  District  have  been comparatively
strong.  We've  had  plus  numbers  in  both  categories versus  negative
numbers  on  a national  basis.  And just  one  item, the backlog  for
cement  shipments,  currently is  running  some  40  percent  higher  this
year than  last  year,  at  least  for  one  shipper.  But  having said  that,
I do  sense  in  a more  current  perspective  that there  are  not  only
postponements  of  some  major  commercial  projects but  some  outright
cancellations.  I think within the  last  couple of weeks  even  in the
Midwest  there has  been  a change  of  attitudes  there.  One  supplier  to
the  commercial  construction business  tells me  that  their  attitudes  are
rather  worse now than they  have  experienced  since  1981  or  1982.

The  auto business  continues  to  be  a sector  of  enormous

uncertainty.  But  I did talk to  one  company  as  late  as  last  Friday  and
they  continue  to  hold to  a sales  forecast  for  cars  and  light  trucks
together  of  14.4 million for  this  year.  And  they're  looking at  14.3
million  for  next year.  While  those  numbers,  at  least  in my  eyesight,
look pretty  good,  their baseline  number  is  15.4  million.  So,  when
they're  under that  baseline number  by  that  amount,  they think
conditions  are  pretty negative.  Third-quarter  production schedules
this  year  are  up  17  percent  over  last  year;  fourth-quarter  schedules

8/21/90

-16-

are  up  10  percent  over  last  year.  But,  clearly,  the  production  risks
at  this  point  are  on  the  down  side.  And  even this  late  into  the  third
quarter  the  projected  pickup  of  17  percent  is  likely  to  be  erroneous.
Meanwhile,  auto  dealer  attitudes  are  very  negative.  One  would  expect
some  pickup  in  orders  because  of  the  possibility  of  a strike;  despite
that,  dealers  just  aren't  ordering  cars.  But  again,  for the  company
that  I talked  to,  27  percent  of  their  dealers  are  operating  at  a  loss,
which  accounts  for  the  negativism.  The  heavy truck business  is  bad.
One  manufacturer we  talked  to  is  looking  for  shipments  of  class  E
trucks,  the  heavy trucks,  this  year  of  125,000  units;  that's  lower
than  others  that  are  at  133,000 to  135,000.  Again, that's  against  the
baseline  number  of  about  160,000.  So,  clearly,  they're  having a very
bad  year.

In  the  agricultural  sector,  growing  conditions  continue  to  be

very  good,  but  because  of  late  plantings  and the  reasonably  cool
summer  that we've  had  so  far,  crops  are  a bit  slower  [coming in]  than
normal.  The  yield  is  going  to  be  determined  largely by  the  timing  of
the  first  frost.  If we  have  a reasonable  break  on  that  first  frost,
production  could  be  excellent  and,  indeed,  farm  income will  be  high.
There's  a shot  at  least  at  having  a record farm  income.

With  regard  to  credit  and  lending  conditions,  I continue  to
think that  this  is  really  a phenomenon caused  by  the  banks  themselves
going through  a self-correcting process.  I think they've  raised their
lending  standards.  But  even with  the  increases  in  C&I  lending  by  the
District weekly  reporting  banks  lower  this year  than  last,  the  numbers
are  nonetheless  positive.  And  C&I  lending by  small  banks  in the
District  is  higher this year  than  was  the  case  last  year.  So,  maybe
we're  seeing  a bottoming  in  this  trend--at  least  in  genuine  C&I
lending,  taking out  merger-related  activity  and  the  like.  I am
reassured  by  the bankers  that  for  good  credits--they  do  emphasize  the
word  "good"--there  is  plenty  of money  available.  But  they do  all  say
that  they have  raised their  credit  standards.

Shifting  to  a post-Middle-East-events  comment  and  a look  at

the  national  economy,  I think  it's  just  too  early  to  assess  the  damage
that we're  likely to  experience.  Having  said  that,  I haven't  talked
to  anybody  so  far  who  specifically  has  changed  their  business  pattern
or  what  they  are  doing in  the  way  of  operations.  Some  companies  are
going  through  their  capital  budgets,  but  there  are  some  contradictory
[comments]  on  that.  Some  companies  are  planning  to  pull back  on their
capital  spending  programs,  but  I did  talk to  one  company that's  doing
quite the  opposite.  They  are  now  in  the  process  of  accelerating their
capital  spending  because they  sense that  the  level  of  inflation will
be higher  and,  therefore,  they want  to  get  their  expenditures  in
before  that  occurs.

Now,  I continue to  have  a feeling,  at  least  in  an  intuitive

sense,  that  the  economy  is  operating  at  a very moderate  level  and  that
the  Middle East  events  certainly  are  a negative  in  all  this.  But  it's
awfully hard  to  judge  the  outlook  at  this  particular  point.  And,
therefore,  certainly in the monetary  policy  sense,  it's  a very  awkward
period.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Parry.

8/21/90

-17-

MR.  PARRY.  Mr. Chairman,  in  the  Twelfth  District,  employment

growth continues to  exceed  that  of  the  nation, although  the  rate  of
growth has  slowed  more  in  recent  months  than  has  been  the case  in  the
nation.  For  example,  if you  go  back  a year  ago,  our  growth of
employment was  about  1-1/2  percent  more  than  the  rest  of  the nation;
now it's  running  a little  under  1 percent  more.  Following the
national pattern,  employment  in  manufacturing  and  construction has
fallen  in  recent  months,  but  it  has  fallen  at  a rate  that  is  less  than
half  that  for the  rest  of  the  nation.  Growth  of trade  and  services
industry  employment is  below that  of  a year  earlier,  but  the  growth
rates  continue  to  be  in  the  area  of  3 to  4 percent,  which  are  not  bad
increases.  Agriculture  is  performing well  in  the  District  as  a result
of high  crop  prices  and  yields  and  also  high  livestock  prices.

If  I can  turn  to  California,  since  California  got  some

attention in the Greenbook  as  well,  economic  growth has  slowed  from
last  year's  pace;  there's  no  question  about  that.  But  the  state's
employment  is  growing  at  a steady  rate  of  just  under 2-1/2  percent  on
a year-over-year basis.  Defense  and  aerospace  layoffs  are  [slowing]
and  will  slow  economic  growth.  But  even  in  LA and  San  Francisco,
where the bulk  of the  layoffs  will  take  place,  the  loss  of  jobs  in
these  sectors will  be  small  relative  to  what  are  expected to  be
healthy  gains  in other  nonmanufacturing  sectors.  Real  estate  activity
is  slow.  There's  no  question that  sales  and  permits  are  off
significantly.  Median home  prices  indicate  the  drop  in  home  prices
but,  as  was  indicated  in  the  Greenbook, most  of the  decline  reflects  a
shift  in  the  composition of  sales  to  lower  priced  areas,  particularly
Sacramento,  Riverside,  and  places  like  that,  and  also  to  smaller
homes.

Turning to  the  national  economy,  although the  risk of

recession certainly  is  real,  the  upward  revisions  in  retail  sales  for
May and  June,  the June  drop  in the  inventory/sales  ratio,  and  the
favorable  report  on June  net  exports  are  certainly  encouraging.  It
appears  as  though, with  a better balance  between  inventories  and
sales,  positive  real  growth  in the  second  half is  quite  likely.
Although the  Greenbook's oil  price  assumptions  are  reasonable,  I
believe  that  the  effect  on  inflation  in  the  second half  of  the year
will be  larger  than that  indicated  in  the  Greenbook.  In  addition,  the
impact  of higher  oil  prices  in  stimulating business  investment  could
turn out  to  be  a bit  greater  than  implied  in  the  Greenbook  forecast.
Finally,  although a future  drop  in  oil  prices  is  assumed  and certainly
would help  to moderate  inflation,  I don't  think we  should  forget  the
effects  of the  dollar  depreciation, which  has  been  quite  substantial.
The  latter,  plus  continued  upward  pressure  on  wages,  should  prevent  a
significant  decline  in  inflation next  year.  Thank you.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Forrestal.

MR.  FORRESTAL.  In  the Atlanta  District,  Mr.  Chairman,  with
the  exception  of exports,  the  tone  of  the reports  that  we're  getting
is  very,  very negative.  The  list  of  the  weak or  the weakening  sectors
that  I talked  about  at  the  last  FOMC  meeting  is  unchanged.  And  I
suspect  from  reading the Beigebook  that these weak  areas  are  very much
the  same  as  those  around  the  country.  Construction activity  is
particularly  sluggish  at  the  present  time  and,  unfortunately, there  is
a large  unoccupied  stock that  will  have  to  be  worked off before  any
new activity  is  justified.  I don't  hear  very much  about  the  [credit]

8/21/90

-18-

crunch anymore.  Clearly,  the  banks  have  tightened their  underwriting
standards.  What  we  are  seeing,  though,  is  a decline  in  consumer  loans
rather than  construction  loans.  And  I suspect  that  that's  more a
function  of  demand than supply.  Before the  Middle East  problem arose,
the  oil  and  gas  business  in the District  was  beginning  to  expand, but
the  industry  has  been  constrained by  labor  shortages.  The  workers
have  left  the area,  particularly Louisiana  and  the Mobile  area,  and
are  not  returning.  At  the  moment  it's  still too  early to  tell  how
much  stimulus  the  oil  component  sector will  get  from the  recent  price
increases.  The  important  regional  industries  that  are maintaining
their level  of  output  are  doing  so  only  because their  exports  are
replacing domestic  sales.  And  in  this  category  I certainly would
include wood  and  pulp  and  paper  producers.  Agriculture  is  strong in
the  District,  and  sales  of  farm equipment are  rising  pretty rapidly
both because  of a good  year  domestically  and  also because  of  rising
export  sales.  In  an overall  sense,  the  slowdown may be  a little more
pronounced  than  it  was  in  July,  but  I don't  see  any  new areas  of
weakness  emerging.

One  other  comment  that  I picked  up  from  a number  of  contacts,

particularly people  in  small  businesses,  is  that  they are  seeing a
growing  problem with  receivables,  which  have been  much harder  to
collect.  As  a result,  these  firms  are  in  effect  financing  these  slow-
paying  customers.  Sentiment  is  very  negative,  I would  say.  And,
Governor Mullins,  consumer  confidence  is  very  low  in  our  District--and
it's  getting  lower  as  a result  of the  Kuwait  and  Iraq situation.

With  respect  to  the national  economy,  I find myself in
agreement  with the  Greenbook  generally.  In  the  interest  of  full
disclosure,  I would  say my  staff  is  a little more bullish on  consumer
spending  than I am.  I must  say  that  I am  increasingly pessimistic,
and  I was  pessimistic  before  Kuwait,  about  the budget  accord.  I would
like  to  think that  something will  happen,  but  I'm not  at  all  sure
that's  going  to  be  the  case.  Overall,  I think that  we  may  avoid  a
recession;  but  I am more concerned  about  our  falling  off the  edge  than
I was  at  the time  of  the last  FOMC meeting.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN.  Mr.  Chairman, as  seems  to  be  the  case  for  the

nation as  a whole,  economic  conditions  in  our  region  are  showing  signs
of  slowing.  There  are  special  factors  here  and  there  that  keep  the
overall  growth numbers  positive.  After  fairly  strong  employment  gains
in the  first  quarter  of the year,  our  three-state  District  would  have
experienced  employment  losses  in the  second  quarter  had  it  not  been
for  a strong  growth in  government  jobs.  Our  manufacturing  employment
had  been  growing  slightly while  conditions  nationally  deteriorated.
In the  last  few months,  however,  manufacturing  employment  has  declined
in  each  of  our three  states.  Weakness  has  been  concentrated in
transportation equipment--mainly  defense-related--apparel, and
electrical  equipment.  While  employment  gains were  experienced  in
chemicals  and  petroleum  refining,  we  expect  some  slowing  in these
industries  with the higher price  of energy-related  input.  Employment
in  the  services  sector  has  been extremely weak  outside  of  government
employment.  The  government  employment  gains  were  for  all  government
entities  and  were  not  just  related  to  federal  census  workers.

8/21/90

-19-

In  private  services,  the main  areas  of  strength were  in

transportation and  public  utilities,  both  of which  will  be  adversely
impacted by  higher  energy  prices.  The  one area  where higher  energy
prices  should  help  the  District  economy  is  in  drilling activity,  but
any  positive  response  that  does  occur will  be  with a long  lag  time.
First,  inflation-adjusted oil  prices  are  only  about  half  the  peak
level  reached  in  1981,  and  the  rig  count  is  highly  correlated  with
real  oil  prices.  Second,  almost  half the  drilling activity  in the
Dallas  District  is  for  natural  gas  which  has  a long way to  go  before
gas  prices  catch  up with  oil  prices.  Third,  drillers  have  to  be
convinced that  higher  energy  prices  will  persist  for  several  years.
And  lastly,  even  if  everything  on  the  price  side  fell  in  place--and  as
Bob  Forrestal  found  out--we  simply do  not  have  the  capacity to
increase  drilling  activity  since  about  half  of that  capacity  exited
the  industry  over  the  last  four  years.  I did  see  on  local  TV  that
they  reinstituted  a rough-neck school  out  in  west  Texas  to  teach
people how to  drill  oil wells.  So,  somebody has  a little  optimism.
In  the  short  run,  the  negative  effects  of higher  energy prices  in  the
District  will  predominate  over  the  positive  effects.  I might  add,
however,  that  the  weak picture  for  retail  sales  that has  existed
lately  should  be  helped  somewhat  by the  sharp  boost  in  royalty  and
partnership  income  which is  proportional  to  oil  prices.

Following  the  Iraqi  invasion of Kuwait,  we  did  do  another

round  of Beigebook  contacts.  As  a result,  the  anecdotal  evidence  has
shifted  from  [an  outlook for]  slow but  steady  growth to  one  of great
uncertainty.  Even  the  focus  of agriculture down  our  way has  shifted
from too  little  or  too much moisture  into  marketing  uncertainties  in
the  new  environment.  With  respect to  the  national  picture,  I really
don't  have  views  that  would  be  considered  different  from the  Greenbook
forecast.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.  Well,  since we  met  in  July  there has  been  some

further  softening  in  an  already  soft  Philadelphia  District  economy.
The  sluggishness  is  widespread,  including manufacturing, retailing,
construction,  and  capital  goods.  Some  areas  of the  District that  have
experienced  labor  shortages  for the  last  several  years  now  report  the
number  of job  applications  rising.  And  in banking,  I sense  that  our
loan  problems,  which heretofore  have  been  concentrated  largely  in  New
Jersey,  are now  floating across the  Delaware, much  as  George
Washington  did  some  years  ago.  And  I think we're  going  to  see  some  of
those  loan problems  in  Pennsylvania as  well.  The  chemical  and  plastic
firms  are  the  two  that  I have talked  to  most,  and  both  of those
industries  already  report  substantial  cost  increases  from  the  Middle
East  problems.  I also  noted  that  attitudes  have  turned  very, very
cautious.  For  the  first time  in  a number  of years  I'm hearing  more
talk  about  recession in  the  outlook  and,  although  I think  that  is
still  a minority view,  it's  a growing minority view.

On the  national  outlook, my  sense is  that  we probably  will

see  some  negative  real  GNP  by  the  fourth  quarter.  Before  the  Middle
East  shock, we  had  increasing downside  risks  stemming  from weakening
demand  in most  sectors  and tighter  credit  conditions.  And  with the
Middle  East  problems,  I think we'll have  still worse  downside  risks.
My hunch  is  that  the  Greenbook  is  underestimating  the  negative  impact
on  consumption.  I think that  consumer  confidence  has  been  on  thin  ice

8/21/90

-20-

for  a while  and  with the cumulative  impact  of economic  concerns  that
were  building,  and  as  this  Middle East  situation  drags  on,  I think we
will  see more  of  a negative  impact there.  And that's  going  to  affect
business  confidence  as  well.  I think the  key  issues  for  us  are:  How
much  slack  is  enough  and  how much downside  risk are  we  willing to
tolerate  to  provide  a reasonable  prospect  of  keeping  the  impending
bulge  in  oil-related  prices  from working  its  way  into  the  core  rate  of
inflation?  And  that's  the  next  part  of the  meeting.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Syron.

MR.  SYRON.  Mr.  Chairman, the  gloomy  news  continues  to  track
the  people  from  the Northeast.  The  New England  economy,  I think,  has
continued  softening at  a somewhat  faster  rate  than  it  had  before--even
in  the  pre-Saddam period.  That  will be  exacerbated to  some  extent by
the Middle  East  problem--at  least  in  terms  of  peoples'  expectations--
in  that  as  a share  of  energy  provided we  rely about  50  percent  more on
petroleum than the  nation as  a whole.  But  the number  of BTUs  per
dollar  of output  is  only  about  80  percent  of the  national  output.  So,
it  tends  to  offset  itself  somewhat  but  not  completely.

In  the  District,  the  most  pressing  immediate  issue  continues

to  be  a further  softening--and  almost  a free  fall  in  some  parts--of
the  real  estate market.  I don't  know whether you've  sold  your  house
or  not,  David.  While  we  haven't  heard  anything  about  it  yet,  the  oil
situation  could  have  an  impact  on  vacation homes  similar  to  that  in
1973  and  1979,  when people  did  not  want  to  buy them because  of  concern
about  the greater  cost  of  getting  to  them,  and  that's  why we  had  a lot
of softness  in condos.  At  that  time--though it  isn't  true  this  time--
there was  a concern about  the  supply  of  fuel  to  get  to  vacation homes.
Even  before this  came up,  though,  we  really had  a quite  poor tourist
season.

Construction  employment,  of  course,  has  fallen very  strongly,

but  it  still  has  a way  to  go.  Even  though  the  level  of  construction
employment  has  fallen  very  significantly,  it  is  still  above  the  1981
level;  so  we  think that  will  continue  to  be  a drag.  Beyond  that,
we've  seen  weakness  now  spread to  the  services  and  trade  sectors.  In
the  trade  sector particularly,  we've  seen  fairly  significant  declines
in  employment.  As  for  consumer  confidence  in the  region,  the
Conference  Board data  show that  even before  this  oil  situation
confidence  had  fallen  55  percent  July-over-July.  I don't  know how
good  these  regional measures  are,  but  several  months  ago  New England
was  the  only declining  region.  Now it's  striking  that  only  three  of
the  nine  census  regions--relatively  small  regions  at  that--show  an
increase  in  confidence.

In  terms  of the  less  dim, if  not  bright,  areas  of the
region's  economy,  I'd  have  to  say  that's  in  manufacturing  exports.  I
find  a quite  distinct  pattern  for manufacturers  between  their  domestic
business  and  their  export  business.  For  the  domestic  business,  our
survey  shows  them about  flat  to  down  10  percent;  but  their  export  side
is  up  about  5 to  20  percent.  Interestingly,  and  I think  this  reflects
something that  Bob  Parry  said,  we've  started  to  see  some  turndown--and
we  have  secondary  suppliers--in  the  aerospace  industry  and  we've
started  to  be  greatly  concerned  about  how soft  things are.  But  we're
beginning to  see  some hope  that  defense  cutbacks  won't  be  as  great  [as
anticipated].  In  fact,  at  Raytheon,  one  or  two  contracts  have  been

8/21/90

-21-

continued that  were  expected  to  be  dropped.  Credit  availability
continues to  be  much talked  about  and  I think  is  a somewhat  broader
problem.  A relatively  small  thrift  operator  came  in  and  said  he  has
told  his  loan  officers:  "If  it  isn't  gold,  don't  bring  it  in to  me."
I don't  say  that that's  a particularly widespread  view, but  I think  it
reflects  something  about  the people  in  general working  out  problems.

As  far  as  the  national  economy  goes,  it's  far too  early  into
this  whole situation  to  know what  the  impact  is  going to  be  in  terms
of  disruption.  We  need to  look  at  things  in  terms  of before  Saddam
and  after  Saddam.  My  own  reaction  is  that  I am  quite  struck by  any
overreaction to  it.  I'll  admit  that  I was  struck by  the  revisions  on
the  GNP  numbers--that  what  we  saw when  they  came  out  [differed  so
much]  from what  [we  thought]  had  happened before.  And  on the  basis  of
that,  I myself have  some  concerns  about  confidence  and  a little
concern that  the  Greenbook  forecast  might  be  a bit  on  the  strong  side,
actually.  However,  I also  have--maybe  it's  a reflection  of  being  a
[unintelligible]  from the  Northeast--an  increasing  concern  about this
issue  of financial  fragility in  almost  all  of  our  large  institutions.
Thus,  on  balance,  I would have  thought  the  economy  seemed somewhat
softer  before the  Iraqi  business,  though  perhaps  not  to  the  point  of
dictating  a policy  change.  I don't  know  if  we  know enough yet  to
determine  what's  going to  happen.  With the  degree  of  [military]
buildup  that  we're  going  through,  it  seems  to  me  entirely  possible
that--even  short  of  an  absolute  shooting war--before  too  long we  could
get  to  a point  where we  will  get  some  stimulative  effect  on  the
economy,  particularly  if the  reserves  are  called  up.  We  have  had,  as
everyone has,  some  reserves  called up  already  in  our  District.  I also
am somewhat  concerned  about  the  patterns  in  consumption  and  the
steepening of  the  yield curve  in  the  context  of  the  international
situation.  So,  I think the  discussion  in  the  policy  section  is  going
to be  very  lively  indeed.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Stern.

MR. STERN.  Well,  as  far  as  the  District  goes,  it's  more of

the  same.  Growth  is  unspectacular  but  it's  steady.  We  continue to  do
a bit  better  than  the  nation;  of  course,  that's  not  a very  remarkable
statement these  days.  But  most  of what  has  been  happening  in  the
District  reflects  a continuity of  what  has  happened  over the  last
several  months.  Agriculture  remains  good;  tourism has  been  good;  most
of the  natural  resource  related  industries  are  doing well;  and the
diversified metropolitan  areas  continue  to  do  well,  all  things
considered.  I would  say  that  we're not  likely  in my District  to
continue  to  outperform the  national  economy much  longer,  but  at  the
moment  anyway things  are  still  going  a bit  better than  at the  national
level.  The  run-up  in  oil  prices  as  a result  of  Iraq  and  Kuwait
occurred  too  late  to  stop  the  bikers  from descending on  Sturgis
[unintelligible].  So  that  turned  out  to  be  a successful  event  and
injected  a lot  of  income  into  the  South  Dakota  economy.

With  regard to  the  national  outlook,  somebody  used the  word

"dilemma" earlier  and  I think that  captures  it.  Even before  the
invasion  of Kuwait,  we  were looking  at  slow  growth and  we were  looking
at  that  simultaneously with a lack of  progress  in bringing down
inflation.  And  it  seems  to  me  if that  was  the  dilemma,  it  has  only
been  sharpened  by what  has  happened  in  the Middle East.  Obviously,  I
can't  assess magnitudes,  but  I think it's  fair to  say the  dilemma  has

8/21/90

-22-

been  sharpened.  My  own  judgment  is  that  on top  of  all  that--and  one
could  probably  point  to  some  other  things  that have  gone  wrong--the
likelihood  of any  progress  on  the  budget  has  diminished  as  a
consequence  of this.  I would  guess,  although  this  is  a double-edged
sword,  that  we  will  see  some  kick  to  military  spending  before  this  is
all  said  and  done.  Now, that  may  help  the  real  economy  a bit,  but  I
just  have  a sense  that  there's  an  awful  lot  of turmoil  out  there  and
that  the  dilemma,  as  I say, has  worsened.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Vice  Chairman  Corrigan.

VICE  CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.  Well,  first  of  all,  in terms  of the
national  outlook,  I think the  staff has  done  as  well  as  anybody  could
possibly do  in  terms  of trying to  capture what  might  happen  and  what
the  contingencies  are.  For what  it's  worth,  both our  baseline
forecast  and  our  alternative  forecast  are  really  quite  similar  to  the
kinds  of things  the  staff is  talking  about.  About  the  only material
difference is  that  in  the  next  two  quarters  we  probably have  the  real
economy a bit  softer  and  the  inflation  rate  a bit  higher.  But  over
the  forecast  period  as  a whole,  the numbers  both  internally  and
externally  (on trade)  are  really  quite  similar  to  the  staff's  baseline
forecast.  There  are multiple  risks.  In  the  very  short  run the
greatest  risk  or  uncertainty,  of  course,  is  that  the  Iraqi  situation
will  turn into  a  shooting war.  I've  talked  to  some  people  who  know
something  about  the  oil  infrastructure in  that  part  of  the  world  and
the  impression  I get  is  that  even  if  it  were  a very  short  armed
conflict,  a  guy  like  Hussein  could  do  one  heck of  a lot  of  damage  in  a
very  short  period  of time  to  the  oil  infrastructure  in terms  of
pipelines  and that  type  of thing.  So,  again,  even  if  a  shooting war
were  very  short  and  very  decisive  for  the  good  guys,  the  damage  that
could be  done to  the  oil  infrastructure  in  a matter  of  days  is  quite
substantial,  I gather.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  It's  all  concentrated  in  a relatively

small  area  south  of Kuwait.

VICE  CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.  All  the  pipelines  I gather  are  above

ground  even when  they're  far  removed  from  Iraq  or Kuwait  itself.  So,
they  are  just  sitting there.  And  the  potential  for  substantial  damage
when  you have  a crazy  guy  like this  guy  is  quite  real.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  When you  say  crazy  [unintelligible]  get

it  back to  work and  functioning  within a year.

VICE  CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.  All  of that  would,  consistent  with

what  Gary  says,  involve  some  substantial  stimulus  from  a lot  of
sources.  Anyway,  I think the  staff's  effort to  try  and  capture  both
the  baseline and  some  of the  contingencies  is  as  good  as  one  can  do  it
in  these  circumstances.  Leaving that  aside,  an  interesting way  to
think  about  this  is  to  ask  what  was  going on  pre-Iraq and  what
superimposing  Iraq  means.  I have  to  say  that  my impression  is  that
even prior  to  the  Iraqi  invasion  the  attitudes  in the  business
community--both  big business  and  small  business--were souring.  My
sense  is  that  the  economy,  if  anything, was  softer  rather than
stronger  and  that  even  before  the  very  latest  CPI  number  the  inflation
rate  was  higher  rather  than lower--not  in  any  decisive  way, but
certainly the  hopes that  the  inflation rate  was  going to  bend  down,  I
think, were  fading.  I agree  with  some  of  the  others  who  said

8/21/90

-23-

that--again, even before the  Iraqi  invasion--expectations had  soured
quite  significantly  in  terms  of the  prospects  for  any kind  of  a
meaningful  budget  compromise.  Obviously, the Middle East  situation
has made  all  of those  things worse,  at  least  in  the  short  run.  What  I
hear now is  not  only more  overt  talk about  the risks  of  recession but
a crescendo  of  opinion  about  a vicious  form  of stagflation  in  which
the  inflation rate,  at  least  for  the  foreseeable future,  could  be
significantly  higher  in  a context  in which  the economy  is  just  sitting
there.  Now, the  good  news  in  all  of this  that  I detect  rather  overtly
in  many instances  is  that there  is  a recognition in  the  business
community and  maybe  even on Main  Street  that,  at  least  in  the  short
run,  it's  not  something that  is  subject  to  any quick  fix by monetary
policy.  I think there  is  a recognition that  all  of  this  does  put
quite  a constraint  on  monetary policy.  Indeed,  I'm  even  surprised
about the  number  of people  who  talk  overtly  about not  making  the  same
mistakes  that  were made  in  the  1970s  when,  in the  eyes  of many people,
oil  prices  and  energy  shocks  were  allowed  to  feed  into the  general
pattern  of wage  and  price  setting.  So,  there may be  at  least  that
element  of  realism there.  Nevertheless,  I have  the  impression  at  this
point that  things  are  very much  on the  gloomy  side.

One  quick  footnote  on  the  real  estate  situation:  You  can  get

many different  stories  there;  it  depends  upon  whom you talked  to  last.
But  what  I'm impressed with  is  that my  examiners--who  I think  are
pretty darn  good,  especially  in  real  estate--are  very much  of the  mind
that  the  situation  had  to  get  worse  before  it  was  going  to  get  better.
And  again, that was  before any  further  problems  were  superimposed  on
that  situation.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Melzer.

MR.  MELZER.  For  the  District,  the most  recent  numbers, which
are  second-quarter numbers,  show a decided  shift.  Generally in  recent
months  I have been  reporting  that  we  have  been  out-performing the
national  economy;  in  the  latest  period both  absolutely  and  relatively
there  is  weakness  in  employment  and weakness  in  non-residential  and
residential  construction.  In  talking  to  our  directors  and  others
around  the  District,  I have  not  picked  up  any  sense  that  they  have
noticed  anything  dramatically different.  What's  interesting is  that,
despite  reporting that  things  are  pretty much  as  I have  described  them
in  recent  months,  there  is  a lot  more  anxiety.  Last week  I had  our
staff  do  a survey  of business  contacts  throughout  the District,  which
was  rather  interesting.  In  general,  it  supported  an  outlook for
continued,  albeit  somewhat  slower,  expansion  for the  balance  of  1990.
One  surprising  part  of it  to  me  was  a good  deal  of  optimism in  terms
of  retail  sales,  which  either met  or  exceeded  expectations.  And those
sales  were  obtained without  unusual  price  cutting;  their  inventories
were  in  good  shape.  Basically,  7 out  of  9 retailers  contacted
reported that  their outlook was  good  or  optimistic  for  the  balance  of
the  year.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  This  [survey]  was  taken when?

MR. MELZER.  Just  last  week.  Now, we  have  relatively
sluggish job  growth and  some  layoffs  coming  in  the  aerospace  industry
--in  St.  Louis  in  particular--and  in  the  defense  industry.  So,
whether  or  not  that  optimism by  retailers  holds  up  in  the  face of
slowing  or  maybe  even declining  employment  growth  and  lower  incomes

8/21/90

-24-

remains  to  be  seen.  Based  on  this  survey  and  the  views  of  our  people,
in  general  we  would  expect  weakness  in  autos  and  construction  and  some
strength  in  services,  agri-business,  and mining.  That  pretty  much
sums  up  the  results  of that  survey.

On  a national  basis,  I would  be  in  general  agreement  with

what  the  staff has  forecasted.  What's  very  tricky,  if we  come  to
grips  with monetary  policy,  is  that there's  an  assumption  in that
forecast  of an  essentially unchanged  monetary policy  in  terms  of the
funds  rate.  And,  of  course,  given  our  operating procedure,  an
unchanged  funds  rate  in  a slowing  economy could  in  fact  create  a
tightening--from the  perspective  of  monetary  stimulus.  And  I think
that's  something we  have to  watch  pretty  carefully.  Now,  I've
personally  been  encouraged  by  the  pickup  in  money  growth  recently  and
what's  projected  for  August  and  so  forth,  but  we  have  to  watch  that
carefully.  The  other  general  comment  I would make  is  that  I think the
July  experience  sort  of showed  us  that  we're  not  in  an  environment,
given the  concerns  about  inflation,  in which we  can  try  to  lead the
market  lower.  I think we're  in  a position where  we  have  to  follow
behind  market  expectations  in  terms  of  policy  actions.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY.  Thank you,  Mr.  Chairman.  Well,  [economic

activity]  in the  Tenth District  is  not  a great  deal  different  than
reported  in  prior meetings.  We  continue  to  have  moderate  growth  with
mixed  performance  in  individual  industries within  the  District.
However,  the  higher  oil  prices will  likely  slow  job  growth  in the
District,  particularly  in  states  such  as  Missouri,  Nebraska,  and
Colorado.  And  that will  not  be  offset  in  our  opinion by  the
District's  increase  in  energy production  in  states  such  as  Oklahoma,
Wyoming, New Mexico,  and Kansas.  In  the  energy  area,  the  District  rig
count did  increase  before  the  Middle  East  situation;  the  rig  count
went  up  from  266  in May to  about  290  in  June,  largely in  the  natural
gas  area,  however.  That  level  of  290  in  June  is  only about  [20]
percent  of  the  level  in the  peak  years  of  1982  and  1983  when the
number  of  rigs  operating  in  the  District  was  something  over  1500.
Automobile manufacturing has  been  curtailed within the  District,
principally  in  Missouri,  as  has  been  reported.  For  example,  the  GM
plant  has  been  closed  for  two  weeks'  vacation  related  to  a lack  of
parts.  There  is  some  suspicion  that  it's  simply because  the  dealers
just  don't  want  to  take  down  additional  inventory.  On  the  other hand,
Ford  has  closed  its  plant  for  a week because  of  the  slow  orders  from
dealers.

In  the  agricultural  sector, there  has  been  a very  large  wheat
crop,  as  I think everybody  knows.  Prospects  for  corn and  soybeans  and
other  feed  crops  have  been  very  good.  As  reported  earlier,  because  of
a wet  spring  and  late  planting  there  is  a good  growing  season,  and  it
appears  that we  will  have  a very  good  crop  in  all  of  these  different
commodities  providing  we  don't  get  an  early  frost,  which  would  kill
off this  late  planted  corn  and  soybean  crop.  One  interesting  thing
that  I'd  like  to  report  on  is  a second-quarter  survey  of  farm land
values,  which  showed  a continued  increase  of  3 percent  overall.  But
that's  a slowing  in the  rate  of  increase  of  agricultural  land  prices.
For  example,  in  the  same  period  in  1988  the  year-over-year increase
was  5-1/2  percent;  for the  same  period  in  1989  it  was  up  4 percent;
and this  year  the  increase  slowed  to  about  3 percent.

8/21/90

-25-

Given  all  of  that,  we  don't  see  any  great  deterioration  of

economic  activity,  which  is  very much  as  it  has  been in  the  past.
What  will  happen  with  respect  to  the  energy  sector  as  a result  of oil
prices  is  still  uncertain,  obviously.  But  as  also  reported  earlier,
we  will  not  be  able  to  get  back into  a boom condition of  drilling  oil
wells  simply because  the  level  of  skilled  labor  has  vanished  since
that  earlier  period  and  there  is  not  the  equipment  to  put  in the  field
to  bring  forward  new wells.

With  regard to  the  national  outlook,  as  Bob  Forrestal  said,

in  the  interest  of  full  disclosure  I should  report  that  our  staff
believes  the  outlook  is  a little  weaker  than  shown  in  the  Greenbook,
marginally  so.  However,  I'm more  supportive  of  the  Greenbook
forecast.  And  it  does  show,  of course,  the  kind  of  outcome  that  we
would hope  for.  That's  all  given  against  the  background  of  the  great
uncertainty  of the  Middle  East  situation.  Talking  about  a recession,
given what's  going  on  in  the  Middle  East  and  the  prospects  for  a
shooting war,  I don't  know  that  we  have  any  history  of  going  into  a
recession  during  a shooting  war.  As  a result,  this  adds  a bit more
uncertainty,  but  I come  out  [with  the  view]  that  the Greenbook
forecast  is  very believable.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  First  Vice President  Monhollon.

MR.  MONHOLLON.  We  think  the  baseline  projections  in  the

Greenbook make up  about  as  reasonable  a scenario  as  anybody  might  come
up  with,  given  the  additional  uncertainties  created  by  the  Middle  East
crisis.  The  key  assumption underlying these  projections  is  that  the
oil  shock will  be  relatively  brief and  relatively mild.  That  may or
may not  turn  out  to  be  correct,  but  it's  certainly a reasonable
assumption  given  what  we  know now.  But  even the  stronger  and more
persistent  shock  assumed  in the  staff's  alternative  scenario  produced
only  a moderately  different  outcome.  As  has  been discussed  here,  we
agree  that  the  [range  of]  confidence  around  these  projections  is
obviously  wider now than  it  was  a month  ago.  And  the  probability of  a
near-term  recession  is  correspondingly  higher.

As  a matter of  fact,  slowing  economic  activity  in  our  own

District  and  rather  pessimistic  recent  comments  by  some  of  our
directors  and  other  contacts  led  us  to  think that  the  probability  of  a
downturn had  risen  a bit  even before  the  Iraqi  invasion.  But  we think
it's  important  not  to  exaggerate  the  downside  risk  to  the  economy.
Several  points,  some  of which  have  been mentioned,  come  to  mind in
this  respect.  First,  the  upward  revision  in  the  second-quarter  retail
sales  figures  suggests  that  final  demand  in  the  second  quarter  was
stronger  than  we had  thought,  and  the  healthy  increase  in  hours  worked
by  production workers  in  July  indicates  that  the  payroll  employment
data  may have  overstated  the  weakness  in  the  early  part  of the  third
quarter.  Secondly,  both  the  United  States  and  the  rest  of  the
industrial  world  are  better  positioned,  for  a variety  of  reasons,  to
absorb  an  oil  shock now than  in  the  1970s.  Third,  the  prospects  for
continuing  pretty  strong growth  in  Japan  and  the  European  community
should  hold  up  export  growth to  provide  a partial  offset  for  softening
domestic  demand.  Fourth,  the  absence  of  any  widespread inventory
imbalances  implies  that  if we  do  get  a recession,  it  should  be  fairly
mild.  And  finally,  the  projected  acceleration  in M2  growth  in  August
holds  out  some  hope  that  the  extraordinary weakness  in  the  growth  of
the  money  supply  in recent  months  may  be  ending.  These observations

8/21/90

-26-

are  certainly not  intended to  deny  that  the  downside  risks  with
respect  to  economic  activity have  increased.  But  the  purpose  is  to
help keep  these  things  in  perspective.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Hoskins.

MR. HOSKINS.  Business  conditions  in the District  really have

not  changed  much  from the  reports  I've  given you  before,  and  we
continue  to  operate  at  high  levels  of  economic  activity.  What  has
changed,  obviously,  is  what  everyone  has  mentioned  here  already  and
that  is  the  uncertainty that  people have  going  forward.  In  response
to  that  [uncertainty, the  comment  I heard]  when  I dug  around a little
was  that  firms  were not  planning  to  reduce production  now or to
curtail  capital  spending plans.  Their plans  had  more to  do  in  some
sense  with anticipating  slower  growth  out  there  and  preparing
themselves  for  reductions  in  their  labor  force  in the  future.  The
responses  that  some people  seem to  be making to  the uncertainty  about
the  fourth  quarter  included:  using  overtime  as  opposed  to  adding new
people;  letting  attrition  run  down  the work force  a little;  and using
contracted  help.  One  response  from  a steel  company  executive was  to
protect  the  company  in  the  fourth  quarter  by  exploiting opportunities
in  Europe where  steel  demand  is  very  strong and  mills  are  booked  out
through  December.  He has  the  opportunities  for  business  in  that  area.
The  only  cancellation,  or  at  least  deferred  sale  that  I know of,  is  at
a steel  company that  had a transformer  on a ship  to  Iraq.  I don't
think  they're  going to  complete  that  sale  for  a while!

MS.  SEGER.  Iraq  really  needs  it,  doesn't  it?

MR. HOSKINS.  They'll  need  it  more later.  In  terms  of  the

national  outlook,  it's  obvious  what  we  face.  The  oil  shock  has  given
us  two  outcomes  for  the  economy:  higher  inflation  in the  near  term and
reduced  output.  It  seems  to  me  also  that  one  could  argue  that  real
interest  rates  need  to  be--and  probably  are--somewhat  higher to  ration
or  reduce the  supply of  output  over time.  With  respect  to  monetary
policy,  I think  there's  little that  we  can do  constructively to  get
more  oil.  And  there's  not  much we  can  do  constructively  to  lower  real
interest  rates.  There is  one  thing we  can do  and  that  is  to  keep  the
long-term inflation  expectations  from  being built  into  this  economy.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Governor  Angell.

MR. ANGELL.  It  does  seem that  looking  at  the  real  economy
provides  some  benchmark that we  can use  to make  our  estimates  about
the  future.  But,  certainly,  the  latest  revisions make  it  very  clear
that,  when  some  quarters  in  1989  that were  originally around  3 percent
are  revised  to  1.7  percent,  we  have to  be  very  careful  about  thinking
about  that  kind  of precision.  I am  somewhat  optimistic  about  the  real
economy  in  regard  to  the  performance  of  net  exports.  I think the
strong  current  dollar  net  exports  in  the  second  quarter  will  certainly
switch to  very  strong  real  net  exports  in the third  and  fourth
quarters,  as  the  price  patterns  in the  second  quarter  reverse.

The monetary  aggregates  now have  fallen  into the  category  of

being  interesting.  I used  to  think  they were  much more than
interesting, having had  four  years  in  which the  growth  of the
aggregates  has  been down,  with M2  below  5 percent.  Whether  you're
measuring M2  over  four  years,  three  years,  two  years,  or  one  year,  its

8/21/90

-27-

growth  is  very  close  to  4-1/2  percent.  But  the  fact  of the  matter  is,
according to  the  staff  forecast,  we're  probably  going  to  end  up with
the  highest  year-over-year  CPI  inflation  since  1981.  That  means  the
results  in  nine years  have been better than the  results  this  year.
Certainly,  for  an  old  fashioned monetarist  that  gives  one pause.  Now,
that  doesn't  mean that  the  monetary aggregates  are  not  important;  it
probably  just means  that  we  have  to  look  to  somewhat  lower M2  growth
rates  to  achieve  our  objective than we  first  thought  necessary.  We
can  also  look at  real  interest  rates,  which  I think  are  a very  crude
check in  regard  to  distinguishing between periods  in which monetary
policy  is  apparently  very  easy,  as  it  was  in  the  1970s,  versus  the
real  interest  rates  that  prevailed in  the  1980s,  which  in  general  were
in  the  4 to  4-1/2  percent  range.  Certainly,  it  seems  likely,  given
the  tax  changes  with regard to  the  deductibility  of  interest,  that
those  real  interest  rates  are  consistent  with inducing  a change  in
household  savings  patterns.  And  in  a sense,  I think  all  of us  ought
to  be  much more  enthused than  we  are  regarding the  level  of  consumer
spending.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  saving  rate  in the  United  States  is
not  too  high and  that,  consequently,  some  rise  in the  saving  rate--
which means  a diminution in the  rate  of  growth  of  consumer  spending--
is  exactly  what  the  doctor would  order.

Now, it  seems  to  me  that  a look  at  forward-looking  indicators

really can  [help  one]  begin to  pinpoint  a bit  better when monetary
policy  has  been  easy  and when  it  has  been  restrained.  And  those
forward-looking  indicators  clearly  show that  monetary policy  in  1988
and  after  maybe the  first  three  quarters  of  1989  were  indicative  of
rather  significant  restraint.  Whether  you're  looking  at  commodity
prices,  the  yield  curve,  or  the  foreign  exchange value  of the  dollar,
you get  a  confirmation  of the  fact  that  the  money  growth  prevailing at
that time  did  not  enable enough  liquidity to  be  out  there to  support
upward movements  of  commodity  prices  and  it  supported  the  exchange
value  of  the  dollar.  But,  frankly, it  seems  to  me  that  over the  last
nine  months  we  have moved--though not  from a monetaristic determined
way  of  looking  at  monetary  policy--from monetary  restraint to  monetary
ease.  I don't  think it  has  been  an  abrupt  move;  I think it  has  been a
very  gradual move.  And we  probably have  not  altered the  real  interest
rates  significantly,  or  so  dramatically  as  to  [foster]  too much
expansion  in the  period  ahead.  But  I think  it  is  quite  apparent  that
the yield  curve  is  indicating  that  participants  in the  real  market  are
suggesting  that  the  appropriate  rates  of  interest  are  higher  than we
may  be  providing.  Certainly,  [that  can  be  seen  in]  commodity  prices.
The  staff  did me  the  favor  in  Chart  7 of  indexing these  commodity
prices  to  the  first  quarter  of  1986,  which  is  in some  way  a little
embarrassing  for me  because  I talked  about  keeping those  commodity
prices  within  a  range  of  10  percent  up  or  10  percent  down  from  where
they  were  in  the  first  quarter.  And  when  I look at  all  commodities,
the  index at  almost  140  means  that  we  had  an  8 percent  annual  growth
rate  over  a 4-1/2  year  period.  All  commodities  except  crude  oil  show
a 5 percent  annual  rate  of  gain;  and  that's  not  stability in  those
prices.  So  monetary  restraint  does  not  seem to  be  characteristic  of
this  era.  When  you look  at  the  bottom  chart,  all  commodities  except
food  and  crude  oil--which  takes  out  some  of the  variabilities  of
agricultural policy--it  looks  like  we  have had  a very  significant
trend  line  of  rising  prices  over  the  last  11  months.  So,  there's
nothing  there  that  gives  me  any  indication that  monetary  policy  at
this  moment  is  too  restrained.  Indeed,  if the  foreign  exchange value
of the  dollar  continues  to  fall  at  the  rate  it  has  been falling--since

8/21/90

-28-

really  over  the  last  10  months--it's  a  rather  significant  event, which
with the  recent  movements  in  gold  prices  I think  could  be  an outright
devaluation.  And  that  only  occurs  during  periods  of monetary  ease,
not  monetary  restraint.  So,  I'm  somewhat  of the  view that  we  have
already  eased.  And  I'm  of the  view that  that  ease,  if  it  takes  hold
prior  to  the  time  that  we  get  a breakout  of  the  rate  of  inflation  from
the  rut  we  have  been in  on  the  down  side,  is  going  to  give  us  one  heck
of  a problem  in  the  years  ahead.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor  Kelley.

MR. KELLEY.  Mr.  Chairman,  I'll  be  brief because  my
observations are  very much  in  the  mainstream  of much of  what  has  been
said  this  morning.  In  the  area  of  inflation,  pre-Iraq  I think the
news  was  already  disappointing  in  that  we  really  had  made very  little
progress.  And now  post-Iraq,  we  have  an  oil  shock that  is  a virtual
cinch  to  pick  inflation  up  substantially.  So,  I believe  we  do  have  a
higher  inflation  outlook.  There  is  some  concern  that  it  might  be
substantially higher;  that's  a very  clear and  unequivocal  threat.  In
the  area  of  real  economic  activity,  I think pre-Iraq we  have  been
getting  pretty much what  we  had  asked  for--maybe  a  little  on the  soft
side  of that,  but  no  real  nose  dive  that  was  in  any  way  perceptible.
And  today, we  have  even more  softness  in  prospect  as  a result  of  the
oil  shock.  So,  the  recent  events  are  certainly  not  a plus  and  they
certainly  add  to the  risk  and  to  the  uncertainty.  But  at  least there
is  not  yet  much  evidence that  the  economy  is  headed  for  the  tank.  So,
we  do  have  an  exacerbated  inflationary  situation and  I think there  is
a clear  need  that  that  be minimized  in  a way  that  is  most  sensible  to
the  rest  of  the  economy  and  its  progress.  Economic  activity per  the
Greenbook may  still  be  okay;  I hope  we  get  the  Greenbook outlook  and  I
think that  probably would  be  okay.

One  question that  I ask myself  is:  If we  did  try to  help  the

economy  through  easing, would  it  work?  Would the  medicine  turn  out  to
be  as  bad  as  the  disease  is  in the  first  place?  I'm not  sure;  perhaps
some  percentage  thereof.  I'm not  sure  what  would happen  to  long  rates
in  that  event.  I'm not  sure  what  would  happen  to  the  dollar  or the
inflation  rate.  And  I'm not  even  very  sure  whether  we  would  get  the
response  we would  be  looking  for  from  the  consumer  and  on  the
investment  side  if  we  did  that.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Governor  LaWare.

MR. LAWARE.  In  general,  I would  like  to  identify myself  with

President Boehne's  remarks.  In  spite  of the  fact  that  the  consumer
confidence  figures  are  terribly volatile  and  not  necessarily  reliable
in  the  long  term,  they  are  cause  for  a reasonable  amount  of alarm  on
my part  because  we  have  such  a consumer-driven  economy.  I think we're
very  close  to  the  edge  of that  cliff;  if  it's  not  a  cliff,  it's  a
steep  decline.  I'm  concerned that  if  we  do  lapse  into  recession,
certain  weak elements  in  the  economy  could  accelerate.  The  real
estate mess  could  be a  real  collapse  on  a much broader  front  than  it
currently is.  The  further  losses  that  a recession would  imply for  the
banking  system would  further  undermine the  banks  at  a time  when many
of  them are  on  skinny ground  as  it  is.  Corporate  profits  remain very
disappointing.  The  debt  burden  of the  private  sector  is  heavy  and,
obviously, the  burden  of  servicing that  debt  in  a declining  economy  is
going  to  be  much  greater.  I have  no  confidence  that  the  oil  price

8/21/90

-29-

rise  will  be  contained  or  that  it  will  begin to  decline  due  to  offsets
from  Saudi  Arabia, Venezuela, the  United Arab  Emirates,  etc.  I'm not
sure  that  they  really are  going to  come  on  stream as  advertised  and
that  they  will  be  sustained.  Part  of  it  depends  on the  duration  of
the  Iraq  crisis  and  I think that's  an  imponderable.  Short  is
obviously  good  even  if  it's  a  shooter;  long  is  very  serious  whether  or
not  it's  a shooter  because  of  the  effect  on  the  economy  and  the
possibility of  permanent  or  at  least  longer-term  impairment  of the
flow  of oil.  The  dilemma  is  that  the  external circumstances  have
threatened  growth  and  at  the  same  time  stimulated  inflation.  And  the
challenge  for  us  is  that  movement  against  one  exacerbates the  other,
whichever  way we  go.  And  the  whole  situation is  seriously  complicated
by the  vulnerability  of  the  dollar  and  the  possible  consequences  of a
free  fall  in  the  dollar to  the  financing  of  the  deficit--and  the
deficit  may be  growing  at  the  same time.  So,  those  are  comments  that
don't  lead  us  anywhere,  but  they  describe what  I am thinking about  at
any  rate.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS.  My  views  on  the  nature  of the  economy,  pre-oil

shock,  are  pretty  consistent  with  what  everyone  else  has  described.  I
would  consider  it  marginally  gloomier  than  last  time,  but  with  no
really  clear  evidence  of  a  recession,  and  brighter  than  the  gloom that
pervaded  after  some  of  the  statistics  that were  released  a few months
ago.  I guess  we're  still  pinning  our  hopes  on  exports.  Looking  back
over  six  quarters,  if you  ignore  the  first  quarter  of  1989  drought
distortions,  we  have  had  roughly  six  quarters  of maybe  1.4  percent  GNP
growth.  That  should be  the  equivalent  of a  couple of  quarters  of
negative  1 percent  recession with the  rest  of them in  the  mid  2
percent  range  and  you would think  that  it  should  have  produced  slack.
We  don't  see  a lot  of  evidence of  slack  in  the  economy  but  we  do  see
some.  Capacity  utilization has  edged  down  some  and  it's  only  high  in
a couple  or  three  industries,  such  as  mining  and  primary metals.
Unemployment  has  increased  and  employment  has  fallen.  The  real
mystery  is  what  happened to  the  600  thousand  to  1 million  people who
left  the  work  force.  Clearly,  if  they were  in  the  work  force  and  if
the  latter  had  grown  at  the  rates  we  saw  in  the  1980s,  unemployment
would be  above  6 percent.  I think they  are  legitimately out  of the
work  force  because  we  don't  see the  pressure  on  wages.  And  we  see
other  evidence  in  the  labor  statistics,  such  as  aggregate  hours
worked,  that  suggests  there is  not  a lot  of  slack.

So,  overall,  I think we've  seen  very  little  progress  on

inflation.  It  is  true  that  the  June  CPI  number,  which  upset  so  many
people,  had  the  owner's  equivalent  rent  in  it  suggesting  that  home
costs  were  going  up  pretty  rapidly  at  a time  when  other  things
suggested  they were  going  down.  That  was  true  in July  as  well,  but  it
was  not  the  only factor  in  July;  there were  other  concerns  in  July.
You  can't  help but  believe  that  nearer  term the  recent  months  of  slow
growth  in money  and  credit  should  start  to  have  an  impact.  But  I
would  say  at  this  stage  that  I see  no  hard  evidence  of  progress.  From
these  levels  of GNP  growth  I'm  also  not  that  confident  that  if  we  saw
a downturn we  could  do  much to  catch  it  in  time,  which  is  why  I think
we  need  to  look ahead  and think  carefully  about  the  future.  My
initial view  of  the  oil  shock was  that  it  was  not  such  a massive
event.  In  terms  of the  increase  in  the  price  of  oil  it  is  perhaps  50
percent.  In  the  early  1970s,  oil  prices  increased  by  four  times  and

8/21/90 

-30-

in  the  late  1970s  by two  or  three  times.  This  seemed  a lot  smaller,
although the  news media  tends  to  equate  it  with  those two  [earlier]
events.  And  I think the  1970s  conditions  were  far  different.
Certainly, we're  going  to  see higher  CPI  numbers.  As  Governor  Angell
mentioned, these  will  be the  highest  we've  seen  essentially  in  the
[last  decade]  and  in  fact  the  highest  we've  seen  since  the  last  time
an  oil  shock happened.  One  of  the  reasons we  didn't  see  higher
numbers  in  the  1980s  was  because  we  didn't  have  oil  shocks  in  the
1980s.  It's  still  not  a very  pleasant  prospect;  and  it  comes  on  top
of not  very much  progress  before  this  in  the  CPI.  The  staff estimates
a moderate  impact  on  inflation, perhaps  1-1/2  percentage point  higher
CPI  numbers,  and  a transitory  impact.  I guess  that's  consistent  with
the  notion that  there  is  some  slack in the  economy.  The  economy  is
pretty  weak and  money  and  credit  growth have  been slow.  It's  not  too
likely  that  this  would  feed  into  some  generalized  inflation.

Yet  the  bond markets  reacted  quite  negatively to  this--and

around  the  world,  I might  add.  The  reaction  was  pretty  similar  in
bond  and  stock markets  in  the  major  industrialized  countries.  U.S.
long  bond yields  went  up  50  to  60  basis  points,  and  it's  hard  to
reconcile  a transitory  impact  on  the  CPI  with  30-year  investors  in
some  crude  sense  saying  30-year  inflation  is  one  half point  higher.
They  are  responding not  so  much  perhaps  to  the  projected  median
inflation  rate  as  to  the  small  probability  that  the  high  consequence
outcome  is  letting  inflation  get  out  of hand.  I also  believe  some
important  part  of  the  higher  yields  is  a real  risk  premium associated
with  the  uncertainty  and the  disruption  in  real  economies.  Investing
in  30-year  bonds  is  simply  riskier  in  a world when  small  countries  can
disrupt  large  economies  at  will.  That  disruption risk  had  been there
in  the  1970s.  We  went  through  the  entire  1980s  without  one  of  these
events;  indeed,  we  went  through the  entire  Iran-Iraq war  without  one
of  these  events.  The  cold  war  ended  and  now all  of  a  sudden we  have
real  instability, which  I think people  will  offset with  a real  risk
premium.  There  are  some  arcane measures which  document  the
volatility.  The  implied  volatility  on  bond  options  has  gone  through
the  roof.  There  are  technical  factors  in the  bond  market.  When  you
have  this  sort  of uncertainty  the  hedges  come  undone;  it's  more
expensive to  be  a 30-year  investor.  Peter mentioned  the  problems  with
the  auction.  And  it's  not  clear  to  me  that  some  of  the  other  markets
that  didn't  have  the  auction  problems  went  up  quite  as  much.  One  way
I try to  conceptualize  the  oil  shock  impact  is  to  assume  that  it
hadn't  happened but  that  instead  we  had  a budget  deal  which  involved  a
$10  a barrel tax  on  oil  with  half  of the  proceeds  given  as  foreign  aid
to  oil-producing  countries.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  inflationary
impact  of that  sort  of  budget  deal  in  some  crude  sense  should be
roughly  the  same  as  what  we've  seen.  But  I suspect  the  markets  would
have  responded  far  differently.  And  it  seems  to  me  that  difference  in
response has  a lot  to  do  with the  uncertainty and  the  potential  for
future disruptions  of  this  type.  So,  I wouldn't  read--

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  But  the  difference  is  who  imposes  the

tax.

MR. MULLINS.  I think  the  yield  curve  is  going  to  be  more

steeply  sloped  for  some  time  to  come  because  of  an  uncertainty  premium
in  it.  What  bothers  me most  is  the  impact  on the  real  economy.  This
is  a  contractionary event.  People  are  poorer;  they  have  less  money to
spend;  their wealth  is  reduced.  Because  the  magnitude  of  the  impact

8/21/90

-31-

is  not  that  great  in  terms  of the  percentage  increase  in prices,  the
impact  in the Greenbook is  relatively  small--less than  1 percent
reduction  in  GNP.  And we  don't  have  a lot  of  GNP  to  give  up now;  we
come  out  projecting  .5 for  the fourth  quarter,  which  is  a pretty small
margin  of error.  I've  already alluded  to my major  concern  in  this
area,  which  is  the  fragility  of  consumer confidence.  I'm  a little
concerned that we  may  see  the  increase  in  the  saving  rate  that
Governor Angell  talked  about  if we  start  a shooting  war  over there.
I'm  also  concerned  that we  haven't  thought  a lot  about  how this  is
likely to  end.  We  discussed  it  a little  here.  The  outcomes  aren't
that  encouraging from the  point  of  view of consumer  confidence.  We
could  be  lucky  enough to  have  an  efficient  coup.  But  when you think
about the  scenarios,  it  leads  to  a pretty  sour mood.  This  on  top  of
an  already  fairly weak economy  suggests  to  me  that  there's  certainly  a
possibility  that the  contractionary consequences  could be  greater  than
projected  in the  Greenbook.

I'm  still  a little  concerned  about  the  slow  growth  in money

and  credit.  We  have had very  low growth  in the  past four  or  five
months,  including last  month,  despite  the absence  of RTC  activity.  I
guess  growth  is  picking up  in  the  first  couple of weeks  of August,  as
we  apparently have  scared  people back  into  money.  Money market mutual
funds  have  gone  up  and we're  apparently  exporting currency  again  at  a
rapid  pace.  Obviously,  some  of it  could  be  demand;  but  there  also  is
some  fragmentary  evidence  on  the  supply  side.  The  lending  officers
survey continues  to  show tightness;  and  finance  company  lending  went
up  pretty dramatically  recently,  which  is  consistent  with the  notion
of  some  borrowers  having to  search  for  alternatives  to  bank  credit.
I'd  be  particularly  concerned  about where  the low  investment  grade
borrowers  are  going.  The  junk  bond market is  gone;  the  banks  are  not
forthcoming.  You  don't  see  the  substitution  effect  in  the  commercial
paper market;  high-grade  credit has  gone down  as  well.  The  other
concern  I would have  is  the  fragility  of the  banking  system.  If we
have  a sharp  downturn, we  could  have  some  real  problems  there  and  the
FDIC  could have  some  real  problems  as  well.  So,  I see  a fairly weak
picture  to  begin with--with  this  shock making  it  weaker--and  with the
certain  prospect  of higher  numbers  on  the  CPI  as  inflation works
itself through,  the  specter  of  a real  possibility  that  the  consumer
could  pull  in  his  or  her horns.  This  presents  us  with a difficult
dilemma  for  setting  policy;  people  have  extended their  pity  on  our
tough  dilemma.  What  concerns  me  is  that  I think  it's  likely  to  get
more  difficult  before  it  gets  easier.  As  the  numbers  actually  start
to  go  into  the  CPI  and  as  the  impact  on  the  consumer  becomes  clearer,
the  policy options  down the  road  may be  at  least  as  difficult  as  the
ones we  face now.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Governor  Seger.

MS.  SEGER.  Every  time  I come  to  one  of these meetings  I am

reminded of how  difficult  it  is  either to  analyze  the  economy
currently  or to  forecast  it.  This time  we've just  come  through a
period  of having  received these major  revisions  in  the  GNP  numbers
which, at  least  as  I read  them,  show that  we had  weaker  growth  last
year than  most  of  us  thought  we had had.  Also,  the  numbers  for  the
first  two  quarters  of this  year  look rather  weak.  In  doing our
forecast,  I think  the  uncertainties  are  really tremendous.  I
mentioned  a couple  of them in  my  questions  for the  gentlemen at  the
end  of the  table:  primarily, the  impact  of the  Middle East  situation,

8/21/90

-32-

the  budget  summit  or  what  might  come  out  of  the  summit,  or  how Gramm-
Rudman  will  work and  whether  or  not  we'll have  a sequester.  All  of
those  are  key  unknowns  in  our  forecast.  I certainly  don't  pretend  to
have  any  answers  that  are  any better  than  anyone  else's.  It  is
interesting  for  someone  who  has  been  rather  concerned  about  the  signs
of weakness  in  the  economy,  as  I have,  to be  able  to  add  some  more
indicators  to  my list  this  summer.  A number  of them have  been
mentioned,  so  I won't  repeat  them.  Also,  I think it's  interesting
that  the  U.S.  Chamber  of  Commerce  has  now  come  up  with,  and  made
public,  a recession  forecast  for  this  year.  Solomon  Brothers
economists  also  are  now  forecasting a  recession.

As  I compare  my own  views  with the  Greenbook  presentation,

there  are  a  couple  of  things  I would mention.  One  is  the  area  of
consumer  spending.  I'm  somewhat  more  negative  about  that  than  our
official  forecast,  primarily because  of  the  debt  situation.  Consumers
are  really  loaded  up  to  their  eyeballs,  I would  argue.  And  I think
this  Middle  East  mess  and what  that's  doing  to  consumer  confidence  is
going  to  result  in  a chance that  their  debt  problems  may  even worsen
with  defaults  and  delinquencies  and  those  sorts  of  things.  Also,  I
never  hear  anyone mention  the  impact  of these  declining  real  estate
[values]  on  consumer  spending.  John  LaWare  and  I have  talked  about  it
in  the  past  as  an  influence  on the  health  of  the  banking system  and
S&Ls,  etc.  But  for  the  average  person,  at  least  the  average person  I
know, the  equity  in their  home  is  the  biggest  single  item on their
personal balance  sheet.  And when  the  bombs  dropped  on  the  values  of
those  homes--they actually  are  facing  declines  in  real  estate  values
in many  parts  of the  country,  except  maybe where  Bob  Parry  lives--it
made  them feel  more  poor.  I think  that  is  a bigger  impact  on  the
consumer  sector  than  the  October  1987  stock  market  decline.  The
latter  impacted  people  who  owned  equities,  but  a lot  of  other people
didn't  even  know there  was  anything  going  on  on  Wall  Street.  I think
the  decline  in  real  estate values  is  far  more  serious  to  the  consumer
and  will be  a future  influence  on  consumers'  willingness  and  ability
to  spend.

Also,  I'm  somewhat  more  concerned  about  housing and  other
kinds  of  construction  because  I don't  think the  financing  problems
that  are  out  there  in  the  real  world  have  been  fully  reflected  in  our
statistics,  particularly the  needs  of  contractors to  locate  funds  to
do  their  construction work.  I know we've  discussed  the  credit  crunch
primarily  in the  context  of banks,  but  it  also  relates  to  S&Ls  and  to
the  closing  of  S&Ls  and  to  the  limits  on  loans  to  a  single borrower.
That  is  coming  in  through  the  back door  and  impacting  on the
construction  of  single-family homes,  multifamilies,  etc.  I'm  also
more  concerned  about  what's  going  on  in  state  and  local  governments
and their  budgetary  problems.  I think we're  likely  to  see  either  cuts
in  their  expenditures  or  still more  hikes  in  their taxes.  We've
already  seen  numerous  instances  of that  but  it  wouldn't  surprise  me to
see  still  more.  And  that,  of  course,  impacts  those  folks who  have  to
pay  the  tax bills.

In  terms  of  why  I would  just  as  soon  not  let  us  go  into  a

recession,  the  fragility  of the  financial  system  is  certainly  the  big
part  of  that.  I'm  sure  that  the  problems that  already  exist would  be
made  much, much, much  more  difficult.  And  a  recession would make  the
U.S.  budget  far more  difficult  to  deal  with  and  would make  the  budget
deficit much,  much bigger.  As  for  inflation,  if you  could  guarantee

8/21/90 

-33-

me  that  a trip  through  the  wringer would  cut  our  inflation  rate  in
half,  I might  sign  on  for  the  ride.  But  I haven't  heard  anyone  try to
make  that  argument.  Consequently,  I am unwilling to  take  the  risk  of
a recession  to  get  what  may be  a very modest  cut  in  the  inflation
rate.  So  many  of the  sources  of  inflation  that  I see  are  just  out  of
our  reach,  period--whether  it's  an action  by  government  or  whether
it's  something  that  has  to  do  with  OPEC  or  Mother  Nature,  etc.  I
think we  have  some  impact  but  we  certainly  don't  have  complete
control.  So,  I hope  that  we  can  come  up  with  a good  decision
today--one  that  will  help  to  keep  us  out  of  a recession if we're  not
already  in  one,  though  be  responsible  on  the  inflation-fighting  side.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  I think we  all  need  some  coffee.

MR.  BOEHNE.  Good  idea.

[Coffee  break]

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Mr.  Kohn.

MR.  KOHN.  Thank you,  Mr.  Chairman.  [Statement--see

Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Questions  for  Mr.  Kohn?

MR.  PARRY.  I'd  like  to  ask a  question  about  what  you
referred  to  as  the  "felicitous"  outcome  involving an  unchanged
[nominal]  income path  after the  shock which,  of  course,  leads  to  an
[un]changed  interest  rate  path  and  M2  path.  To  me  that  has  critical
implications  for  the  policy  decision  we make  here.  What  bothers  me a
little  is  that  it  seems  to  me  a bit  counter-intuitive;  also,  I know a
couple  of models  at  least  where there  are  different  results.  It  would
seem more  likely, with  an  oil  shock  of the  magnitude  we're talking
about,  that  in  the  first  year  we  probably  are  going  to  see more  of  the
impact  on  higher  prices  than  on  the  real  side.  That  would  suggest
that  in  order  to  get  the  same  path for  nominal  income  growth we  would
need  higher  interest  rates  and  somewhat  slower  growth  of M2.  And  if
indeed  the  same  nominal  income  path  is  what  we want  now, this  is  a
very  critical  difference.  I don't  know  how much  effort  was  spent  in
trying to  verify  this  or  to  look  at  it  in  different  ways,  but  assuming
an  unchanged  nominal  path  is  what  we  want,  it's  critical  which
interest  rate  path  is  consistent.

MR. KOHN.  Well,  let  me make  one  or  two  comments  and  then

Dave  or  Ted  may want  to  comment  as  well.  One  is--and  this  follows  the
conversation we  had  before--that  I think it's  important  to  distinguish
between  GNP  prices  and  the  CPI.

MR.  PARRY.  Yes.

MR. KOHN.  You  get  a  lot  more  [effect]  on  the  CPI,  given  that

it  has  imports  in  it  and  given  that  it  has  a higher  weight  on  energy,
than  you would  on  GNP  prices.  Secondly,  it's  sort  of a  function  of
the  model;  it  falls  out  of  the  model's  parameters, which  are  based  on
past  experience.  I think  you could  argue  that  past  experience was
distorted;  we  had  controls  in  certain  cases  and  things  like  that.  So,
I think  it  is  particularly difficult  to  get  a reading  on what's  going
to  happen  now.

8/21/90

-34-

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  There's  also  an  interesting  change  in

the  translation from crude  oil to  product  prices  this  time  relative  to
the  last  time.  We  used to  have  a long  lag;  now  it's  instantaneous.

MR.  PARRY.  Well,  we  had  price  controls.

MR.  KOHN.  Yes,  everything was  distorted by  the  controls,

certainly  in the  first  period.  So,  my thought  is  that  past  experience
may  not  be  that  good a guide.  And  that  simply reinforced  my  own
feeling  that  one  can  start  with the  staff  forecast  as  a first
approximation, but  this  is  probably  a period  in which  the  odds  on  that
coming through  are  less  than  I would  usually  say  is  true  for  the  staff
forecast  and, therefore,  that  one  needs  to  be  somewhat more  adroit  and
alert  in  changing policy if  in  fact the  incoming  information  is  not  so
suggestive--

MR. STOCKTON.  It  isn't  the  case  that  our  forecast  is

constrained by  this  particular  feature of  the model--that  somehow the
energy  price  run-up  would naturally  lead to  offsetting  price  and
output  effects  with unchanged  nominal  income.  As  Don  pointed  out  in
his  briefing,  it  is  a function  of the  parameters  of  this  specific
model  and  not  a theoretical  feature  of  the  economy  or  something  that
is  anything  other  than  a summary  of past  historical  experience.

MR.  PARRY.  It  seems  to me  that  we  made  one  major judgment

that  interest  rates  should be  the  same  or  lower,  but  I have  a feeling
that  we  shouldn't  take  too  much confidence  in that  result.  It  seems
to me  quite  likely that  if  we make that  judgment  then we're  probably,
in effect,  going to  see higher nominal  income  and  it's  probably  going
to  be  primarily  as  a result  of  greater  inflation.  I think the  risk  is
there  and  it's  a significant  risk.

MR. PRELL.  I think the  sense  in which  this  nominal  GNP

concept  is  attractive  is  as  sort  of an  automatic  stabilizer.

MR.  PARRY.  Right.

MR. PRELL.  But  you don't  necessarily  have  to  constrain

yourself to  that  automatic  response.  So,  there's  nothing  magical
about this.  If  you were concerned  about  any  acceleration  in  inflation
in  the  short  run,  you might want  to  have  a lower  nominal  GNP path  or
even--

MR.  PARRY.  Oh,  that's  true.

MR. PRELL.  So  it  doesn't  do  the work  for  you here  in terms

of the  policy decision.

MR.  PARRY.  But  it  may cast  it  in  a somewhat more

[unintelligible]  way if  indeed the  underlying  relationships  are
different  than as  portrayed by  that model.  But  you're  right:  It
depends  on  what  you want  to  set  as  your  objective.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Stern.

MR.  STERN.  Don, what  do  you  project  for  M2  growth in  the

fourth  quarter  given  something  like the  baseline  assumption?

8/21/90

-35-

MR. KOHN.  We  have  4 percent  quarterly  average  growth  in  the

fourth  quarter.  But  I believe  the monthly  numbers,  which I don't  have
right  in  front  of me,  are  lower than  that.  We  come  out  of  the  third
quarter  higher,  so  I think we're  looking  at  rates  more  like  3-1/2
percent  on  a monthly basis  in  the  fourth  quarter.  And partly  because
we  have  the  RTC  activity picking  up  at  the  end  of  September,  once
again  that  starts  depressing M2  growth early  in  the  fourth  quarter.
And  then we  have  opportunity  costs  perhaps  even  widening a little  as
banks  and  thrifts  reduce  their  offering  rates  in  lagged  response to
other  rates.  So,  we  don't  have  any  big  push in  M2  for  the  fourth
quarter.  We  did  raise  the  projection for  the  year  to  4 percent  based
largely  on  incoming data,  revisions  to  past  data,  and  how we  saw the
third  quarter.  We  didn't  really  strengthen  our  outlook  beyond  the
third  quarter  very much.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Anybody  else?  If not,  why don't  I get

started  and try  to  cut  through  some  of this.  I must  say that  this  is
about  as  difficult  a policy  discussion  as  I have  ever been  confronted
with,  and  I've  been  around  these  policy  woods  so  to  speak  for  40
years.  Let's  start with where  we  are.  I think there  are  several
things  we  can  stipulate  with  some  degree  of  certainty:  namely,  that
those  who  argue  that we  are  already  in  a recession  I think  are
reasonably certain  to  be wrong in  the  sense  that  we  do  have  weekly
data  that  suggest,  as  others  have mentioned, that  up  until  perhaps  a
week or  so  ago  there  was  no  evidence  of  deterioration  in  what  was  a
very  sluggish  pattern.  The  insured unemployment  data  are  as  broad  as
any  set  of  numbers  that  we  have  for the  economy  as  a whole.  They
don't  get  revised.  Sometimes  they  are  a little unstable, but  in
general  they  do  give  an  unfailing measure  of where  we have  been.  And
I think where we  have  been  in  the  first  half  of the  third  quarter  is
clearly  some  small  plus.  The  whole thing may fall  on  its  face next
week,  but  I think  at  the moment it  hasn't.

On the  inflation side,  those  who  argue  that  the  goods

inflation  is  suppressing the  problem  on  the  services  side  are  clearly
looking  at  the  numbers  [but]  I find the  numbers  a little  difficult  to
read.  I think  the  crucial  issue  here  is  not  the  services  inflation
numbers  but  the wage rates  which--however  one  looks  at  this  inflation
trade-off--clearly  have  not  been  coming  down and  show a slight  upward
tilt.  Although  there  is  still  the  possibility that  that  could  turn
around  in  the  third  quarter,  I wouldn't  want  to  count  on  it  given  the
type  of  environment  we're  in.  The  services  inflation problem  has  a
lot  of tricky things  to  it,  which  is  what  I think  David Mullins was
raising--especially when you try to  substitute  existing  house  prices
for  the  cost  of  house  operations  for the  owner  or  renter.  So,  it's  a
mixed bag.

What  I am  saying,  essentially,  is  that there's  a degree of

apparent  certainty  out  there  in  forecasts  and judgments,  which  I think
is  suspect.  The  crucial  issue  confronting us  right  at  the  moment  is
that  the  odds  of an  actual  war  in  the Middle East  are  50/50.  If  you
look  at  the  form of  the  buildup  that  we're  engaged  in  there,  it's
fairly  apparent  that  this  is  not  a military establishment  that  is
going  to  sit  there  for  a very  long period  of time.  We  are  bringing  in
fairly  significant  tactical  offensive  weapons.  The  chances  of  this
all  positioning  itself  and  doing nothing  and  Saddam backing  down
easily  has  to  be  on  the low  side  of the  probability  [spectrum].  And
the  crucial  issue  here  is  that  if  a war  does  come,  we  have  a very

8/21/90

-36-

serious  question--as  I think  Jerry mentioned--with  respect  to  the
state  of the  Saudis'  oil  facilities,  a very  substantial  part  of which
are  concentrated directly under Kuwait  off  Ras  Tanura  and  to the  north
of Bahrain.  And  that  is  not  all  that  far away  from  a couple  of
kamikaze  raids,  which  some  Iraqi  pilots  have  already volunteered  for.
Frankly,  I don't  think  it's  an  issue  in  the  next  week or  so.  We  are
still  building  our  military forces  and  it's  extremely unlikely  that
anything  will  be  triggered  until  we  are  positioned.  We  are  nowhere
near  there because  of  the  lead  times  it  takes  to  move  our  equipment
and  troops.  And  while we  have  a formidable  force--enough  for
inhibiting  any  adventuresome  activities--I  don't  think  we're yet
anywhere  near  the  level  that  the  reported flow  of materials  suggests
we  are.

As  a result  of  that,  in  an  odd  way where  the  economy has  been

is  a very interesting  statistic,  but  I'm  not  altogether  certain  it's
as  crucial  as  we  probably  would  like  it  to  be.  We  obviously have  a
major  budget  problem,  not  so  much  in  the  additional  costs  but  I think
in  the  reduced  probabilities  of  getting an  agreement,  which  I think
clearly  have  declined  significantly.  In  Gary  Stern's  terms,  we  are  in
a sense  in  economic/political policy  turmoil.

In  that  type  of  an  environment,  it  is  crucial  that  there  be

some  stable  anchor  in  the  economic  system.  It's  clearly not  going  to
be  on the budget  side;  it  has  to  be  the  central  bank.  It's  got  to  be
we!  I think we  very  clearly  have to  preserve--which  is  our
fundamental  role,  mainly--the  value  of the  currency  both internally
and  externally  and,  in  a sense  I suspect,  be more  involved  in  damage
control  than  in  trying to  implement  a policy  that  is  apt  to  do
something  of very  significant  dimensions.  I personally would  feel
very  uncomfortable  if  we  exhibited any  evidence  that we  were  going  to
accommodate  the  increase  in nominal  GNP  that  we would  like  to  come  out
[unintelligible]  with  the  price  rise.  As  Lee Hoskins mentioned,  the
experience  of  the  1970s  is  something that  very  clearly  has  to  be
avoided.  When we  get  uncertainties  at  the  level  that  we  currently
have,  I think  we  have  no  choice but  to  go  to  where  our  fundamental
policy  issues  lie,  mainly  in  trying to maintain  as  closely  as  we  can  a
stable  credit  and  monetary  environment.

I must  say,  I disagree  with  Wayne Angell's  pessimism  on  M2.
I would  be  more  inclined to  explain the  fact  that we  have  had  a very
low  rate of M2  growth  in the  last  three  or  so  odd  years--in the
context  that  inflation was  not  coming  down more--in  terms  of the  P*
model  that  we  set  up.  That  would  show  in  1986  that  adjusting  the
money  supply  relative  to  the  price  level  indicated that  the  price
level  was  down  here  and  the  long-term parallel  real  money supply was
up  here.  What  we  have been  seeing  essentially is  a gradual  narrowing,
with  the price  level  coming up  and  essentially  burning  off the  excess
money  supply.  And  it's  only  very  recently that  the  lines  have
crossed.  I certainly would  say that  if  the  inflation  rates  were to
continue  [moving]  up  as  money  supply  stayed  stable,  then the  pessimism
that  you're  exuding has  some  reason  to be  focused  on.  But  at  the
moment  I think  it's  premature;  I think we  have  evidence  that  this
system fundamentally  still works.  And  I think that  we  have  to  be
focused  on  essentially where  the  credit  aggregates  and  the  money
supply  growth are.  While  at  our  last  meeting we  were  getting  clear
indications  that  the markets  were tightening more  than we  had
anticipated,  I had  hoped that  the  money  supply numbers  we were  looking

8/21/90

-37-

at  in  recent  weeks  were  suggesting that  that  basically  is  simmering
down.  As  I recall,  Bob  Forrestal  mentioned  that  he  was  hearing  less
about  a credit  crunch and  that  may  in  fact  be  what  is  happening;  it
may  well  be  that  what  these money  supply  numbers  of  recent  weeks  are
showing  us  is  that  the  cumulative  pressure  coming  in the  credit
markets  in  an  endeavor  essentially to  preserve  capital  has  reached  the
point  where that  continuing tightening has  at  least  flattened  out.

In  today's  environment we  have  to  recognize that there  is  a
rather  limited  chance  of  affecting the  economy  in  a significant way.
I would  suspect  at  this  point  that  the  Pentagon  has  more  policymaking
clout  than we  do,  because  it's  fairly  obvious  looking  around the world
that  if  oil  [prices]  go  up  and  oil  [production]  comes  down,  that will
have  profound  effects  on  the  system.  And  if  Saddam  is  perceived to  be
increasing  his  power  and  his  clout  and  his  control  over  the  West,  he
is  going  to  be  able  to  name  OPEC's  level  of  output--including  his  own,
which will  be  up  there and  everybody  else's,  which will  be  down.  And
his  control  would be more  than just  strictly the  Gulf  states  because
he  has  terrorist  groups  out  there  and  he  can  control  Indonesia  and
every  far  flung  oil  producer  in  the  world.  Consequently,  our  ability
to  divert  this  guy  probably  has  far more  implications  with respect  to
crude  oil  output,  prices,  interest  rates,  the  world  economy,  and
specifically the  United  States  economy, than  anything  we  can  do
sitting  around  this  table  for  weeks.  So,  I would  suggest  at  this
particular  stage that  we  ought  to  have  a more  modest  view of what  it
is  we're  going to  be  able  to  accomplish.  I don't  think  it  is  in  our
power  to  either  create  a boom or  prevent  a recession  or  vice-versa.
At  this  particular  moment  and  for  the  period  immediately  ahead  our
tools  are  limited.  Therefore,  I would  suggest  that  perhaps  the
greatest  positive  force that  we  could  add  to  this  particular  state  of
turmoil  is  not  to  be  acting but  to be  perceived  as  providing  a degree
of stability.  And  I would  hope  that  to  the  extent  our  foreign  central
bank  associates  will  feel  the  same  way,  we might  be  able  temporarily
to  put  some  degree  of  stability at  least  somewhere  in  the  system.

Having  said  that,  if  one  looks  through to  our next  scheduled

meeting  on  October  2,  I think  it's  more  likely that  events  will
materialize  in  a manner whereby we  eventually will  feel  more
comfortable  easing than  we will  tightening.  So,  I would  still  like  to
stay  where  we have  been  which  is  "B,"  asymmetric  toward  ease.  But
this  is  such  an  uncertain period  that  I think we're  going to  have  to
be  auditing  it  quite  considerably.  And  under  any  conditions,  I would
recommend  that  we  not  go  more  than  two  weeks  before  we  meet  again  on
the  telephone because  I do  think  that  within  the  next  two-week  period
something  is  very  likely to  emerge  that will  require  a  general  review.
I don't  know anything  specific  about  whether  or  not  [our military]  has
built  up  to  an  offensive  technical  capability  or  not.  Frankly,  if  I
had  to  guess,  I would  believe  that  the  President  has  not made  that
judgment yet.  To  know that  we  have the  capability, one  only needs  to
watch the  television tube  for  any  protracted  period  of time  and  know
something  about  what  types  of  armaments  are  used  for what  types  of
purposes.  Now, if  this  is  strictly  a limited  police  action,  there  are
just  too  many policemen.  So,  let  me  stop  there  with that  proposal  and
see where  everyone would  like  to  go.

MR.  HOSKINS.  Just  a point  of  clarification.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Sure.

8/21/90

-38-

MR. HOSKINS.  In  the  context  of what  you  said  on  asymmetric

language  and  the  conference  call,  are  you  suggesting that  you are
suspending what  I guess  has  developed  into  a tradition  recently of
asymmetric  meaning you have  two  calls  of  your  own of  25  basis  points,
or  would  you  confer?

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  No,  this  particular  period  I would  view

somewhat  as  a special  case.  I don't  know how I'm going  to  answer  that
frankly  at  this  stage.  I haven't  given  it  thought.  The  authority  of
the  Chairman under  this  proposed  directive  I think has  to  be  evaluated
very  carefully.  Certainly,  this  is  not  the  same  view that  I held  last
July when  I put  it  the  other  way  around.  I think we  need  something
very  significant  to move  from where we  are.  President  Syron.

MR.  SYRON.  I guess  the  first  law  of medicine  is  do  no  harm.

It  seems  to  me  that  you're  suggesting  that that  might  be  the  first  law
of  central  bankers  in  these  circumstances.  I have  a lot  of  sympathy
with  that.  I think  of  the  whole  situation  in  a sort  of  "BS,"  before
Saddam,  and  "AS,"  after  Saddam way.  I must  confess  that  before  Saddam
I was  somewhat  inclined to  think  on  the  basis  of the data  we  had
coming  in--the  GNP  revisions,  other  developments,  and  the  financial
situation--that  some moderate  easing  along the  lines  of  25  basis
points  might  be  appropriate.  But  in  the  wake  of what  has  happened  in
the Middle  East,  with the  further  steepening  of  the  yield  curve  and
the  intermingling  of  the  concern  of  inflation expectations  for  a
variety  of  reasons  and  also  what  has  happened in  the  foreign  exchange
market,  it's  a somewhat hazardous  course to  make  any  change  at  this
point  in time  until  we  have  somewhat more  certain  information  about
what's  going  to  happen with  the  dominant  event.  As  you  point  out,  the
dominant  event  will  be  something  not  determined  in  this  room.  I must
confess  to  being  somewhat  dismayed  by your  odds.  I'm not  disagreeing
with  them because  I'm  sure  you know more than  we  do,  but  still  it's
fairly  discouraging.  I agree with  the  "B" asymmetric;  and  because  it
is  a long time  in  this  environment  until  October  2nd,  I think we  may
need  some  consultation  before then.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Parry.

MR.  PARRY.  Mr.  Chairman,  in  light  of the  uncertainties  and

concerns that  you  mentioned,  I certainly would be  supportive  of
Bluebook  alternative B.  In terms  of my  own  viewpoint,  though,  my
concerns  about  higher  inflation are  equal  to  my  concerns  about
recession.  Consequently,  if  I had my  druthers,  I'd  prefer symmetric
language  as  well.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor  Angell.

MR. ANGELL.  I'm  encouraged  by your  confidence  in M2  and,  Mr.
Chairman,  I want  to  believe you're  right.  I think  [your  proposal]  is
in  a somewhat  acceptable  range  and  I certainly  do  agree  that we  need
to  have  more  information  to move.  Although  somewhat  satisfied  with
the  range  that  you  stated,  my  preference  would  actually  be  "B" with  a
tilt  toward  restraint.  But  I don't  know that  that  restraint would
need  to  take  place  by  an  increase  in  interest  rates.  I just  believe
that  there's  some  confusion  in the marketplace  in  regard to  what  it  is
that  we  are  about.  And  if there were  some  way  of communicating  your
call  for  stability,  and  that  includes  price  level  stability,  then  I
believe  that we  would  have  a much better chance  to  get  long-term

8/21/90

-39-

interest  rates  down.  My  guess  is  that  if we were  to  move the  fed
funds  rate  up  25  basis  points  that that  would be  quite  a surprise  and
that  it  would be  taken  as  an  indication of  our  not  accommodating  this
oil  price  phenomenon.  And  frankly,  I would  expect  long bond  rates  to
come  down  as  much as  short-term rates  go  up.  Now,  I realize  it's  a
lot  easier to  suggest  that  when you're  not  Chairman  than  it  is  when
you are,  but  that's my  guess.  In  periods  of  low growth  in  which the
housing  industry is  under  such a serious  restraint  that  it  does  make
other  consumer  goods  areas  vulnerable  to  the  downturn,  it  is  important
to  have  lower  long-term  rates;  and  those  lower  long-term  rates  come
with  reduced  inflation  expectations.  I believe  if the  world knows  the
Federal  Reserve  stands  as  the  guardian of  the value  of the  U.S.  dollar
in purchasing  goods  and  services  in  our market,  which  also  includes  a
stable  value of the  dollar  abroad,  then  we would  do  wonders  for
interest  rates  and  actually  increase the  chances  for  the higher real
growth  that  I think  some  of you would  like  to  see.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Keehn.

MR. KEEHN.  Mr.  Chairman,  I absolutely  agree  with  the
solution that  you  describe  in  what  is  at  best  a very  difficult
situation.  Therefore,  I would  support  alternative  "B" with  asymmetric
language  toward  ease.  I have  one minor  operative  difference,  and  it
relates  to  the  question  that  Lee  Hoskins  raised.  Looking  ahead,  I do
think  the chances  are  that  we  will be  easing policy  sooner than we
will  be  tightening it.  And  it  seems  to  me  that  these kinds  of
situations happen very,  very  quickly  and  that  there  are brief windows
in  which we  would have  an  opportunity to  make  a change.  Therefore,  I
would  not  be uncomfortable--if  you were  to  become aware  of  something
and you  felt  we  did  not  necessarily  have  time to  bring the  Committee
together--if you were to  go  ahead  and make  a change  without  a phone
call.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Lee  was  raising  a question  of two

[changes],  is  that  correct?

MR. HOSKINS.  Yes,  that was  what  I understood  it  [meant]

around the  table  when the  language was  asymmetric.  But my  question
also  relates  to--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  I recall  we  always  really interpreted  it

as  one.

MR. ANGELL.  One.

MR. KEEHN.  Yes,  that's  how  I interpreted  it.

MR. HOSKINS.  Well,  I always  interpreted  it  as  that you  had
[as  Chairman  the authority to  make]  a 25  basis  point move  either way
if the  directive  was  symmetric.  That  was  my  understanding.  If  it  was
asymmetric--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  I don't  think  that has  ever  actually

been  formulated by this  Committee,  at  least--

SPEAKERS(?). 

[Secretary's note:  Unintelligible because

several  people were  talking  at  once.]

8/21/90

-40-

MR.  BOEHNE.  I think  we  shouldn't  do  it  today.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  I don't  think  it's  the  appropriate  day.

MR. BOEHNE.  I think we  have to  have  some  confidence  in  our

Chairman to  use  his  discretion,  particularly  in  periods  like we're  in
now.

MR.  KEEHN.  That's my point.

SPEAKER(?).  That's  the  point.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  I appreciate that.  President  Forrestal.

MR.  FORRESTAL.  Mr.  Chairman,  in  the pre-Iraq  invasion
environment  I was  beginning to  feel  that  we  were  at  the  point  where we
should  consider  some  easing  of  policy,  and  I must  say  that  the  events
in  the Middle East  have  tended  to  confirm my  feeling that  that  is
probably the  appropriate  stance  for  policy.  I'm  not  at  all  convinced
that  the  price  of  oil  is  going to  be  maintained  at  the  $25  level  that'
the  staff  is  forecasting,  in  the  context  of your  remarks--which  I tend
to  agree with--that  there's  a 50/50  chance that  we're  going  to  get
into  a real  shoot-out  here.  All  of that  I think  is  going to  reduce
aggregate  demand  in the  economy  and  it's  going to  have  a greater
effect  on  the  real  economy  and  on  output  than  on  prices.  My view  is
that  we  should  do  what  we  can  to  avoid  a recession  for  reasons  that
we're  all  familiar  with  and that  Governor  LaWare  articulated  very well
a few minutes  ago.  I think  one  can  argue  that we  can  attain  greater
stability  by moving  at  this  point  and  giving  greater  confidence to  the
people  at  large  that we  are  not  going  to  be  moving into  a recession.
And  I say that  with  full  recognition  of  the  effects  on  inflation  and
the  exchange  rate.  But  having  said  all  of that,  your  argument  is
quite  persuasive.  As  you  said,  it's  a very, very  difficult  call--
probably one  of  the most  difficult we  have  faced  in  a long  time.  So,
I can  support  your  prescription with some  reservation.  My  preference
would  be to  move  slightly to  give  a psychological  boost,  if not  a real
boost,  to  the  economy.  But  if  I were  a voting member  I would  not
dissent  from  your  prescription.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Boykin.

MR.  BOYKIN.  Mr.  Chairman,  I'm  fully  supportive  of your

position.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Stern.

MR.  STERN.  I support your  position  as  well.  I think it's

the  right  prescription  for  these  circumstances.  There might  be
something to  be  said  for  a symmetric  directive,  in  part  because  that's
my usual  preference and  in  part  because  of  all the  uncertainties  and
risks.  But  I don't  feel  very  strongly about  that  at  the moment.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Guffey.

MR.  GUFFEY.  Mr.  Chairman,  I also  would  support  your
proposal.  I think  the  most  important  thing  that  you may have
indicated  is  the need  for  stability.  If  we  were  to  move,  it  seems  to
me  that  the  markets  would  read  it  as  sort  of  a double  whammy.  On  the

8/21/90

-41-

one  hand,  I would  assume  a move  toward  ease  would  indicate  to  some
that  we  are  more  concerned  about  a recession  and,  therefore, people
will  accumulate  the  thoughts  [and  tend  to  react  in  ways]  that will
make  it  come  true.  On  the  other  hand,  another  part  of  the  market
would  read  the  easing  as  being  inflationary  over  time  and  that  will
build  inflationary  expectations.  I think nothing  good  could  come  out
of  a move  right  now.  And  as  a result,  stability  is  where we  should  be
and where we  should  stay unless  some  very dramatic  changes  take  place
in  the  near  future.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Boehne.

MR.  BOEHNE.  Well,  doing  nothing  so  as  to  do  no  harm is  one

side  of  the  coin.  The  other  side  of  that  coin  is  paralysis.  I think
it  might  freeze  us  into  avoiding  opportunities  to  make  some  positive
contribution.  And  I think  we  need to  be  aware  of  that  paralysis  risk
as  we  go  through the  next  several  months.  I agree  that  at  this  point
we  cannot  change  policy, if  for  no  other  reason than what's  going  on
in  the  financial markets,  both the  bond  and  foreign  exchange markets.
But  I feel  that  the  real  economy  is  going  to  need  some  help;  it's
going to  need  some  help  from us  in  the  coming weeks  and months  and  I
think we  ought  not  to  shy  away  from providing that  help.  So,  I prefer
an  asymmetrical  directive  in  the  direction  of  ease  but  I think  I would
be  more  active  with that  asymmetrical  directive  than  I sense  you would
be.  I would  look for  opportunities to  ease  in  the  intermeeting period
when  financial  markets  would  be  more  favorably disposed  to  accept  such
an  action.  I view this  as  a tactical  maneuver  rather  than  an
abandonment  of  our basic  strategy  of  restraint  to bring  down
inflation.  My  expectation is  that  whatever  easing moves we make  in
the  coming months  will  likely have  to  be  reversed  once  the  economy
begins  to  strengthen.

We  hark back  to  the  lessons  that  we  learned  in  the  1970s,  but

I think we  learned  lessons  on  both  sides.  In  the  first  episode  in
1974  we  underestimated  the  amount  of  weakness  in  the  economy  that  was
in the  background  when we  had  that  first  oil  shock,  and  we  ended  up
with  a very,  very  deep  recession.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  later  one
in  1979,  we  wanted  to  avoid  the  first  mistake  so  we  tended  to  err  on
the  side  of  ease  and  we  ended  up  with  one  big inflation  that  led to
recession.  So,  there  are  lessons  on  both  sides.  And while  I agree
with  you that  this  is  not  the  time  to  move,  let's  not  get  an
inferiority  complex in  this  big  world  and  get  paralyzed  into  doing
nothing  when  opportunity  knocks  at  the  door.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Melzer.

MR. MELZER.  I would  agree with what  you  recommended here.
I'd  make  three  points.  First,  in  this  kind  of  environment,  while  I
don't  think we  can  rely  exclusively  on  it,  I really  do  think  as  Don
Kohn  suggested  that we  need  to watch  what money  is  doing because  I
don't  think we  can  assume  that  an  unchanged  funds  rate  is  an unchanged
policy.  Secondly--I've  said  this  before  as  well  and  I think Don
suggested  this  too  in  his  remarks--I  don't  think that  we  can  pretend
to  lead  markets  in  this  kind  of environment;  we  really have  to  follow.
Now, we  don't  always  have  to  buy  what  markets  are  doing  in  a volatile
period,  but  I'm  suggesting  that  unless  there were  expectations  of  ease
evidenced  in  financial  markets,  it  would  be  very  difficult  for  us  to
ease  and  get  away with  it  given the  concern  about  inflation  that's  out

8/21/90

-42-

there.  And the  final  point  I would make  is  that  if  a recession  is
imminent--if we're  going  to  go  into  recession in  the  fourth  quarter--I
don't  think we  can do  much about  it  right now.  Even in  the  face  of
weak incoming data,  if we  feel  that we're  on  a monetary  policy  course
that  is  consistent  in  the  long run  with  sustainable  growth  and
progress  toward  price  stability,  that's  about  all  we  should  do.  I
worry  about  overreacting--not  on your  part  but  just  in  general--to
incoming weak data  on  the  thought  that  somehow we  could  pull  this
economy  out  of  recession in the  short  run.  I don't  think we  can.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE.  Well,  instinct  and  intuition both  tilt  me toward

ease  and  sooner  rather  than  later.  But  the  cautionary  comments  that
you made persuade  me  that,  as  long  as  we monitor  the  situation
carefully  and  closely  and  are  prepared  to move  quickly, your
recommendation  is  appropriate.  So  I join  in  supporting  it.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Governor  Kelley.

MR. KELLEY.  Mr.  Chairman,  I fully  support  your

recommendation  for  "B"  asymmetric  toward  ease,  but  I'm  not  as  sure  in
my  own mind  that we  really  are  locked  into  an  eventual  ease.  I think
we  may be  surprised with the  strength  of  the  economy.  I also  think
that  if we  do  contemplate  ease,  we're  going  to  have  to  assess  that
very  carefully to  make  sure  that  it  is  efficacious  if we  do  ease.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Vice  Chairman.

VICE  CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.  I also  would  support  your
formulation.  It's  probably fair  to  say  in  my  case that  prior to  the
Iraqi  developments,  I would  have  leaned  to  easing  in  any  event.  As
things  stand  right  now, I probably would  come  fairly  close  to
associating myself  with Mr.  Boehne's  definition  of the  situation.  But
I also  think it's  so  uncertain that  it  could  easily  go  the  other way.
I could  easily  envision  unpleasant  circumstances  where we  might  have
to  tighten monetary  policy.  I say  that  not  because  I favor  that,  but
only because  it  captures the  range  of  emotions  that  I think is  really
on the  table.  As  I say,  your  formulation  is  fine with me  as  things
sit  right  now.  I would  lean toward  Mr.  Boehne's  prescription,  but
depending  upon  what  happens  I might be  a lot  more  cautious  about
seeking  out  an  opportunity to  ease.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Mr.  Monhollon.

MR. MONHOLLON.  I think  there's  a serious  risk that  if we

were  to  ease  now, we might  be  misread  by the  public  and  by  the
markets.  It  might  decrease  our  credibility  and  might  produce  sharp
negative  reactions  in  both  domestic  bond  markets  and  foreign exchange
markets.  It  might  make  our  longer-run  objectives more  difficult  and
more  costly to  achieve.  So,  I have  a strong  preference  for  "B,"  Mr.
Chairman  for  those  reasons  in addition  to  the  ones  you've  outlined.  I
don't  have a  strong  feeling about  the  symmetry  question,  but  I have  a
slight  preference  for  symmetry.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Hoskins.

8/21/90

-43-

MR.  HOSKINS.  Mr.  Chairman,  I agree  with your  analysis this

time  almost  wholeheartedly with  respect  to  what monetary  policy  can
and  can't  do.  As  I said  before, we  face  the  fact  that  there  is  an  oil
price  shock, that  output  is  going  to  be  less  than  it  otherwise  would
have  been,  and that  inflation is  going  to be  higher  than it  otherwise
would have  been.  There's  not  a lot  we  can  do  about  that.  The  one
thing we  can  affect,  however,  is  how people  in  the  marketplace  view
the  future  for  inflation--that  is,  inflation  expectations.  My  view
would be  that  we  should  look  at  that  more  carefully  or  at  least  give
it  more  weight  than  perhaps  we  have  in  the  past.  This  is  a policy
mess,  but  there  is  a silver  lining  in  it.  It  does  offer  us  a chance
to  regain  some  of  our  credibility  or  to  increase  it.  That  would  argue
for  a position very  close  to  Wayne Angell's.  One  could  make  a  case  on
those  grounds,  I think,  for  a token tightening.  But  since  the  market
already  expected  an  easing by  us,  that  would  argue  in  my mind  for
staying where  we  are  for  stability  reasons.  But  I do  think we  are  at
risk  with respect  to  our  credibility  in  terms  of  pursuing  price
stability.  My  preference would  be  that  we  have  symmetric  language  in
"B" and  that  hopefully  we would  have  a Committee  discussion  before  a
move  is  made.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Governor Mullins.

MR.  MULLINS.  I would  support  the  proposal,  although  I'm

leaning more  in  the  camp  with  Vice  Chairman  Corrigan  and  President
Boehne.  Without  this  [Middle  East  situation]  I think a  case  could  be
made  for  some  easing,  especially  if money  and  credit  growth had  not
picked  up  a little  in  August.  It  still  bothers  me  when  we  go  through
a period  of  months  with  low growth  in money  and  credit  because  history
suggests  difficulty  a bit  down the  road.  I would  agree  that  in the
current  setting  stability  is  important.  I do  think,  though,  that
there  are  some  risks  in waiting and  that  it's  not  likely  to  be  a lot
easier  down  the  road.  What  concerns  me  most  is  that  we  might  find
ourselves  in a position  where we're  trying  to  play  catch-up,  requiring
larger moves,  which  would make  me  uncomfortable because  of  the  risk to
stability.  I believe  there's  great  merit  in  gradualism.  Also,
looking  down the  road,  I would  suggest that  at  some  stage  it  wouldn't
be  too  bad  an  idea  to  get  the  market  used  to  somewhat  more  movement  in
the  fed  funds  rate  instead  of  the  assumption  that  it's  chiseled  in
marble.  That's  something we  should  think about  as  well.  But  in  the
current  climate  I would  support  "B" asymmetric  toward  ease.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Governor  Seger.

MS.  SEGER.  I know these  are  very tough  times  and  it's

difficult  to  come  up  with accurate  forecasts  and  it's  difficult to
make  good  policy.  And  I appreciate  your  point  about  the  need  for
stability and  the  need  for  some  sort  of  anchor  in Washington  or
something  that  is  viewed  as  an  anchor.  But  having  lived  on  a river
for  13  years,  I remember that  even boats  that  are  anchored move  a
little;  otherwise  the  line  snaps.  So  I think we  could  move  a bit  and
not  be viewed  as  either  irresponsible  or  reckless  and  also  that  it
wouldn't turn  the  financial markets  on  their  ear.  In  fact,  it  seems
to  me  that  a modest  move--to me  25  basis  points  is  modest--would
offset  some  of  the  availability problems  that  I see  in the  credit
markets.  And  at  the  same  time  it  would make  it  easier  to  do  further
modest  moves  in the  future  as  we  see  the  need.  So  my  preference would
be  for  some  sort  of  a move  that  would  resemble  "A."

8/21/90

-44-

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  I don't  think  I have  asked specifically

for  support  in  a large  number  of meetings,  going  back a number  of
years.  I'm  not  saying that  people  should  violate what  they think  are
their principles.  I merely indicate  that  at  this  particular meeting
it's  important  for  us  to  have  as  large  a consensus  as  we  can  get.
Obviously,  I'm  not  asking  anyone  to  go  against  his  or  her  particular
view of  where  you would  like  policy to  be,  but  if you  can  find  your
way  clear,  this  is  the  type  of meeting  in which  it  would  be  helpful  if
we  had  a very  substantial  consensus.  Having  said  that,  I'd  like  to
request  the  Secretary  to  put  to  a vote  "B" with the  language
asymmetric  toward  ease.

MR.  BERNARD.  I have  a  question.  On the  asymmetry  toward

ease,  we  [now]  have  "slightly  greater  reserve  restraint  might  or
somewhat  lesser  reserve  restraint  would...."  Stay  with the  "would"?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Yes,  I'd  stay with  exactly what  we  had.

MR.  BERNARD.  "In  the  implementation of  policy  for  the

immediate  future,  the  Committee  seeks  to  maintain the  existing  degree
of pressure  on  reserve  positions.  Taking  account  of  progress  toward
price  stability,  the  strength  of  the  business  expansion,  the  behavior
of  the  monetary  aggregates,  and  developments  in  foreign  exchange  and
domestic  financial  markets,  slightly  greater  reserve  restraint  might
or  somewhat  lesser  reserve  restraint  would be  acceptable  in  the
intermeeting period.  The  contemplated  reserve  conditions  are  expected
to  be  consistent  with  growth  of  M2  and  M3  over the  period  from  June
through  September at  annual  rates  of about  4 and  2-1/2  percent
respectively.  The  Chairman may  call  for  Committee  consultation  if  it
appears  to  the  Manager  for  Domestic  Operations  that  reserve  conditions
during the  period  before  the  next  meeting are  likely  to  be  associated
with  a federal  funds  rate  persistently outside  a range  of  6 to  10
percent."

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Call  the  roll.

MR.  BERNARD.

Chairman Greenspan 
Vice  Chairman  Corrigan 
Governor  Angell 
President Boehne 
President Boykin 
President Hoskins 
Governor  Kelley 
Governor  LaWare 
Governor  Mullins 
Governor  Seger 

President  Stern 

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes,  with  careful  writing of
the  minutes.
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Thank you.  Our  next meeting  is  October

2nd.  Let's  break  for  lunch.

END  OF MEETING




==== GREENBOOK | 1990-08-21_FOMC19900907confcall.txt ====

Federal  Open Market  Committee

Conference  Call

September  7, 1990

PRESENT:  Mr.  Greenspan,  Chairman

Mr.  Corrigan,  Vice  Chairman
Mr.  Angell
Mr.  Boehne
Mr.  Boykin
Mr.  Kelley
Mr.  LaWare
Mr.  Mullins
Ms.  Seger
Mr.  Stern

Messrs.  Forrestal,  Keehn, and  Parry,  Alternate

Members  of the  Federal  Open Market  Committee

Messrs.  Guffey,  and Melzer,  Presidents  of  the
Federal  Reserve  Banks  of Kansas  City,
and  St.  Louis,  respectively

Mr.  Kohn,  Secretary  and  Economist
Mr.  Bernard,  Assistant  Secretary
Mr.  Gillum, Deputy Assistant  Secretary
Mr.  Mattingly,  General  Counsel
Mr.  Prell, Economist
Mr.  Truman, Economist

Messrs.  Lindsey,  Promisel,  Simpson,  and
Stockton,  Associate  Economists

Mr.  Sternlight,  Manager  for  Domestic  Operations,

System Open  Market  Account

Mr.  Cross,  Manager  for  Foreign  Operations,

System Open  Market Account

Mr.  Coyne,  Assistant  to  the  Board,  Board of

Governors

Mr.  Slifman, Associate  Director, Division  of

Research  and  Statistics,  Board  of Governors

Ms.  Low, Open  Market  Secretariat  Assistant,

Division of Monetary  Affairs,  Board of
Governors

Messrs.  Eisenmenger, Hendricks,  and  Monhollon,

First  Vice  Presidents,  Federal  Reserve  Banks
of Boston,  Cleveland,  and Richmond,
respectively

Transcript  of  Federal  Open Market  Committee  Conference  Call  of
September  7,  1990

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Good morning,  everyone.  This  telephone

conference  call  is  the  two-to-three-week  post-meeting  call  I had
promised.  In  view of the  crucial  nature  of the  data that  are
scheduled  to  come  out  today,  I thought  it  might  be  a very  useful  time
for  us  to  have  this  call.  I fully  recognize  that  this  is  creating  a
disruption  in  the  Atlanta meeting,  and  I hope we'll  be  able  to  keep
this  reasonably  short.  I'd  like  to  spend  a minute  on  what  I think the
employment  report--which  you may  or may  not  have  significant  detail
on--has  shown and  then  update  our  views  on  the  general  outlook.

As  I'm  sure  you're  all  aware,  the  employment  report  came  out

with  an  increase  in the  unemployment  rate  from 5.5  to  5.6  percent.
There  were  significant  upward  revisions  in  the  nonfarm payroll  report:
for  June  in the  amount  of  57,000  and  for  July in  the  amount  of
130,000.  Excluding Census  worker  changes,  July now  shows  an  increase
of  73,000  and August  45,000.  The  composition  in  this  relatively
stable  [picture],  however,  in  one  sense  is  weak  in  that  manufacturing
is  down  45,000  even though--for  reasons  I haven't  yet  figured  out--
overtime hours  went  up  a tick.  The best  news  from  our  point  of view
is  that  average  hourly  earnings,  which had  been  preliminarily
estimated  at  .5 in  June  and  .6 in  July now  read  .5 and  .4, with August
at  .2.  Nonetheless,  there  is  an  indication  of  a weakened third
quarter.  The  downward  revisions  that  appear to  be  the  case  in  the
production  worker  hours  for  July  and  August  suggest  probably  slightly
weaker  GNP  growth  than  indicated  in  the  Greenbook.

As  a consequence of  these  data,  we  are  preliminarily  looking

for  a  small  decline  in  industrial  production,  in  the  area  about  1/4  of
a percent.  Nonetheless,  there  is  no  evidence  of which  I'm  aware  that
suggests  that  the  economy  is  deteriorating  at  an  increased  pace.
Initial  claims  for  unemployment  insurance  are  not  showing  any  dramatic
changes.  And  even though  some  of the  press  reports  on  the  auto  sales
figures  for the  month  of August  were  very  negative,  from what  I can
see  the  data  don't  look  half  bad.  Autos  really are  quite  crucial  to
this  immediate  period  because,  to  the  extent  that  there is  a consumer
shock  from  the  oil  price  increase  and  to  the  extent  that  one  looks  at
the  confidence  indexes  and  sees  dramatic  changes,  one  probably  would
find  the  consequences  of that  in  big  ticket  durable  goods  items  in
consumer markets.  And  however  one  reads  those  auto  sales  figures,
they  clearly  don't  suggest  that  the market  is  fading  away at  a
particularly  rapid  pace.  As  a consequence of  all  of this,  I'm
inclined myself to  suggest  that  we  do  nothing  at  this  particular
stage.  But  I am  fully  cognizant  of the  fact  that  this  is  a very
crucial  period  and  a lot  of things  are  going  on,  many  of which  we  are
not  familiar with.  Rather  than merely  assert  a position,  I frankly
would  be most  appreciative  if  I could  get  any updated  views  from the
members  of the  Committee  since  our  last  meeting.  I purposely  had  not
requested  staff  comments  because  it  would  impinge  on the  time  of the
Atlanta meeting.  But  if anyone wants  to  query  any  of  our  colleagues
here,  please do  so.

MR. FORRESTAL.  Mr.  Chairman, this  is  Bob  Forrestal.  I would
just  report  that  since  the  last  meeting  of  the  Committee  I continue  to
hear  very  pessimistic views  from  our  directors  and  other  business
people.  I think to  a large  extent  they  are  reflecting  activities  in

9/7/90

their  own  particular  institutions  and  are  not  taking  a broader  view.
Nonetheless,  at  least  in  this  District,  there is  a clear  desire for
some  easing  of  policy.  I must  say that,  while  I have  not  had  an
opportunity to  look  at  these  employment  numbers  in  any  detail,  I would
slightly  favor  a move  at the  present  time,  as  I did  at  the meeting.
I'm not  sure  what  the  events  in the Middle East  are  producing  in terms
of GNP  and  inflation.  I don't  think  the  employment  numbers  will  pick
up  a lot  in  the  month  of August.  But  from  a psychological  viewpoint,
it  might  be  desirable to  move  the  funds  rate  down by  a 1/4  of  a point.
That's  my view,  based  on what  I'm hearing  in  this  District.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Okay.

MR.  KEEHN.  Mr.  Chairman,  this  is  Si  Keehn.  I would  agree

largely  with Bob  Forrestal.  In  our  District  there  are no  significant
changes  that  I would  report  since  the  last  meeting.  I agree with your
assessment,  particularly on  the  car  sales.  Having  said  that,  if you
look at  the  June,  July,  and August  numbers  for  total  sales  of  cars--
imports  and  domestic--there  is  something  of a decline,  though  not  a
precipitous decline.  It  seems  to  me  that  to  some  considerable  extent
the  market  has  discounted  a change,  particularly  on  the  short-term
side,  and  that  if we  don't  move  the  fed  funds  rate,  it  may  back up.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Could  I just  interpose?  I meant  to
mention  that  the  response  of the  market  to  the  [employment]  report
this  morning was  a decline  in  the  bond market  of  1/2  point  and  a
backing  up  of the  bill  rate  by  4 basis  points.  That  suggests  that  the
market was  expecting,  obviously,  a weaker  report  than this,  especially
in  the  context  of the  backward  revisions  to  the  data.  There may well
still  be  some  judgment  that  the market  is  expecting  us  to  ease,  but  I
think  it  is  clearly  less.  Don Kohn might  weigh  in  on  that  issue--or
Peter,  if he  is  available.

MR.  STERNLIGHT.  Peter  Sternlight,  Mr.  Chairman.  I think  you
had  it  just  right.  The  consensus  from the market,  as  we have  gathered
it  to  this  point,  is  that  they  see  a move  as  less  imminent  or  less
immediate,  though  it's  certainly  in  their  minds that  the  economy  is
weak  and  they wouldn't  rule  out  a move  in  a slightly  longer  horizon--
meaning weeks  or  months  rather  than  days,  I would  think.

MR.  BOEHNE.  In  the  Philadelphia District,  looking  at  it

strictly  from a District  point  of view, the  weakness  that  I reported
earlier  continues.  And  if  one were  making  policy based  just  on that
Mid-Atlantic  part  of  the country,  I think  there would  be  sentiment  for
some  easing  of  monetary  policy at  this  point.  That's  no  different
than  it  has  been  for  several weeks,  however.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Okay.

MR. PARRY.  Mr.  Chairman,  this  is  Bob Parry.  In  the  Twelfth

District,  there  really hasn't  been  any  significant  change  in  views
since the meeting.  There is  a lot  of  uncertainty,  primarily
associated with  developments  in  the Middle  East,  but  basically  I
wouldn't  say that  there  is  any substantive  change.  I would  also  say,
on  a national basis,  that  the  data  we've  seen  since  the  last  FOMC
meeting would  not  suggest  any  greater  need  to make  a change  than was
apparent  at  that  time.  And  I would  support  your  viewpoint  that  a
change  in  policy is  not  required  at  this  point.

9/7/90

MR.  BOYKIN.  Mr.  Chairman, this  is  Boykin.  We  really  have

not  observed  any  change  since  the  last  meeting that  shows  a  clear
direction  one  way  or  the  other.  I  also  would  be  supportive  of  the
position  that  you're  taking  of  just  standing by  and  not  doing anything
right  now.

VICE  CHAIRMAN  CORRIGAN.  This  is  Jerry Corrigan.  I  think

there  is  a  tremendous  amount  of  anxiety  out  there.  The  anxiety may  be
worse  in  some  ways  than the  reality,  but  it's  there.  There  is  a  lot
of  sentiment  in  the  markets  and  elsewhere  on  the  side  that  there  is  a
kind  of  window,  if  you want  to  put  it  that  way, where  policy might be
more  accommodative.  But  I  don't  see  that  the  window is  there  on  the
basis  of these  numbers  and the  other  numbers  we  have  seen  in  the  last
couple  of  weeks.  At  least  for  now, I  too  would  associate myself with
the  position  you've taken.

MR.  STERN.  This  is  Gary  Stern.  I  certainly agree  with where

you came  out,  Mr.  Chairman.  I would  only  add  that we  recently
surveyed  our  advisory  council  members  and  directors  and  that  survey
didn't  turn  up  anything  very  surprising.  That  is,  while  anxiety  has
clearly  increased  as  a  consequence  of  the  developments  in  the  Middle
East,  I  didn't  get  a  sense  reading  through  the  report  on  the  survey
responses  that  there  really  has  been  any  discernible  change  yet  in
economic  conditions,  at  least  in  our  part  of  the  country.

MR. GUFFEY.  Roger  Guffey, Mr.  Chairman.  I  don't  think there

is'anything  substantially  different  in  our  District  than what  was
reported on  before.  The  general tenor  in  the  Tenth  District  as  to  the
outlook  is  that  it's  fairly  promising.  I  also  would  agree  with your
position  of  no  change.  And we  shouldn't  overlook what  a  change might
portend  for  the  dollar,  which  is  weak  already.

MR. ANGELL.  Mr.  Chairman,  Wayne Angell.  I  agree  with your

assessment.  The  money  numbers  look better than  they  looked at  the
time  of  the  FOMC  meeting and  the  foreign  exchange value  of  the  dollar
looks  even  more  precarious  than  it  did  then.  Not  to  follow your
advice  and  to  make  an  easing move  at  this  point  really  could  [lead  to]
a  devastating  kind  of  market  reaction.  To  me  it  would be  unthinkable
to  make  that  move,  so  I  support  your  position.

MR. MELZER.  This  is  Tom Melzer.  I  would  support  where you
came  out  as  well.  And  I might  add  a  comment  on  what  the  markets  are
doing:  I  continue  to  think  that this  is  an  environment  where we  ought
to  be  sensitive  to  expectations  that  are  reflected  there.

I  have  a  couple  of  comments  based  on  a

is  in  the  housing  business  nationally

and  he  commented  that  the  housing  market  is  still  turning  down,  even
in  some  of  the  better markets.  He  happened  to  mention  Sacramento.
So,  things  in  better  markets  are  slowing down  as  well,  which  is  not
terribly surprising.  I  think the  issue  is  just  as  consumers  stay
frozen for  an  extended  period  of  time  [unintelligible]  confidence
bounces  back  up.  But  I  can  see  a  scenario  where  things  continue  about
where they  are  right  now  and  consumer  confidence  could  come  back.  A
comment  in  the  other  direction: 
industry--and  he  also  has  national  exposure--said  the  first  couple  of
weeks  of August  were  lousy  in  terms  of volume  but  the  second two  weeks

in  the  trucking

9/7/90

picked  up  dramatically,  and  actually  August  came  in  as  a very  good
month.  Some  of  it  could  be  military-related.

I agree  very  strongly  with staying  where we  are  right  now,

but  I would  not  be  at  all  surprised  if down  the  road  there  came  a time
when we  decided  to  move.  One  other thought  I would  share:  If  we're
concerned  about  anxieties  and  consumer  confidence  and  so  forth,  one
could make  the  case that  we  [might]  want  to  move  when there  is  a very
compelling  case  and we  can move  quite  dramatically.  I'm  not  sure  that
we  necessarily  are  in  an  environment  where we  should be  nibbling  away
at  the  edges.  We  don't have  all  that  much  room between  the  funds  rate
and  the  discount  rate  right  now.  Our  Bank doesn't  have  a
recommendation  in  for  a discount  rate  change,  as  you know,  but  I for
one  would  rather  think  in  terms  of  possibly  creating  some  room  fairly
early  in  this  process,  not  later  on.  In  other words,  if we  nibbled
away  at  the  edges  with  a couple  of  25  basis  point  moves  and  then had
only  50  basis  points  of  [spread  between  the  two  rates],  we  might be
forced  for  technical  reasons  to  cut  the  discount  rate  at  a time  when
we  really wouldn't  want to--sort  of  at  the  end  of  an  easing  as  opposed
to  the  beginning.  That's  just  a thought  for  future  reference.

MS.  SEGER.  This  is  Martha  Seger.  Even  though  I probably

have  a little  dimmer  view of  the  overall  economy  than the  average
view,  I still would  support  the  Chairman's  position  today to  do
nothing, mainly  because  I'd  like  to  break the  link  between  the  BLS
employment  report  and  our  actions.  I think  we have  made that  link  too
apparent  to the  markets.  So  even  though  I think,  as  Tom Melzer  said,
that  the  time will  come  in  the  not  too  distant  future that  we'll want
to  ease,  I would  rather not  do  it  on  the  day  of  the  release  of this
report.  Also,  I'd  like  to  make  a  significant  enough move  so  that  it
really has  an  impact.

MR.  KELLEY.  This  is  Mike Kelley.  I concur  with the

recommendation  for  all  the  reasons  that  have been  recited  and  would
add  just  one more.  And that  is,  that  the  budget  summit  is  reconvening
and  I'm  not  sure  that  a move  now would  be  construed  in  a context  we
would  like.  I think  there would  be  a linkage made  there,  and  not  a
good  one.

MR.  LAWARE.  This  is  John  LaWare.  I would  go  along  somewhat

reluctantly with the  recommendation.  I'm  not  persuaded  that  the
economy  is  really  so  very strong  as  the  indications  would  suggest.  I
rather  agree  with  Martha.  On  the  one  hand,  if we  wait  until we  get  a
clear  signal  of  what we  ought  to  do,  it  may  be too  late  to  really make
much  difference.  On the  other  hand,  I don't  have  a persuasive
argument  why we  should move  at  this  point.

MR. MULLINS.  This  is  David Mullins.  I agree  with  John

LaWare  generally in  sentiment.  I would  agree  that  this  is  not  an
attractive  window  in  which to  move, but  I don't  really  see  those
opportunities  becoming a lot  easier  as  the  oil  price numbers  start  to
work their way through  to  the  CPI.  I'm  also  a little  concerned  with
the  notion  that  we make  larger moves  because  I feel  there  is  an
advantage  in  gradualism and  stability;  and  if we  wait  too  long  and  the
situation does  deteriorate,  we will  be  in a  situation of making  larger
changes  in  policy,  which concerns  me.  But  I would  agree that  the
current  situation,  especially  the  reaction  of the  long-bond market,
does  not  appear to  suggest  a good  opportunity to  move.  I'm  a little

9/7/90

concerned  about  our  getting  trapped  in  a tautological  [unintelligible]
situation with  bond market  expectations--where  they  don't  expect  us  to
move  so  they  don't  move and  we  don't  move  because they  don't move.
So,  I think we  should  think  pretty carefully  and  look  for
opportunities  as  we move  on.  But  I would  support  the  Chairman's
position  at  this  time.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  I think  that  we  should  stand with  an

asymmetrical  directive toward  ease.  And  I view that  as  a position  in
which  if there  is  a clear  opening to  move  and  the  evidence  suggests
that  it  is  desirable,  that  we  do  so.  But  this  is  such  an
extraordinary  period  in which  the  particular moves  the  Committee makes
are  going to  be  crucial  for  a good  long  time,  so  I would  suggest  that
this  might  be  an intermeeting period  in  which we  should  have more
rather  than  fewer  telephone  conferences.  Obviously, we will  be
getting  data  next  Friday  on  retail  sales  for August,  which will  be  a
very  crucial  number. 
comes  out  I am  certain  will  be  revised  very  substantially.  I wish  I
knew which  direction that  would be.  It  will  also  be  interesting  to
see  the  PPI  that  emerges  as  well  as  the  initial  claims  data.  So,  I am
looking  at  what  are  some  very  clear  differences  of opinion  in  this
Committee.  And  I think  it  might  be  not  only  useful  but  appropriate
that  we meet  again,  perhaps  in  a week  or  so,  and  discuss  where we
stand.

The  problem  I have  is  that  whatever  number

MR.  PARRY.  This  is  Bob  Parry.  I wonder  if at  that  meeting

we  could  have  an  update  of the  forecast  by the  staff, because  in
addition to  looking  at  these  individual  statistics  it's  probably  even
more  important  that  we  make  the  policy move  on  how we  see the  future.
It  would be  very  interesting,  I think,  to  get  an  update  on  their
projections.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Mike, is  that  feasible?  Mike  Prell

shakes  his  head.

MR. PARRY.  In  which  direction?  [LAUGHTER]

MR. PRELL.  Up  and  down!

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  If  there  are  no  further  comments,  I'll

adjourn  the  session.  The  session  is  adjourned.

END  OF  SESSION




==== GREENBOOK | 1990-08-21_FOMC19900917confcall.txt ====

Federal  Open Market  Committee

Conference  Call

September  17,  1990

PRESENT:  Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

Greenspan,  Chairman
Corrigan,  Vice  Chairman
Angell
Boehne
Boykin
Hoskins
Kelley
LaWare
Mullins
Seger
Stern

Messrs.  Black,  Forrestal,  Keehn,  and  Parry,

Alternate Members  of the  Federal  Open Market
Committee

Messrs.  Guffey, Melzer,  and  Syron,  Presidents  of
the  Federal  Reserve Banks  of  Kansas  City,
St.  Louis,  and Boston,  respectively

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn,  Secretary  and Economist
Gillum, Deputy Assistant  Secretary
Mattingly,  General  Counsel
Prell,  Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs.  Lindsey,  Promisel,  Siegman,  Simpson,

and  Stockton, Associate  Economists

Mr.  Sternlight,  Manager  for  Domestic  Operations,

System  Open Market  Account

Mr.  Cross,  Manager  for  Foreign Operations,

System  Open Market  Account

Mr.  Coyne,  Assistant  to  the  Board,  Board  of

Governors

Mr.  Ettin,  Deputy  Director, Division  of Research

and  Statistics,  Board of  Governors

Mr.  Slifman,  Associate Director,  Division  of

Research  and  Statistics,  Board  of Governors

Ms.  Low,  Open  Market  Secretariat  Assistant,

Division  of Monetary Affairs,  Board  of
Governors

Transcript  of  Federal  Open Market  Committee  Conference Call  of
September  17,  1990

MR.  CROSS.  [Unintelligible].  Since  the  last  FOMC  meeting
the  dollar  has  slipped  about  6 to  7 percent  against  [the  yen].  The
market  continues  to  focus  on  the  weak  fundamentals  of  the  economy  and
the  implications  of that  are  lower U.S.  interest  rates  and  easier
monetary  policy.  Of  course,  the  United  States  already  has  the  lowest
short-term  rates,  I think,  of anyone  in  the  G-10;  and  the market  is
concentrating  on the  fact  that,  if  anything,  rates  are  likely  to  go
lower  here  and they may be  going  in  the  other  direction  in  some  of  the
other  countries.  During  the  Kuwait  crisis  the  dollar  hasn't  seen  as
much  of  an  upward  movement  from the  kind  of  safe  haven  consideration
that  might  have  been expected  from  earlier  situations.  In  fact,
[those  in the  trading]  rooms  around town tell  us  that  since  August  2
their  older traders  who  have  been  through  these  situations  before
haven't  done  as  well  as  the  younger  traders  who  haven't  had  that
experience.  So,  the  safe  haven  consideration has  not  given  as  much
upward  momentum as  the  old  hands  would  have  expected.  But  there  is
still  some  effect.  For  example,  last  Friday, when  it  looked  as  if
there was  going  to be  real  shooting with  real  bullets  and  on  similar
occasions  when the  situation has  become  that  serious,  the  dollar has
shown  some  upward  movement.  So  far,  though,  I think the  effect  has
been mainly  in helping  to  keep  the  dollar  from  sliding more.  And  it
does  give  people  pause  about  going too  short  against  the dollar.
There  has  been an  awful  lot  of  attention on  the  yen,  given  that
Japanese  interest  rates  have  risen  significantly  since  our  last
Committee meeting,  and  there  are  expectations  of,  if  anything,
possible  further increases--in  contrast to  the  situation here.  And  as
the  dollar/yen  rate  has  declined,  we think  there has  been some
increase  in  hedging  by  some  of the  Japanese  investors  through  currency
options  and  [unintelligible].  So  far  we  haven't  heard  of  a major
strategic  decision  for massive kinds  of hedging  or  currency  shifting.
But  there  is  the danger  that  if  the  dollar  continues  to  slip  we  could
get  a lot more  of  that  at  some  point.  So,  Mr.  Chairman,  we  sit  here
in a  rather precarious  position  in  which  the  dollar  in  trade weighted
terms  is  at  about  the  low point  that  we  hit  around  the  end  of  1987.
The  decline  thus  far has  not  been  disorderly or  frightening,  but  it
could move  in  that  direction very  suddenly.  That  completes my  report,
Mr.  Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Thank you.  Are there  questions  for  Mr.
Cross?  I assume,  Sam,  that you  have not  been  getting  any indications
from the  Treasury to  pull  out  the  intervention club?

MR. CROSS.  We  have  not  gotten  any  serious  indications.  They

have,  of  course,  become  more attentive  to  the  situation  as  the  dollar
has  continued to  slip.  But  there  has  not  been evidence  of that  desire
at  this  point.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Okay.  Peter  Sternlight,  could you

update  us  please?

MR.  STERNLIGHT.  Thank you, Mr.  Chairman.  We've  continued  to

aim for  reserve  conditions  consistent  with  a fed  funds  rate  around  8
percent.  Operations  have  been  conducted  against  the  background  of
market  expectations  of  a more  or  less  imminent monetary  policy  easing
move.  That  sense  of  imminence  seemed  to  reach  a high about  a week  ago

9/17/90

when  the  market  focused  very  intensely  on  the  employment  report  for
August.  Since  then, the  anticipation  of  an  immediate move  has  faded  a
bit,  but  there  are  still  expectations  of  a fairly  near-term move  as
the  economy  is  seen as  quite  soft,  though not  collapsing.  And  outside
of monetary policy,  there  are  expectations--related  to  the view that
an  agreement  on  a budget  deficit  reduction  package  is  close  to  being
reached--about  market  reaction to  any  such package.  Since the  August
meeting  short  rates  have  come  down  somewhat--about  15  to  20  basis
points  for  bills--while  longer-term rates  are  about  unchanged to
slightly higher  depending  on  one's  precise  starting  point.  That
leaves  the  long bond  yield  right  now  a shade  over  9 percent,  about
9.03  percent  when  I last  looked.  That's my  brief  summary, Mr.
Chairman.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Questions  for  Peter?  If not,  Mike

Prell,  would you update us  on the  more  relevant  economic  statistics  of
recent  weeks?

MR. PRELL.  Mr.  Chairman,  we've begun  to  get  some  information

on  developments  since  the  Iraqi  evasion  of Kuwait but  the  data  really
do  not  provide  a decisive  reading  on  even  the  current  quarter  let
alone where we  are  headed in  the  remainder  of  the  year  and  into  early
1991.  Read  literally, the  employment  report,  retail  sales  data,  and
other  economic  figures  that  have  come  in  would  appear to  us  to  be  on
track with  our  expectation  for  the  third  quarter.  At  this  point,
based  on  the data,  we  have no  reason  to  make  a significant  revision.
Looking toward  the  fourth  quarter,  given the  flow  of data,  there
probably would  be  little  reason to make  any  significant  change.  Our
forecast  had been  for  1/2  percent  GNP  growth;  in  essence, we were
saying there was  little more  than  a 50/50  bet  that we  would be  in
positive  territory.  I would have  to  say  that  the  anecdotal  evidence
coming  in  through the  reports  from banks  and  everything  else we  hear
has  been  quite  negative.  My  reading  would be  that  it  might  even be
somewhat more  negative  than we  thought  would be  coming  in,  given the
kind  of economic  environment  we  had  forecast.  So,  I'd  have to  say
that  if  we  were  to  write  down  a Greenbook  forecast  today, we'd
probably  be  more  in the vicinity  of  zero.  Whether we'll  be  in  plus  or
minus  territory in  the  fourth  quarter.  I think, at  this  point,  is
really  too  close  to  call.  But,  as  Peter  suggested, many private
analysts  may be  thinking it's  not  evident that  a significant
cumulative  collapse  is  in  process  at  this  point.  Indeed,  one  factor--
which  I would defer  to  Ted  Truman  to  discuss  further--as  we  look out
over  the  next  few  quarters,  is  the  decline  in  the  dollar.  While  it
may  have  some  additional  adverse  price  level  consequences,  it
certainly  seems  to  indicate that  there's  a greater  likelihood that  the
trade  sector  will  be  a source  of  some  buoyancy in  the  economy.  I
might  just turn  to Ted  to  see  whether  he  has  anything  he'd  like  to
add.

MR. TRUMAN.  You  said  it  fine.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Questions  for  Mike  or  for  Ted?  If  not,

Don  Kohn, would  you like  to  fill  us  in  on your  area?

MR. KOHN.  Mr.  Chairman,  the  aggregates  have  strengthened

about  as  projected  in  the  Bluebook;  in  fact,  they may be  just  a tick
stronger than we  were  projecting.  Given  a September projection  for  M2

9/17/90

of  a little  over  6 percent  and  for M3  of  around  4 percent,  for  June-
to-September we're  looking  at  5 percent  for  M2  compared  to  4 percent
in  the  Bluebook and  3-1/4  percent  for  M3  compared to  2-1/2  percent  in
the Bluebook.  Generally  speaking,  the  strength  has  been  in the  liquid
components  of  these  aggregates  including Ml,  which  is  several
percentage  points  stronger than we'd  expected,  and  in  money market
funds.  Core deposit  components  are  still  fairly  sluggish.  We  have
bank credit  data  for  August which  suggest  a pickup  to  around  10
percent,  but  a lot  of  that  pickup  is  in  reverse  RPs  and  securities
loans;  business  credit  remains  quite  sluggish.  Consumer  credit  has
picked  up  a little  but  that  reflects  a drop-off  in  securitizations;
otherwise,  it  remains  sluggish  as  well.  And  real  estate credit
appears  to  have  dropped  from the  8 to  12  percent  area  it  has  been  in
for  several  quarters  now to  around  five  percent  in  August.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Questions  for  Don?  If  not,  I'd  like  to

ask  among  the  Board members  and  the  Presidents  whether  they  have  a
sense of  change  in  their views  since  our  last  telephone  meeting.

MR. BOEHNE.  This  is  Ed  Boehne,  Mr.  Chairman.  I have

observed  a clear  and  significant change  toward the  weak side  in  this
District  in  the  last  several weeks.  And  I think  that  economic
activity  across  the  board  has  slowed  both in  August  and  in  the  first
part  of  September.  Our manufacturers  report  a continuing decline  in
business;  in  fact,  we  have not  seen  as  sharp  a decline  since  the
recession  of the  early  '80s.  Retailers  generally  indicate  that  sales
have  fallen  from  the prior  month, and  that  is  continuing  into
September.  Bankers  report  an  overall  decline  in  lending  activity.  I
would  say  that  a recession mentality  has  taken  hold,  and  I think  it's
not  limited  just  to  this District.  Business  sentiment  is  in the
process  of thinking  pretty much  on  a wide  basis  that  we're  headed
toward  a recession  and  I think  that  is  also  the  consumer mentality.

As  I look  at  the  national  economy,  my sense  is  that  economic

growth is  essentially  at  a standstill  based on  the  employment,
production,  and  sales  data,  and that  negative  growth  is  the  likely
outcome  for  the  fourth  quarter.  And  I think  if we  wait  to  ease until
a  recession is  upon  us,  we  have waited  too  long.  I think it's
important  to be  somewhat  anticipatory  if we're  going to  stay  ahead  of
the  recessionary curve.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Ed,  is  it  your  impression  that  if we

were  to  ease we'd  bring long-term  rates  down?

MR. BOEHNE.  If we  did  ease,  I think  it  would  be very

important  for us  to  be up  front  and  quite  clear that  we  are  easing
because we  are  trying to  offset  some  [slack]  in the  economy  rather
than  to  try to  find  some  other  reasons  for  doing it.  If we  did that,
I think  we would  have  a reasonable chance  of at  least  keeping  long-
term  rates  from falling  or  falling  very  much.  That's  a risk, but  I
think we  minimize  the  risk by  saying that  we  are  easing because  of the
softening in the  economy.  The  recessionary mentality  is  moving
rapidly  in  business  thinking  and an  easing  on  our  part  would  seem  to
be  a very  reasonable  expectation.

MR.  SYRON.  Ed,  Dick Syron.  May  I ask  a question?

MR.  BOEHNE.  Yes.

9/17/90

MR.  SYRON.  I agree  with your  analysis  about where  the

economy  is.  Certainly,  in  the  First  District  our  sentiment  is
comparable  to  that  in  the  1973  recession  in  terms  of people's
expectations.  I agree  with your  view of  what's  going to  happen  in  the
fourth  quarter,  and  I think a move in  the  easing  direction  [is
appropriate.]  But  I am wondering  about  the  timing.  If we  were  to
take  the  course  that  you mentioned, which  is  to  explain  that  we're
easing--even before  a budget  accord  has  been  reached  and  with  the
uncertainties  in  the Middle  East--because  the  economy  is  so  soft,  how
much weight  would you  give  to  the  chance  that  people  would  expect
further  easing because  they would  be  saying:  "Gee,  the  Fed  has  gone
ahead  and  eased,  when they  clearly  didn't want  to,  preferring  to  wait
for  a budget  accord.  They  must  think things  are  awfully  bad."

MR. BOEHNE.  Well,  I don't  think  it  makes  a lot  of  difference

whether  we  ease  today  or  tomorrow or  the  next  day.  Personally,  I'm
growing  increasingly  uncomfortable with the  continuation  of  a no-
change  policy.  If  we  think that  there's  going to  be  a significant
budget  announcement  in  the  next  couple  of  days  and  we  could  [wait],  I
don't  have  a problem with that.  But  I think we  can  get  ourselves
paralyzed waiting  for  the  next  development  to  occur  to  provide  a more
favorable  environment  to  ease.  And  then  we  could  find  out  we're
staring  a recession  right  in  the  face  and  we  would have  to  ease  fairly
dramatically.  I think  it  looks  as  though  we're more  in  control  of  the
situation  if we  ease  the  same  way we  tightened:  that  is,  to  take  a
series  of  steps  when  the  timing  seems  right,  being  somewhat
anticipatory about  it.

MR. PARRY.  Mr.  Chairman,  this  is  Bob  Parry.  One  question  I

have--perhaps  this  should be  directed  to  Don--is:  If we  were  to  ease
very modestly,  what  would be  the  expectation  of  the  effects  on  nominal
growth in  '91  if we wanted  it  focused  on  [unintelligible].  What might
happen  to  nominal  growth  if we  kept  the  interest  rate  constant?  That
probably  would  result  in  nominal  growth being higher  as  a  result  of
the  oil  shock,  and  the  Board  staff's  expectation was  that  nominal
growth would remain  unchanged.  If  interest  rates  go  down,  it  seems  to
me we  are  probably talking  about  higher  nominal  growth, which  is  going
to  result  primarily in  higher  inflation.  I wonder  what  Don's  view is
on  this.

MR. KOHN.  I think  I'll  defer to  Mike who  makes the  GNP

projections.

MR.  PRELL.  Well,  I think the  direction  should  be  reasonably

predictable:  that  if we take  a more  expansive approach  by  pushing
rates  lower  at  this  point  than  they  otherwise would have  been,  we
would have  somewhat  higher  nominal  GNP  growth next  year.  Our  reading
of history  suggests  that  in  the  short  run  that  probably  is  going  to
have  more  effect  on the  real  side  than on  the  price  side.  But  I
should  underscore  that  a movement  of  a fraction  of  a percentage  point
isn't  likely to  have  a dramatic  effect  in  any  event  in  1991.

MR. BLACK.  Mr.  Chairman, Bob  Black.  To  get  the  other  side

on  the  floor,  let  me  just  say  that  in  looking  at  the  national  figures
the  sense  of  our  directors  is  that the  economy  is  going to  continue at
a pretty  slow pace  but  we  don't  really  [expect  it  to]  turn  down  now
[unintelligible].  And  I think this  may be  a very  crucial  point  in
policy where we  have  to take  a little  less  in the  short  run  in  the

9/17/90

interest  of  our  long-run  objective  of bringing  inflation  down.  So,  I
would  urge  that  we not  move  just  yet.  It  may  be that  we'll  need  to
move  soon,  but  I  don't  seen  the  evidence  quite  yet  that  suggests we
ought  to  move.  My  answer  to  the  question  you asked  Ed  a  while  ago  is
that  an  easing move would  raise  long-term interest  rates.  And  I  think
that  could  be  very  counterproductive  for  the  economy.

MR.  GUFFEY.  Mr.  Chairman, Roger  Guffey.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Yes,  Roger.

MR. GUFFEY.  [Unintelligible]  the District  economy will  show

relatively  [unintelligible],  albeit  slow.  Agriculture  is  the  bright
part,  though it  is  still  uncertain because  of conditions  in  the  Middle
East.  On the  question  that  you  asked  Ed  Boehne,  I  line  up  about  right
in  the  center  of  that.  It's  quite  clear  to  me,  given the weakness  in
the  dollar  and  the  uncertainty  about  the  Middle  East  and  the budget
accord,  that  one  simply would  push  long-term  interest  rates  higher--
and  perhaps  even much higher--and  the  dollar  lower.  I  don't  think
this  is  the  time  to  take  that  kind  of  action.

MR.  HOSKINS.  This  is  Lee Hoskins,  I  am here  now.

VICE  CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.  Mr.  Chairman,  Jerry  Corrigan up  in

New  York.  Let  me make  several  comments.  First  of  all,  this  dollar
question  is  becoming  a  matter  of  increasing concern  to  me.  I  think
the  dollar  question  itself  has  been  joined  with  a  lot  of  the  banking
issues  and  questions,  especially  abroad.  I  mentioned to  you, Alan,  on
Friday,  that  last  Tuesday  I  had  an  occasion  to  visit  with

banks  in  London.  And  one  of  the  major  themes  of

our  conversation--which  gets  back  to  something  Sam mentioned  earlier--
was  that we  have  this  rather  unusual  phenomenon  of  the  dollar being  on
the  weak  side  in the midst  of  an  international  crisis.  One  of  the
things  he  said  in  very  unmistakable  terms was  that  large  flows  of
funds  into U.S.  institutions  and  U.S.  dollars,  which they themselves
would  ordinarily expect,  were  not  there.  Funds  were  finding  their way
into  British  and  other  institutions  and  into  non-dollar  instruments,
not  only because  of  the  uncertain macroeconomic  situation in  the
United  States  but  also  because  of  the  elevated  concerns  and
perceptions  in  Europe  about  the  banking  situation in  the  United
States.  And  I  think that  reinforces  macroeconomic  considerations.  In
those  circumstances,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  dollar  presents  another
risk beyond  the  one  just  [mentioned]  on  price  level  effects  and  that
is,  though we  still  have  this big  financing  need,  any  significant
further  weakness  of  the  dollar  itself  runs  the  risk  of  cutting  the
wrong  way in  terms  of  how  it  plays  out  in  long-term  interest  rates
here  in  the  United  States.  I  should  also  say  that  impressionistically
and  otherwise,  I  think  that this  credit  contraction  process  has  yet  to
run  its  course.  For  example,  I  know that  some  of the major banking
institutions  are  going  to  be  in  an  asset  contraction  [mode]  for  the
foreseeable  future,  in  part  because  of  supervisory  policies  and
initiatives  but  also  because  these  institutions  are  distinctly  on  the
side  of  being  gun  shy.  But  beyond  that,  I  have  had  further  anecdotal
evidence that  suggests that  asset  contraction  by  important  regional
institutions  is  having  the  effect  of  rationing  out  some  who  are
perceived to  be  creditworthy borrowers--and  in  some  cases  creditworthy
borrowers  not  associated with  the  real  estate  business.  So,  I  think

9/17/90

that  is  still  at  work,  though  it's  very, very  difficult  for  us  to
quantify  it  in  any  sense.

Insofar  as  the  economy itself  is  concerned,  I would agree

with  the  judgment  that  several have  made that we  don't,  at  this
precise  point  in time,  see  evidence  of a cumulating  process  of
downward  pressure.  But,  I must  say,  given  the  sourness  of  business
and  consumer  attitudes,  that  I don't  think it  will  take  a heck of  a
lot  to  give  us  the message.  Having  said  all  of  that,  and  having
debated mightily with myself  and my colleagues,  my  own  view  of policy
at  the  moment  is  that  we  ought  to  try  to  sit  tight  here  a bit  longer
in  the  hope  that we  do  get  something  rather  promptly  in  the  budget
area  that  is  at  least  reasonably  credible to  the  marketplace.  In
those  circumstances,  the  dollar  situation would  tend to  be  a bit
better,  depending  upon  the  [actual  budget]  package.  As  things  stand
right  now,  I think the  likelihood  is  that we  should ease  at  least  a
step  further, but  I'd  rather  sit  it  out  here  a bit  longer in the  hope
that  we  can  do  that  in  the  context  of something  of  a positive nature
in  the  budget  process.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Any  further  comments?

MR. BOYKIN.  This  is  Boykin,  Mr.  Chairman.  Looking  at  the

District,  I would  say  that  we're  certainly quite  [unintelligible].  To
some  extent  the  oil  situation  is  a bit  of a  positive,  but  it's  still
too  soon to  get  very much  of  a  reading  on that.  In  my  mind,  the
external aspects  of what  policy  should be  tend  to  override the
domestic  concerns  at  the  moment.  As  Jerry  Corrigan  and  others  have
said,  I think  it's  going  to  rest  pretty  heavily  on  what,  if anything,
comes  out  of this  budget  effort.  So  I would  be  a little hesitant  to
move  right  away.

MR.  PARRY.  Mr.  Chairman,  this  is  Bob  Parry.  We've  seen  some

signs  of  weak economic  activity  in  recent  weeks;  we  recently had  a
breakfast  meeting where  that was  communicated.  But  at  this  point  I'd
like  to  be  associated with  Bob  Black, Roger  Guffey,  and  others  who
suggest  that  perhaps  we  ought  to  not  take  this  step  to  ease  at  the
present  time.

MR.  STERN.  Mr.  Chairman,  this  is  Gary  Stern.  In  terms  of

the  domestic measures  of the  economy,  I'd  say  things  are  still  moving
along  rather well  in  our  District,  all  things  considered.  Having  said
that,  there  is  no  doubt  that there  has  been  some  deterioration  in
attitudes  and  certainly  concerns  about  the  outlook;  the  level  of
anxiety  is  up  appreciably.  How and  when that  actually  will  affect
economic  activity  remains  to  be  seen.  The  only  other  thing  I would
add  is  that  I'm  concerned,  even without the  energy  price  issue,  that
we haven't  been  looking  at  very  good  inflation numbers  for  some  time
it  seems  to  me.  And we  now also  have  some  acceleration  in  money
growth.  So,  I'm  reluctant  to  be  in a  rush to  ease  policy  in these
circumstances.

MR. HOSKINS.  Mr.  Chairman,  this  is  Lee  Hoskins.  I'd  like  to

associate myself with  Gary  Stern's  comments.  I think it  would be
premature  to move  at  this  point,  particularly with the  aggregates
coming back  roughly to  trend.  I think  we  ought  to  stay  where we  are.

9/17/90

MR.  KEEHN.  Mr.  Chairman,  this  is  Si  Keehn.  I can't  report
anything  in  the  way  of  a change  over  the  last  couple  of  weeks,  since
our  last  phone  call.  But  I do  think  that the  attitudes  are  becoming
increasingly  cautious  out  there--really  even  pessimistic.  My  hunch  is
that  the numbers  on  growth  in  the  Midwest  are  still  a bit  stronger
than  the  national  numbers.  Clearly, we  are  at  what  I think is  a very
moderate  [pace]  and  [the  risks]  are  very much  on  the  down  side.  It's
getting  awfully  close  here.  While  I was  disappointed by  what the
30-year  rates  did,  I think there's  enough  anticipation  in  the  market
that  we  will  ease  that  I'd  be  in  Ed  Boehne's  camp--that  we're  moving
close  enough  [to  recession]  that  we  ought  to  use  a near-term outlook
for  policy.

MR.  FORRESTAL.  Mr.  Chairman,  as  you  heard  on  Friday,  the

economy  in  the  Sixth District  would  be  characterized  as  quite  weak.
There  is  definitely  recession mentality  among business  people  and
consumers.  However,  I do  not  think  that we  have  seen  any
deterioration;  the  report  that  you heard  on  Friday  from our  directors
suggested,  if  anything,  a slightly more positive  attitude  and  slightly
better  numbers  than  I had  heard  two  weeks before.  In  general,  I
continue to  think  that  we  need  to  ease  policy  and  I had  been  in  favor
of making  the move two  weeks  ago.  However,  in  light  of what  has  been
happening  on  the  budget  side,  perhaps  it  might  be  better to  wait  just
a bit  to  see what  happens  on  that  score.  And,  of course,  we  do  have
the  problem with the  dollar  to  consider  as  well.

MR. MELZER.  This  is  Tom Melzer.  I guess  I better  speak  so

you  know  I'm here!  In  our  board meeting  last  Thursday,  I picked  up  a
tone  similar  to  that  cited  by  Gary:  People would  comment  that  they
felt  very  negative  and yet  the  information  that  they were  looking  at
hadn't  really changed  that  much.  Right  now,  the  facts  perhaps  don't
confirm  the  kind  of pessimism that  is  out  there  and  that  is  whipped up
to  some  extent  by  the  press.  I don't  think this  is  the  time to  move;
so,  that's  where  I stand.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Mr.  Mullins.

MR. MULLINS.  This  is  David  Mullins.  As  the numbers  come  in

on  the  national  economy, my  sense  is  that  the  economy continues  to
sink  slowly  and  is  not  [about  to]  fall  off  the  table.  In  the
employment  reports  there was  a down-tick  in  aggregate  hours  worked.
My  view was  that  retail  sales  were  pretty  weak,  even though  they were
down  only  .6 in  August;  without  gas  station  sales,  they  were  down  1.1
percent.  Industrial  production  continued to  ease;  capital  utilization
ticked  down another  notch.  On the  other  hand,  the  PPI  numbers  even
without  the  food  and  energy  components  were  not  especially
encouraging,  even  though there  were  some  encouraging  labor  cost
numbers  in the  employment  reports.  In  terms  of  the  aggregates,  it  is
true  that money  market  funds  and  currency  have  picked  up,  but  as  Don
mentioned, the  [core]  components  continue  to  be weak  and  credit  growth
also  continues  to  be  sluggish.  Another  point,  which  some  people
mentioned  at  the  last meeting,  is  that  our  financial  institutions
appear not  to  be  in  very  good  shape.  I do  think there's  some danger
in  pinning  our  hopes  to  a budget  accord.  I'm not  very optimistic  that
we'll  get  a very  impressive  deal  and  I'd  hate  to  be  put  in  a position
of  trying  to  validate  a weak  deal,  at  least  in the  eyes  of the  market.

9/17/90

I would  agree  that  there's  a  significant  chance  that  if we

did  ease  marginally,  long-term rates  would  react  adversely and  move  up
somewhat.  That's  almost  inescapable  in  the  current  environment  and  I
don't  know  if  it  will  be  any better  later  on.  My  feeling  is  that  with
the  economy  this  weak  and  the  [core]  components  of  the  aggregates  and
credit  growth also  weak, there  is  not  a real  substantive danger  in
being perceived  as  giving  up  on  inflation.  But  there  will  be
doubters.  I guess  my  view is  that  it  wouldn't  be  such  a bad  idea  to
get  the  market  used to  somewhat  more movement  in  the  fed  funds  rate
and  try  to  avoid  the  need  for  much larger  changes  later  on.  I would
agree with  President  Corrigan  and  others  that the  dollar  puts  us  in  a
more  difficult  situation  now, and  I would  not  oppose  sitting  tight.
However,  I continue to  fear  that  as  we  move  from  a third  quarter  which
I tend  to  think will  be  pretty weak into  a fourth  quarter  which will
be  even  weaker  and  as  the  inflation in  the  energy  numbers  starts
working  its  way  through the  CPI--and  if  a weak budget  accord  comes
out--we may  find  ourselves  in  a more  difficult  situation  later  on.

MR. ANGELL.  It  seems  to  me that  this  slowdown  is  not

primarily a typical  end-of-period  monetary induced  event.  That  is,
it's  a  rather  unusual  event,  given that  we  are  15  months  into  a period
of  the  Federal  Reserve  bringing  short-term rates  down.  Now, I think
that  means  that  we  probably  don't  have  as  much monetary  ability to
maneuver  since  it's  not  a monetary-induced  event.  And  given what
Jerry  Corrigan  said  about  the  exchange  value  of the  dollar  and what
others  have  said  about  long-term  interest  rates,  a move  that  shows  a
lack of  Fed  credibility  on  the  price  level  objective  simply will  cause
the  rate  of  interest  that  the  money market  will  insist  on  to be  higher
over  the  period  ahead  than  we wish  it  to  be.  So,  ironically,  in  order
to  have  rates  be  lower we  must  not  make  the  move  until  we  get  a
climate  for  the  dollar  and  a  climate for  inflation that  is  better  than
what  we  see  at  the  present  time.

MR.  KELLEY.  This  is  Mike  Kelley.  As  I try to  think through

the  risks  and  [unintelligible]  characteristics  of  an  easing  here,  I
imagine  that  we  probably  could  buy  some  insurance  for  the  first  and
second  quarters  of  1991.  How much  of  that  would  play  through to  real
GNP  and  how much to  inflation,  I'm not  sure.  On  the  other  hand,  on
the  cost  side  it  seems  to  me  quite  likely  that we  would  have  a further
substantial  drop  in  the  dollar,  which  could  be  a problem for  a long
time  to  come.  And  possibly we  run the  risk  of  a surge  in the  core
inflation  rate  here  that we  probably don't  have  presently.  I
emphasize  core  rate  of  inflation.  It  also  seems  to  me  likely that  we
would  get  a rise  in  long  rates,  which might  well  offset  much  of the
benefit  that  we would  hope  to  achieve  from  an  easing  of  short  rates.
On  balance,  the  reward  that  we might  get  from an  easing  seems  rather
ephemeral whereas  the  costs  seem  quite  substantial  and  long-running.
So,  I would  favor  hanging tight  for now.

MR.  LAWARE.  This  is  John  LaWare.  I'd  like  to  identify  very

closely  with  Jerry  Corrigan's  remarks.  As  you well  know from  repeated
speeches,  I am more  concerned  about  the  risks  of  a recessionary
environment  and  believe  that the  effects  could  be  very  serious  and
deep  and  long-lasting.  On the  other  hand,  if  I thought  that  ease  at
this  point would  put  the  dollar  into  a free-fall  from  its  present
level,  I would  be  very  concerned  that  we  might be  abdicating  real
control  over  the  situation  in  the  future  because  the  financing  of  a
lot  of  our  deficit would  be  forced  back into  our  domestic  market  and

9/17/90

we'd  have  no  choice  perhaps  but  to  flood  the market  with money  in
order  to  keep  interest  rates  down.  I am  persuaded,  however,  that  much
of  the tendency toward  lower  rates  already has  been  discounted  in  the
dollar.  I really  don't  see  it  going  into a  free-fall,  and  I believe
that  there  is  a  significant danger  in  waiting too  long  to  move  toward
ease.  So,  I guess  at  this  point  for  the  first  time  I really would  be
on  the  side  of making  a modest move.

MS.  SEGER.  I'll  bring up  the  rear  and vote  with John LaWare

and  Ed  Boehne,  probably because  in the  last  week  I met  with  some  of  Ed
Boehne's  bankers  from Pennsylvania along with  a lot  of  other  people.
I feel  that  the negativism  is  getting  to  be  a very big  problem in  and
of  itself;  the  [negative]  talk is  just tremendous  out  there.  In  New
York  I talked with  some brokers,  and  they  are  seeing many  of their
customers  pulling  funds  out  of  equities  in the  stock market  and  going
into  money  market  funds.  So,  this  is  not  money that's  going  to  be
supporting  some  big  spending  spree;  it's  money  that  people  are  scared
about--they  are  escaping to  something  that's  perhaps  safer.  So  the
money  market  funds  are  a parking  lot;  therefore,  I don't  view this
increase  in  the  monetary  aggregates  as  a sign  of  strengthening but
rather  just  the  opposite.  Also,  there  is  tremendous  concern  about  the
overall  health  of the  financial  system,  not  just  S&Ls  but  banks  as
well.  I had two  days  of meetings  with  small  business  people  in
Chicago  and heard  again the  very negative feelings.  Many  of the
business  people  feel  that  they  are  in  a recession  at  the moment:  it's
not  a forecast,  it's  a fact  for  them  individually.  And  frankly,  I
think they  need  some  encouragement.  Also,  there's  more  and  more talk
about  the  spreading  credit  crunch.  And  it  is  no  longer  just  from
bankers  who  are  complaining  about  being  roughed up  by  the  regulators
and  particularly  by the  examiners.  I think that  the  credit  crunch
actually is  getting worse  and  that,  as  Jerry  Corrigan  said,  we
probably have  not  seen  the  end  of  it.

Finally,  in  connection  with the  budget  negotiations,  I think
we're  really inviting trouble  to  tie  our  policy moves  to what  Congress
does  or  does  not  do,  because by  delaying we  will  either  produce  a
recession  or,  if we're  heading  into  one  anyway  as  some  people  argue,
we'll  just  make  it  worse.  Whichever  way  it  is,  we're  going  to
sabotage  the  efforts  of those  budget  negotiations  because  a recession
itself is  going  to make  those  numbers  worse  regardless  of what  kind  of
deal they  strike.  I personally don't  feel  comfortable  arguing that
the  existence  of the  negotiations  is  a reason to  delay  a decision.
So,  as  I said,  I would  support  John LaWare's  position  that  we  don't
have  a lot  to  gain  by  delaying and  that  we  should be  easing.  I think
much  of  a modest  easing is  already  discounted in  the foreign  exchange
markets  and that  that's  one  of the  reasons  we  have  seen the  dollar
decline  in the  last  month  or  so.  That  would be  my position.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Okay.  This  has  been  very  useful.  Does

anybody  have  any  closing comments  before we  adjourn?  If  not,  this
session  is  adjourned.

END OF  SESSION




==== GREENBOOK | 1990-08-21_fomc19900821gbpt119900815.txt ====

Prefatory Note 

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 

available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain. 

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 

gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.    

1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Strictly Confidential  (FR)  Class II FOMC

August  15,  1990

SUMMARY  AND  OUTLOOK

Prepared  for the  Federal  Open  Market Committee
By  the staff of  the  Board  of Governors  of the  Federal  Reserve System

DOMESTIC  NONFINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS

Recent  Developments

Incoming information suggests  that  economic  activity around the middle

of  the year  was  expanding at  a pace  little  different  from the  1-1/2  percent

rate  reported  for the  first  half of the  year.  Underlying trends  in

inflation  also were about  unchanged:  Although consumer price  inflation

slowed in the  second quarter, the CPI  was  still  running  4-3/4 percent  above

year-earlier levels.  Despite  a noticeable  softening in  labor demand this

spring, labor  costs  showed no  sign of  decelerating.

Virtually all  of  the current  indicators of production and spending

relate to conditions before the  jump in  crude  oil  prices.  The labor market

reports  for  July  indicated a small decline  in nonfarm  jobs  (abstracting from

Census terminations)  and a rise  in unemployment.  Construction  jobs

continued to  contract,  manufacturing employment  edged down  a bit  further,

and hiring elsewhere was  slow.  Nonetheless, the  index of aggregate hours

worked by production or  nonsupervisory workers  in July was 1-1/2  percent

above the  second-quarter average  (at an annual  rate).  In  addition, weekly

unemployment  insurance  claims  through the end  of  the month continued to

hover around the 350,000 mark, suggesting no  acceleration in  layoffs.

Industrial production for  July is  estimated to have  been unchanged.

Production of  final business  and  consumer goods  (other than motor vehicles)

changed  little while  output  of  construction supplies  declined.  Motor

vehicle  assemblies  also dropped  back a bit  in July, but  they  are  scheduled

to move noticeably higher  again by September.  The weakness  in  the products

I-2

area  in July, however, was  offset by some  further gains  in  production of

materials,  particularly metals.

On the spending  side,  the most  significant  information was  the July

report  on retail  sales.  Although retail  sales  in July were  about  flat,

consumer spending on nonauto goods now is  estimated to have been

significantly stronger  in May and June  than previously reported.  These

changes  likely will  lead to a sizable  upward revision  of  real  PCE in the

second quarter.  Moreover, we  interpret  the  June  data on manufacturing and

trade  stocks  in  current-cost terms  to indicate that the  estimated buildup  in

inventories during the  second quarter may have  been  substantially overstated

in the  national  income  accounts.  This  information, in conjunction with the

upward revision to  retail sales,  implies that  most businesses  did not  face

serious  stock imbalances  at midyear;  such  imbalances might have  exacerbated

adjustments to  a slowdown in  sales  resulting from the oil price increase.

Elsewhere, the  news  has  been mixed, but the  implications  for our projection

are  relatively minor:  Housing  starts, as expected, remained weak in June,

spending  for nonresidential construction showed a surprising uptick, but

orders  for nondefense capital goods were  slightly more  sluggish than we  had

anticipated.

On balance, the  staff's assessment  is  that, absent  developments in  oil

markets, growth in real  GNP  over the  second half of  1990 would have been

close to the  1-1/2  percent  annual  rate  projected in the  June  Greenbook.

Oil  Prices

The outlook  for  inflation and real  activity, however, was  altered

significantly by recent  developments in oil markets.  Prices for  crude

petroleum began to move  up  in mid-July when key OPEC members  appeared

I-3

willing to  agree to  rein in production;  later  in the month they did reach  an

accord  on  production  for  the  second  half  of  the  year.  The  current  Greenbook

forecast is based on an  assumed pattern of petroleum prices in which the

spot  price  of  West  Texas  Intermediate remains  close to the  recent  average of

about  $26.50 per barrel  over the balance of  1990.  This price  translates

into an average import  price  of $25  per barrel, which is  shown in the  chart.

This path for petroleum prices  envisions  a full  cutoff of the  4.3 million

barrels  per  day  of  exports  from  Iraq  and  Kuwait  for  the  balance  of  this  year

and an expansion of  output of  2.3 million barrels per day by other

producers. 1

Prices of Imported  Petroleum  and  Products
(Import Unit Value;  Balance of Payments  Basis)

Quarterly Average

Dollars per barrel

30

25

August oreenbook

.June 

Greenbook
S- 

I 

I 
1990 

I 

I 

I 
1991 

I 

I 

I 

i 
1992

- 20

15

10

In  the  first  half  of  next  year,  the  forecast  assumes  a  resolution  of

the  conflict  in  the  Middle  East  that,  by  mid-1991,  would  allow  total  OPEC

1. The  assumed expansion of output  includes  1.5 million barrels per day

from Saudi Arabia, 0.4 million for Venezuela, and 0.2 million each  from
Nigeria and the United Arab Emirates.

I-4

production to return to  the  rate  targeted in the  July OPEC accord.  As  a

result,  prices  are  assumed to  decline nearly  $5 per  barrel  over that  period.

After mid-1991, these  developments would leave the  rate  of world production

about  3/4 million barrels  per  day below the  rate  assumed in the  June

Greenbook;  that  shortfall would add roughly  $3 per barrel  to the path for

oil prices  compared with our  June  assumptions.  In  light  of the  considerable

political uncertainties, we  view this pattern, and the  associated output  and

inflation projections, as  only one of many reasonable  scenarios.  For

contrast, after  summarizing the Greenbook  forecast, we  present below a

scenario in which the  spot  price of West  Texas  Intermediate  remains at

$26.50  through the end of  1992.

As  outlined above,  the staff  is  assuming that most of the  recent  jump

in petroleum prices  is  transitory.  Consequently, the  principal economic

effects  are likely  to be a rise  in consumer  price  inflation and the

resulting reduction in real  income  growth.  Higher costs  of crude oil

typically are passed through quickly into  prices of domestically  consumed

petroleum products, within a month or  so.  The indirect  effects of the  oil

price  shock  on prices of goods  and services that use  energy as an input and

on prices of  competing energy products  as well as  on wages appear with some

lag;  these factors would contribute to  a larger and more  persistent effect

on inflation if the  jump  in oil  prices were to be  sustained.

Because the United States  is  a net  importer  of crude oil,  higher prices

of  crude act  like  an excise  tax in  reducing demand.  Domestic  purchasing

power  is  depressed, and household  spending is  restrained.  The  eventual

slowing in domestic  production is  associated not  only  with lower  consumer

I-5

spending but  also with  the accelerator  effects on business  spending, and the

size of these  latter effects depends on whether  the price  hike  is  lasting.

Policy  and Other Assumptions

The projection  assumes that  interest rates  remain near  current  levels

through the  forecast period.  This assumption is  consistent  with  both

somewhat higher  inflation and somewhat  weaker real  activity  in the  near  term

than in the last  forecast,  in  light  of the less  favorable  outcomes  for

inflation, output,  or both as  a consequence of the oil  price  shock.  Over

the next  few quarters,  we  continue to  assume that  tighter  lending terms and

a reduction in credit  availability to  some businesses  act  to restrain

aggregate demand.  Indeed, the economic  uncertainty created by the oil  price

shock may  induce  even more cautious behavior by  lenders.  Despite the  more

adverse price  developments  in the next  few quarters,  the assumed policy  is

consistent  with longer-run progress  in bringing down inflation, given the

degree  of  slack that  emerges by early 1991  and is  sustained through the

forecast period.

Growth of M2  is  expected to  remain in  the lower half  of its  annual

range  over the  rest  of this year,  and M3  is  projected to grow  just  above  the

lower limit  of  its  annual  range.  After this year, both aggregates,

particularly M3,  will  continue to be  depressed by  developments that  are

paring depository funding needs:  the thrift  resolution process  and sluggish

bank  lending.  However,  as  these two  influences  abate and  income  growth

picks  up,  the  growth rates of the  aggregates are  expected to  increase over

1991  and 1992.  In  1991, M2  is projected to grow around the midpoint and M3

in the  lower  half of  their respective  tentative  ranges.

I-6

Regarding foreign exchange  rates, we have  lowered the projected path  of

the  dollar by 4-1/4 percent,  incorporating most  of the depreciation that  has

occurred  since the  June  Greenbook.  The dollar  remains around this  lower

level throughout  the current  forecast.

For  fiscal policy, our assumption regarding deficit  reduction is

unchanged.  We are still  assuming that the budget  negotiations will  result

in a deficit-reduction package  totaling $35 billion in FY1991,  which is  less

ambitious than the  summit participants  initially planned.  For FY1992,  we

are  assuming an additional $35  billion in cuts.

Near-Term Developments

As a consequence  of recent developments in oil  prices,  growth of real

GNP  is  expected to average  about  1 percent  at  an  annual  rate over the  next

three quarters,  down  from the  1-3/4  percent  rate  that  we were projecting  in

June.  We  expect domestic  production of goods  to be  affected

disproportionately by the  softening in demand, and industrial  production is

projected to  flatten out  in the  final quarter of  this year and  in the  first

quarter of  1991.

NEAR-TERM PROJECTIONS
(Percent change  from preceding period;  compound annual  rate)

Real  GNP 

Personal consumption expenditures 

Real  disposable personal  income 

Consumer price  index 
Excluding energy 

1990 

Q4 

.5 
.6 

.2 

5.3 
4.8 

Q3 

1.2 
1.7 

.2 

6.1 
5.0 

1991
Q1

1.3
1.5

2.6

4.4
4.9

I-7

The  steep increases  in  gasoline prices  have  begun to hit  consumers'

pocketbooks this month,  and they will  be  followed quickly by similar hikes

for heating  oil this  fall  and winter.  As  a result  of these  increases  and

the  slower pace of  real  activity, real  disposable  personal income  is

anticipated to be about  flat  in the  second half of  the year, which will  hold

down purchases of  consumer goods,  not  only big-ticket  items  like motor

vehicles but  nondurables  as  well.  The depressing effects  of lower  income  on

demand for  new  homes  also is  expected to lead to  slightly weaker housing

starts  in the near term.  Businesses  are  anticipated to  respond to lower-

than-expected levels  of  demand and heightened uncertainty by postponing

spending for  new  capital goods, particularly for  items  like  personal

computers  that  typically are  purchased off  the shelf.  Moreover, throughout

the period, businesses are assumed to keep a tight  rein on inventories.  The

boost to domestic  oil drilling, which shows up in nonresidential

construction spending, is  assumed to be  constrained by shortages  of  skilled

labor and supplies.

In contrast to the components  of domestic demand, the net  contribution

of the external sector has been  raised in the near term.  Exports  continue

to grow  at  a fairly  strong rate  in the current  forecast,  with the  effect of

a lower foreign exchange value  of  the dollar about offsetting somewhat

slower  growth of demand abroad.  At the  same time,  import  demand is

curtailed by the  slowdown in  domestic  spending.

For  inflation, the staff  is projecting that  the consumer price  index

will rise  at  annual rates  of  6 percent  in the current  quarter and  5-1/4

percent  next  quarter.  This  pace  averages more  than  1-3/4  percentage points

higher for  the second  half of  1990  than previously anticipated.  Certainly,

I-8

the direct  and  some  indirect effects of  rising oil  prices  account for most

of the  change  in the  near-term inflation outlook.  But  food prices  also

appear to be  rising more  rapidly this  quarter  than expected earlier,  and our

estimate  for prices  of services has  been raised in  light  of  recent  CPI

figures.

Energy prices  are  projected to  rise  at  close to a 20  percent annual

rate  in  the third  quarter, with the  rise  contributing more than  1 percentage

point  to overall  CPI  inflation.  Despite  the assumed leveling  off of  crude

oil prices,  the  rise  in energy prices  remains  sizable  (almost 11  percent,

annual rate)  in the fourth quarter because  of  lags  in the  response of

heating oil prices  and the  spillover  to prices of  natural  gas and

electricity.  The direct effect  of the  fourth-quarter  increase in energy

costs  is to add roughly  1/2 percentage point to the  overall CPI.  Over this

period and in  the  first  quarter  of  1991,  the  indirect effects of  higher

energy prices,  which are  anticipated to be  smaller than  the direct effects,

should be  apparent  in higher prices  for various  consumer goods and  services

for which energy is  an input  in production.

The  rise  in labor  compensation, as  measured by the employment  cost

index, is projected to  remain at  about  its  recent  trend rate  of  5 percent

through year-end.  The rapid  rates of  consumer price inflation should begin

to affect  cost-of-living adjustments  in wages by the end  of the year.  At

the  same time,  cutbacks in employment  assumed to accompany the  slowdown in

economic  activity  later this  year are expected to move the  jobless  rate

close to  6 percent by the  turn of  the year, and  thus to  restrain wage

demands.

Longer-Term Outlook

I-9

As  oil prices  in  early 1991  retrace much of this  summer's  increase,  the

pace  of  economic activity  will initially receive a boost  from the

acceleration  in growth of real  income.  After that,  the financial  and  fiscal

environment  assumed  in  our baseline projection is  consistent  with the

resumption of  growth  of real  GNP  at  about  its potential  rate.  Nonetheless,

the  unemployment  rate,  which, on average,  is  higher than in the previous

forecast,  imparts  a downward tilt to the  underlying inflation trend.

By the  second quarter  of  1991,  the pace  of consumer spending  is

projected  to have picked up;  and, in  the  second half  of the year, the

attendant  effects  on business  investment  are  expected to emerge.  As we

projected in the  June  Greenbook, the easing of restraints  on credit  supplies

also provides a lift to  activity.  In  sum, gross private  domestic purchases,

which are projected to have  risen only  a little  over the preceding three

quarters,  are expected to  rise at  an  annual  rate  of  2-1/4 percent  over the

final three  quarters  of 1991  and to expand 2-3/4  percent  in 1992.  Over  the

rest  of the  forecast,  growth of  both  exports and imports  is  projected to

pick  up, on average, and the  rate  of increase in  real  net  exports to

subside.  Finally, government purchases are  projected to  change little

throughout the period, as  modest growth in  state  and local  government

spending  is offset by the  restraint  in  federal  outlays.

In  light  of  BEA's downward revision to the  estimate of growth  in  real

GNP  between 1987  and 1989, we  have lowered  our  current  estimate of potential

GNP  growth from 2-3/4  to  2-1/2  percent.  Other things  being equal, this

change narrows  slightly the  slack  in  labor and  product markets that  results

from any shortfall  of  GNP  growth below  its potential rate.  Accordingly,

I-10

although the  jobless rate  rises more  rapidly over the  coming year than the

previous projection assumed, it  ends  up,  as  before,  at  6.1  percent in late

1991 and  1992.

On balance,  overall CPI  inflation  is projected to  come  down to  just

under  4-1/2  percent  in the first  half of  1991.  Consistent with our  assumed

path  for oil  prices, energy prices  are projected to  decline early next  year

and then to rise at  a rate  roughly in  line  with overall  inflation.  Other

prices  continue to be boosted in the  first  half of next  year by the  earlier

increases  in energy costs  and a somewhat  faster  rise  in prices of non-oil

imports;  excluding energy,  the CPI is  projected to rise  at  a 4-3/4  percent

annual rate  over  the period.  Over the  subsequent  year and  a half,  however,

consumer prices excluding energy are  projected to drift down a bit,  to

around the  4-1/4  percent mark by the end of  1992.  The principal factor  in

this deceleration is  the anticipated slowdown in hourly  labor compensation

from the  5 percent  trend projected to persist  into  early  1991  to around

4-1/2 percent  in 1992.

An Alternative  Scenario

Because of the uncertainties  surrounding any  single  assumption about

the path  of world oil prices, the  staff, using our econometric models, has

simulated the  economic effects  of a less  optimistic  scenario.  In the

simulation, the  spot price  of West  Texas  Intermediate is  assumed to  remain

at  $26.50  per barrel through  the end of the  forecast  horizon.  Our

assumptions regarding financial market  conditions,  fiscal  policy, and the

foreign exchange value of the  dollar were  not  altered.  As a result,

although the  near-term economic outcomes  are the  same,  this  scenario shows

I-11

both more  persistent higher inflation and a longer period of  economic

activity below its potential rate  than shown in the  Greenbook baseline.

With the  failure of  crude oil prices to drop back,  CPI  inflation

probably would average  5-1/4  percent at  an annual  rate  in the  first  quarter

of  next  year and  4-3/4  percent in the second quarter  and would remain around

a 5 percent  rate  in the second half.  On balance, these  changes would add

about  1/2  percentage point  to the CPI  increase  for 1991  relative to the

Greenbook projection of  4-1/2  percent.

(Percent change  from end of  previous period;

compound annual rate)

ALTERNATIVE SCENARIO

Real  GNP 
Real  GNP

Personal consumption expenditures

Real disposable personal  income

Consumer price  index
Excluding energy

Unemployment  rate  (percent)

Current account balance  (billions)1

1. End  of  period.

1990
H2
.8

.8
1.2

.2

5.7
4.9

5.9

-98

1991 

HI 

H2 

1991:Q4 to
1992:Q4

1.5 
1.2 

1.5 

5.0 
4.9 

6.1 

-86 

1.9 
1.3 

1.2 

4.9 
4.9 

6.2 

-74 

2.4
1.9

1.5

4.4
4.3

6.3

-61

Growth of real  economic activity  is  shown to be depressed somewhat more

in 1991 and 1992  than the current  Greenbook  forecast  has  indicated.  Growth

of  consumer spending would be  slower throughout  1991,  by about

1/2  percentage point.  Moreover, the spillover  effects on  housing and

business investment  would be  larger  and would extend  into  1992.  The

simulation  suggests  that  growth of  real  GNP would  remain below its  longer-

run potential rate through the end of  1991 and average  just under

I-12

2-1/2 percent  in 1992.  Accordingly,  slack accumulates throughout  the

alternative  scenario,  and the  unemployment  rate  rises gradually  in 1991  and

1992,  ending just  above  6-1/4  percent.

The  current  account  deficit would be  $8 to  $10  billion  greater during

1991  under the alternative  scenario.  However, this  difference with the

baseline  forecast would diminish during the  latter part  of  1991 and during

1992  as  the relative  rise  in U.S.  real  GNP  raises  imports.

Rules  of Thumb

In general, the Greenbook forecast  and the alternative  scenario

outlined  above are  consistent with the  rules  of thumb 2  developed by the

staff to  summarize  the  economic effects of  an oil price  shock.  Those rules

estimate  that  a $5 per barrel  increase  in the  level of crude oil prices,  if

sustained, would

* raise inflation as measured by the CPI  roughly 1 percentage

point  in the  first  year and perhaps  another 1/4  percentage point
in the  second year;

* reduce growth of real  GNP  roughly 1/2  percentage point  in the
first  year  and perhaps another  1/4 percentage point in the
second year;  and

* increase the  current account deficit  nearly $15  billion on

impact,  but  by less  than $6 billion after one year, and only  $3
billion after two  years.

These estimates  include not  only the direct  effect  of higher  crude oil costs

on retail  energy prices, but also  the indirect  effects  on the prices  of

other inputs  to production.  In particular,  they take  into  account  that,  as

price  inflation picks up, wages  are  likely to  accelerate,  boosting price

inflation further.

2. These  rules  were  formulated under the assumptions that  nominal interest

rates are unchanged and that  the unemployment  rate  initially is  at  its
estimated natural  rate.

CONFIDENTIAL  - FR

CLASS  II  FOMC 

.....................................................................................................

STAFF  GNP  PROJECTIONS

Percent  changes,  annual  rate

I-13

August  15,  1990

Nominal  GNP

Real  CGP

GNP  fixed-weight
price  index

Consumer

Price Index  <1>

Une(cid:127)mpleyment

rate
(percent)

............................................................................................................................

6/27/90 

8/15/90 

6/27/90 

8/15/90 

6/27/90 

8/15/90 

6/27/90 

8/15/90 

6/27/90 

8/15/90

Annual changes:

<2>
<2>

1988 
1989 
1990
1991
1992

Quarterly changes:

1989 

Q1  <2> 
Q2  <2> 
03  <2> 
Q4  <2> 

7.9
7.1
6.2
4.6

01  <2>
02  <2>
Q3
04

1991 

1992 

01
Q2
Q3
04

01
Q2
03
Q4

3.1 
2.0 

2.6
1.0

Two-quarter changes:  <3>

1989 

Q2  <2> 
04  <2> 

7.5 
5.4 

1990 

Q2  <2> 
Q4 

6.5 
5.5 

6.5 
6.2 

1991 

1992 

Q2 
04 

Q2
04

Four-quarter  changes:  <4>

6.7
4.5

6.2
4.8

6.5
6.3

Q4  <2> 
1988 
04  <2> 
1989 
04 
1990 
"  1  Q 4 

7.5 
6.4 
6.0 
6.4 

Q4 

7.8 
5.6 
5.5 
6.4 

6.5 

3.4 
2.6 
1.6 
2.2 

3.5 
1.8 
1.1 
2.0 
2.4 

.. >  For all urban  consumers.

<2> Actual.
<3>  Percent change  from two  quarters  earlier.
<4>  Percent  change from four  quarters earlier.

5.0 
3.3 

5.2 
3.7 

4.4 
4.0 

4.5 
4.1 
4.4 
4.2 

4.7
3.4

5.3
4.4

4.7
4.1

4.6 
4.0 
4.8 
4.4 
4.2 

5.7 
3.4 

5.7 
3.9 

4.5 
4.4 

4.3 
4.6 
4.8 
4.5 

5.7
3.4

5.9
5.7

4.4
4.4

4.3 
4.6 
5.8 
4.4 
4.4 

5.5 
5.3 
5.5 
5.9 

5.2 
5.4 
5.6 
5.8 

5.8 
5.9 
6.0 
6.1" 

.0 
.0 

.1 
.4 

.1 
.2 

5.5
5.3
5.5
6.1
6.1

5.2
5.3
5.6
5.9

6.0
6.1
6.1
6.1

6.1
6.1
6.1
6.1

.0
.0

.0
.6

.2
.0

-.5 
.0 
.5 
.3 

-.5
.0
.6
.2
.0

CONFIDENTIAL  - FR
CLASS  II  FOMC

GROSS  NATIONAL  PRODUCT  AND  RELATED  ITEMS
(Seasonally  adjusted;  annual rate)

August  15,  1990

I-14

Units 

1984 

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992

I 

Projection

EXPENDITURES

Nominal  GNP
Real  GNP

Real  GNP 
Gross  domestic  purchases 

Final  sales 
Private dom. final purchases 

Personal  consumption  expend. 

Durables 
Nondurables 
Services 

I 

I 

Business  fixed  investment 

I 
Producers' durable equipment  I 
1 
Nonresidential  structures 

Residential structures 

Exports 
Imports 

Government  purchases 

Federal 

Defense 

State  and  local 

ISillions  of  $ 
3772.2  4014.9  4231.6  4515.6  4873.7  5200.8  5483.8  5802.0  6181.3
IBillions  of  82$1  3501.4  3618.7  3717.9  3845.3  4016.9  4117.7  4167.3  4227.6  4327.8
I 
I
IPercent  change*1 
I 
I 
I
I 
1 
I 
1 

1.1 
.6 

3.5 
2.6 

1.9 
2.1 

3.6 
4.3 

4.7 
5.6 

2.7 
2.9 

5.0 
4.2 

3.1 
2.5 

4.5 
4.0 

1.8 
1.6 

2.0 
1.5 

1.8 
1.1 

1.7 
1.2 

4.6 
4.6 

5.1 
6.4 

1.3 

.4 

2.4
2.2

2.0
2.2

4.1 
10.8 
2.3 
3.5 

13.8 
14.9 
11.8 
6.1 

5.9 
17.4 

7.9 
13.0 
6.5 
4.4 

4.6 
7.0 
3.3 
5.0 

3.7 
4.6 
1.9 
5.8 

-2.4 
4.5 

8.6 
13.3 
7.1 
4.9 

3.8 
11.5 
2.9 
2.1 

-5.5 
.4 
-17.7 
11.6 

2.3 
-1.2 
1.3 
4.1 

6.1 
8.2 
.8 
-2.2 

10.6 
10.0 

19.8 
10.4 

2.0 
1.5 
4.0 
2.3 

3.1 
.5 
6.0 
5.2 

5.6 
8.0 

4.1 
9.3 
2.4 
3.7 

5.3 
8.2 
-2.7 
-.1 

14.0 
5.5 

1.1 
-1.6 
-1.8 
3.1 

1.2 
-1.4 

.6 
2.4 

4.5 
5.4 
1.7 
-7.1 

10.1 
4.5 

.3 
-2.8 
-2.1 
2.6 

.8 
1.3 
-2.2 
2.7 

-.2 
.4 
-1.8 
-3.7 

4.7 
1.0 

2.0 
1.8 
-1.5 
2.1 

1.8 
1.2 

.7 
2.7 

.9 
2.4 
-4.1 
1.3 

7.4 
3.8 

-.2 

-3.1 
-5.4 
1.8 

2.0
1.8
1.1
2.7

3.3
5.3
-3.6
2.2

6.6
5.1

-.3

-3.3
-4.9
1.6

35.9
32.4
3.4

Change  in  business  inventories  IBillions  of 82$1 
IBillions  of  82$1 
IBillions  of  8281 

Nonfarm 
Net  exports 

62.3 
57.8 
-84.0 

9.1 
13.4 
-104.3 

22.8 
28.7 

23.6 
26.5 

23.8 
18.7 
-54.1 

14.9 
12.9 
-35.9 

20.3 
17.2 
-12.8 

-129.7 

-118.5 

-75,9 

Nominal  GNP

IPercent  change* I

8.6 

6.6 

4.6 

8.2 

7.8 

5.6 

5.5 

6.4 

6.5

EMPLOYMENT  AND  PRODUCTION

I 

I

Nonfarm payroll employment 
Unemployment  rate 

Millions 
IPercent 

99.5 
7.0 

102.2 
6.2 

105.6 
5.5 

108.6 
5.3 

110.6 
5.5 

111.3 
6.1 

112.6
6.1

94.5 
7.5 

4.7 
80.4 

97.5 
7.2 

1.9 
79.5 

Industrial  production index 
Capacity  utilization rate-mfg.  Percent 

1.4 
79.0 

6.5 
81.4 

4.5 
83.9 

IPercent change*I 
1 
1
I 

I 
IMillions 
MMillions 
Millions 
Millions 

1 

1.75 
10.35 
7.92 
2.43 

1.74 
11.03 
8.22 
2.82 

1.81 
11.44 
8.22 
3.22 

1.62 
10.23 
7.06 
3.18 

1.49 
10.65 
7.55 
3.10 

1.1 
83.9 

1.38 
9.89 
7.06 
2.83 

1.7 
82.4 

1.25 
9.52 
6.82 
2.70 

2.3 
81.3 

1.25 
8.99 
6.51 
2.48 

3.4
81.4

1.31
9.08
6.58
2.50

Housing  starts 
Auto  sales 
Domestic 
Foreign 

INCOME  AND SAVING

Nominal personal  income 
Real  disposable income 
Personal  saving rate 

IPercent  change*I 
IPercent change*l 
IPercent 

Corp. profits with IVA 6  CCAdj  IPercent  change* 

Profit  share of GNP 

Percent 

8.4 
4.3 
6.1 

7.4 
7.1 

6.6 
2.7 
4.4 

9.2 
7.0 

5.8 
3.3 
4.1 

8.1 
2.7 
2.9 

7.6 
4.3 
4.2 

6.8 
1.7 
4.6 

6.6 
.8 
4.9 

6.9 
1.8 
4.8 

-5.6 
6.7 

17.4 
6.8 

8.2 
6.9 

-16.8 
6.0 

-2.9 
5.4 

-2.4 
4.8 

Federal  govt. surplus/deficit 
State and local  govt.  surplus 
Exc.  social insurance  funds 

(Billioni 

of 

| 

1  -169.6  -196.9  -206.9  -158.2  -141.7  -134.3  -153.1  -127.2 
47.4 
-25.7 

36.7 
-32.8 

46.5 
-16.4 

46.4 
-19.9 

51.0 
-8.3 

64.6 
19.8 

65.1 
13.8 

62.8 
5.6 

6.6
1.5
4.5

2.0
4.5

-87.8
68.9
-7.8

I 
Percent  change*l 

I

PRICES AND COSTS
---------------- 
GNP  implicit deflator 
GNP fixed-weight  price  index 
Cons.  & fixed  invest, prices 

CPI 

Exc. food and  energy 

ECI hourly compensation 

Nonfarm business  sector

Output  per hour 
Compensation per hour 
Unit  labor costs 

3.4 
3.7 
3.3 
4.2 
5.0 

4.9 

1.5 
4.2 
2.6 

2.9
3.3
3.4
3.5
4.3

3.9

1.6
4.6
3,0

2.6 
2.6 
2.5 
1.3 
3.9 

3.0
3.8
4.5
4.5
4.3

4.1 
4.6 
4.3 
4.3 
4.5 

3.7
4.0
4.3
4.6
4.3

4.3 
4.8 
5.2 
5.8 
5.3 

4.3 
4.4 
4.3 
4.4 
4.8 

4.0
4.2
4.2
4.4
4.5

3.2 

3.3

4.8 

4.8

5.1 

4.9 

4.6

1.3 
5.0 
3.6 

2.2 
3.7 
1.4 

1.7 
4.7 
2.9 

-1.3 
2.0 
3.4 

.2 
5.1 
4.9 

1.3 
4.9 
3.6 

1.3
4.6
3.3

* Percent  changes  are from  fourth  quarter to fourth quarter.

CONFIDENTIAL  - FR
CLASS  II  FOMC

GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT AND  RELATED  ITEMS

(Seasonally  adjusted;  annual  rate)

I-15a

August  15,  1990

EXPENDITURES
-*-----------
Nominal  GNP
Real  GNP

Real  GNP
Gross  domestic  purchases

Final  sales 
Private  dom.  final  purchases 

Personal  consumption  expend. 

Durables 
Nondurable 
Services 

Business  fixed  investment 

Producers'  durable  equipment 
Nonresidential  structures 

I 

Residential  structures 

Exports 
Imports 

Government  purchases 

Federal 

Defense 

State  and  local 

"hange  in  business  inventories  IBillions  of  82$1 
IBillions  of 82$1 
IBillions  of 8251 

Nonfarm 

exports 

I 

Units

I 

I 

01 

2 
02 

31 

03 

Q4 

01 

Q2 
02 

Q3 
03 

4 
04 

Q
01 

02

1988 

1989 

1990

IBillions  of  $ 
5451.6
IBillions of  825S  3970.2  4005.8  4032.1  4059.3  4095.7  4112.2  4129.7  4133.2  4150.6  4163.2

4735.8  4831.4  4917.9  5009.8  5101.3  5174.0  5238.6  5289.3  5375.4 

Percent  Change 

( 

5.1 

S1.6 

1

3.6 
3.0 

5.1 
4.8 

2.7 
3.7 
2.0 
2.9 

15.7 
17.9 
9.9 
6.8 

4.4 
.3 

2.7 
3.2 

1.1 
3.0 

3.5 
-1.1 
4.1 
4.5 

1.6 
2.2 
-. 3 
.4 

5.4 
9.2 

3.3 
3.5 
-1.4 
3.2 

-3.8 
-10.4 
-5.0 
1.2 

2.7 
2.4 

4.6 
1.7 

3.5 
14.1 
1.2 
1.9 

-6.3 
-5.5 
-8.7 
-. 4 

16.7 
12.4 

15.7 
33.6 
4.9 
4.3 

3.6 
1.2 

2.4 
.8 

1.6 
1.8 

1.7 
1.4 

-. 3 
-6.0 

.6 
.9 

1.3 
5.6 
-1.7 
2.1 

1.7 
2,8 

1.8 
4,1 

4.6 
9.6 
3.9 
3.5 

.3 
-1.2 

.9 
-1.5 

-. 8 
-13.0 

-.2 
3.1 

8.9 
9.5 
7.5 
-3.6 

6.9 
12.2 
-8.2 
-11.3 

6.3 
6.1 
7.1 

-7.6 

-3.8 
-5.2 

1.3 
-5.5 

15.8 
-2.3 

12.4 
12.8 

-.5 
6.4 

13.5 
1.7 

-3.3 
-9.1 
-10.9 
1.3 

4.0 
7.0 
3.2 
1.8 

-2.4 
-7.9 
7.2 
1.8 

3.0 
-. 4 
-7.0 
5.6 

1.7 

.5 

3.8 
2.4 

1.1 
14.4 
-3.2 
.1 

5.0 
5.7 
2.3 
15.1 

11.2 
2.5 

2.9 
.4 
-1.7 
4.8 

1.2
2.3

-1.5
-2.0

-. 3

-8.7
-4.4
5.5

-6.1
-6.2
-6.0

-13.5

-3.7
3.2

6.2
15.2
3.3
.2

16.9 
19.2 
-72.2 

32.6 
31.0 
-78,5 

14.0 
27.2 
-75.7 

26.1 
16.4 
-51.1 

25.5 
21.5 
-53.3 

24.6 
21.7 
-64.1 

18.9 
15.3 
-47.9 

-2.2 
-8.2 
-35.4 

26.2
27.3
-46.5

7.1 
6.7 

6.9 
21.8 
2.6 
5.6 

11.4 
20.3 
-10.5 
-6.8 

31.7 
.5 

-9.2 
-24.1 
-5.6 
3.9 

31.0 
28.8 
-77.3 

Nominal  GNP 

[Percent  change  1 

7.8 

8.3 

7.4 

7.7 

7.5 

5.8 

5.1 

3.9 

6.7 

5.8

EMPLOYMENT  AND  PRODUCTION

Nonfarm payroll employment 
Unemployment  rate 

[Millions 
IPercent* 

F  104.4 
5.7 

105.2 
5.5 

106.0 
5.5 

106.8 
5.3 

107.7 
5.2 

108.3 
5.3 

108.9 
5.3 

109.4 
5.3 

110.2 
5.2 

110.7
5.3

Industrial production  index 
Capacity  utilization  rate-mfg.  |Percent* 

|Percent  change  1 

5.0 
83.1 

4.2 
83.6 

5.9 
84.3 

2.8 
84.6 

2.7 
84.7 

2.8 
84.5 

-1.2 
83.7 

Housing  starts 
Auto sales 
Domestic 
Foreign 

INCOME  AND  SAVING

Millions 
Millions 
I|illions 
(Millions 

1.46 
10.91 
7.60 
1 
1  3.30 

1.49 
10.67 
7.50 
3.17 

1.47 
10.15 
7.20 
2.95 

1.54 
10.88 
7.89 
2.99 

1.51 
10.03 
7.08 
2.95 

1.35 
10.26 
7.26 
3.00 

1.34 
10.20 
7.36 
2.84 

.2 
82.9 

1.35 
9.09 
6.56 
2.53 

.6 
82.6 

1.45 
10.01 
7.11 
2.90 

Nominal personal  income 
Real  disposable  income 
Personal  saving  rate 

(Percent  change 
1Percent  change 
IPercent* 

Corp.  profits  with IVA  & CCAdj  IPercent  change 

Profit  share of  GNP 

IPercent* 

6.4 
7.3 
4.0 

9.5 
7.0 

8.6 
2.7 
4.1 

8.1 
4.9 
4.5 

7.4 
2.3 
4.1 

11.6 
4.2 
5.2 

5.8 
-1.2 
4.6 

3.7 
2.7 
4.1 

6.2 
1.2 
4.6 

6.6 
7.0 

-1.7 

6.8 

19.5 
7.0 

-23.2 
6.4 

-7.0 
6.2 

-17.1 
5.9 

-19.1 
5.5 

8.6 
2.5 
4.9 

8.4 
5.5 

4.0
82.7

1.20
9.53
6.78
2.75

5.4
.5
5.1

18.9

5.7

Federal  govt.  surplus/deficit 
State  and local govt.  surplus 
Exc.  social  insurance  funds 

PRICES  AND COSTS

GNP  implicit  deflator
GNP  fixed-waight  price  index
ConR.  & fixed  invest.  prices

CPI

Exc. 

food  and  energy

'CI hourly  compensation**

nfarm  business  sector
Output  per  hour
Compensation  per  hour
Onit  labor  costs

*  Not  at  an  annual  rate.
**  Private  industry  workers

ISillions  of  $  I -153.7  -136.9  -120.1  -156.3  -132.6 
48.9 
I 
-16.2 
1 

1  45.5 
1  -15.6 

48.3 
-14.1 

45.2 
-19.0 

46.8 
-17.0 

-122.7 
50.3 
-15.6 

-131.7 
48.1 
-18.7 

-150.1 
38.5 
-29.1 

-168.3 
38.1 
-30.2 

-153.2
32.3
-36.8

Percent  change 

2,7 
3.9 
2.9 
S  3,5 
4.4 

1 

5.2 

S4.2 
4.3 
.1 

1 

4.4
4.7
4.9
4.2
4.7

5.2

-.6
5.0
5.6

4.7 
5.5 
4.5 
5.2 
4.6 

3.8 

2.8 
5.3 
2.5 

4.7
4.4
5.0
4.1
4.6

4.6

3.9 
4.9 
5.0 
5.4 
5.2 

3.9
4.6
5.3
6.0
4.1

3.2 
3.1 
2.3 
2.9 
3.8 

3.8 
3.8 
4.6 
3.9 
4.4 

4.8 
6.6 
6.8 
8.2 
6.2 

4.4
3.9
3.0
3.8
4.9

4.6 

4.9

4.9 

4.8 

5.6 

5.1

.5 
4.2 
3.6 

-1.7 
2.0 
3.8 

-. 5
1.5
2.0

-.8 
1.8 
2.7 

-2.2 
2.7 
5.1 

-1.9 
3.2 
5.2 

1.6
5.6
3.9

CONFIDENTIAL  - FR
CLASS II  FOMC

GROSS  NATIONAL  PRODUCT  AND  RELATED  ITEMS
(Seasonally adjusted;  annual rate)

August  15,  1990

I-15b

1 

1990 

----------------------- 

1991 

1992

----

Projection

Units 

3 

04 

01 

Q2 

03 

Q4 

01 

Q2 

03 

Q4

EXPENDITURES
*----------- 
Nominal  GNP 
Real  GNP 

I

Billions  of  $ 
[Billions  of  8251  4175.2  4180.2  4193.7  4214.6  4238.2  4263.7 

5527.3  5580.7  5665.7  5758.0  5847.0  5937.5  6040.2  6132.8  6228.2  6324.2
4289.1  4314.2  4340.7  4367.3

Real  GNP 
Gross  domestic  purchases 

Percent  Change 

Final  sales 
Private dom. final  purchases 

Personal  consumption  expend. 

Durables 
Hondurables 
Services 

Business  fixed  investment 

Producers'  durable  equipment 
Nonresidential  structures 

Residential  structures 

Exports 
Imports 

Government  purchases 

Federal 

Defense 

State  and  local 

I 

I 
I 

I 

I 

Change  in  business  inventories 

Nonfarm 
at  exports 

Nominal  GNP

IBillions  of  82$1 
[Billions  of  82$1 
[Billions  of  82$1 
I 
I
IPercent  change  I 

EMPLOYMENT  AND  PRODUCTION

1.2 
.1 

1.6 
1.0 

1.7 
4.9 
-1.0 
2.6 

2.0 
2.7 
-. 1 
-12.0 

6.8 
-. 1 

-1.0 
-4.6 
-3.8 
1.7 

.5 
-. 5 

1.2 

.2 

1.3 
.7 

1.2 

.8 

.6 
-3.7 
-. 2 
2.6 

-1.1 
-. 4 
-3.2 
-2.0 

4.9 
-1.4 

.0 
-2.6 
-3.7 
1.9 

1.5 
-. 6 
.6 
2.7 

-1.8 
-. 6 
-5.4 
-1.5 

5.8 
1.8 

-. 4 
-3.5 
-5.8 
1.8 

2.0 
1.7 

1.5 
1.5 

1.8 
1.5 
.6 
2.7 

.4 
1.8 
-4.1 
.7 

7.2 
4.8 

-4 
-3.6 
-5.8 
1.8 

2.3 
1.8 

2.2 
2.1 

2.0 
2.9 
.6 
2.7 

2.1 
3.9 
-3.6 
3.8 

8.0 
4.7 

-. 1 
-2.9 
-5.0 
1.8 

2.4 
1.8 

2.3 
2.0 

1.8 
.9 
.9 
2.7 

2.7 
4.6 
-3.3 
2.4 

8.6 
4.2 

.1 
-2.3 
-4.9 
1.8 

2.4 
1.9 

1.8 
2.1 

2.0 
1.7 
1.1 
2.7 

3.1 
5.2 
-3.7 
1.3 

7.4 
4.4 

-1.8 
-6.9 
-4.9 
1.6 

21.4 
20.4 
-35.9 

14.3 
12.3 
-25.9 

15.5 
12.5 
-19.7 

20.9 
17.8 
-16.2 

21.7 
18.5 
-11.1 

23.2 
19.9 
-4.1 

29.3 
-25.9 
.8 

2.4 
2.2 

2.0 
2.2 

2.0 
1.7 
1.1 
2.7 

3.2 
5.3 
-3.8 
1.2 

6.0 
4.9 

.3 
-1.8 
-4.8 
1.6 

33.4 
29.9 
2.8 

2.5 
2.4 

2.0 
2.3 

2.1 
2.0 
1.2 
2.7 

3.4 
5.4 
-3.6 
2.9 

6.6 
5.9 

.1 
-2.1 
-4.7 
1.6 

38.5 
34.9 
3.9 

2.5
2.3

2.1
2.3

2.0
1.6
1.2
2.7

3.5
5.4
-3.4
3.4

6.6
5.4

.1

-2.1
-5.1
1.6

42.6
38.9
6.1

5.7

3.9 

6.2 

6.7 

6.3 

6.3 

7.1

6.3 

6.4 

6.3

Nonfarm payroll employment 
Uaneployment rate 

IMillions 
IPercent* 

110.7 
5.6 

110.7 
5.9 

110.9 
6.0 

111.1 
6.1 

111.5 
6.1 

111.8 
6.1 

112.1 
6.1 

112.4 
6.1 

112.8 
6.1 

113.2

6.1

Industrial  production index 
Capacity utilization rate-mfg.  Percent* 

IPercent change 

Housing  starts 
Auto sales 
Domestic 
Foreign 

INCOME  AND SAVING

IMillions 
Millions 
IMillions 
IMillions 

2.6 
82.5 

1.19 
9.52 
6.94 
2.58 

-.3 
81.8 

1.21 
9.02 
6.45 
2.57 

1.4 
81.5 

1.23 
8.90 
6.45 
2.45 

1.8 
81.2 

1.25 
8.95 
6.50 
2.45 

2.8 
81.2 

1.26 
9.05 
6.55 
2.50 

3.1 
81.2 

1.27 
9.05 
6.55 
2.50 

3.3 
81.3 

1.29 
9.05 
6.55 
2.50 

3.4 
81.3 

1.30 
9.05 
6.55 
2.50 

3.4 
81.4 

1.32 
9.10 
6.60 
2.50 

Nominal  personal  income 
Real disposable  income 
Personal  saving  rate 

IPercent  change 
Percent  change 
IPercent* 

6.0 
.2 

4.8 

6.5 
.2 
4.7 

7.9 
2.6 
4.9 

6.4 
1.5 
4.9 

6.2 
1.2 
4.7 

7.1 
1.9 
4.7 

7.7 
2.4 
4.8 

6.1 
1.1 
4.6 

Corp.  profits with IVA  a  CCAdj  |Percent  change 

Profit  share  of GNP 

Ipercnt* 

- 6.2 
5.5 

-26.3 
5.1 

-2.2 
5.0 

-2.2 
4.9 

-4.1 
4.7 

-1.0 
4.6 

-4.2 
4.5 

-1.0 
4.4 

5.9 
1.0 
4.3 

3.3 
4.4 

3.4
81.5

1.33
9.10
6.60
2.50

6.5
1.5
4.2

10.6
4.4

Federal  govt.  surplus/deficit 
State  and local  govt.  surplus 
Exc. social  insurance funds 

PRICES AND COSTS
----------------
GNP  implicit deflator
GNP fixed-weight  price  index

Cons.  6 fixed invest.  prices
CPI

Exc.  food  and  energy

ECI hourly compensation**

mnfarm business  sector
Output  per hour
Compensation per hour
Unit  labor  costs

*  Not  at  an  annual  rate.
**  Private industry workers

IBillions  of $ 
I 
I 
t

Percent  change 

I 

1

-143.0  -148.0  -146.1  -128.9  -116.4  -117.3  -106.0 
60.5 
-14.9 

54.0 
-20.5 

44.5 
-28.2 

48.9 
-24.7 

42.3 
-29.5 

39.5 
-31.4 

37.0 
-33.0 

-93.1 
66.0 
-10.3 

-77.9 
71.4 
-5.8 

-74.1
77.7
-.4

4.6 
4.7 
5.7 
6.1 
5.0 

3.4 
4.0 
5.4 
5.3 
5.1 

4.7 

4.9 

.8 
5.9 
S  5.1 

.3 
5.8 
5.5 

4.9
4.9
4.4
4.4
5.0

5.2

.9
3.8
2.9

4.6 
4.5 
4.2 
4.3 
4.8 

4.0
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.7

3.8 
4.1 
4.3 
4.5 
4.6 

4.6 
4.6 
4.3 
4.5 
4.6 

3.8 
4.1 
4.2 
4.4 
4.5 

3.8 
4.0 
4.1 
4.3 
4.4 

5.1 

4.7

4.7 

5.1 

4.5 

4.5 

3.7
4.0
4.1
4.3
4.4

4.3

1.4 
5.6 
4.1 

1.4 
4.8 
3.4 

1.4 
5.3 
3.8 

1.3 
5.1 
3.8 

1.3 
4.5 
3.2 

1.3
4.5
3.2

CONFIDENTIAL  - FR
CLASS  11  FOMC

GROSS  NATIONAL  PRODUCT  AND  RELATED  ITEMS
(Net changes,  billions  of  1982  dollars)

August  15,  1990

Projection

..------------------------..----- 

1988 

I 

0

02 

03 

04 

1989 

1990 

----------------- 
01 

.-------------- 
02 

-
03 

------ 

04 

01 

Q2

1987 

(fourth 

1988 
quarter 

1989 
to 
fourth 
net  change)

1990

quarter,

Real  GNP
Gross  domestic  purchases

Final  sales
Private  dom.  final  purchases

Personal  conaumption  expend.

Durables
Nondurables
Services

Business  fixed  investment

Producers'  durable  equipment
Nonresidential  structures

Residential  structures

Change  in  business  inventories

Nonfarm
Farm

Net  exports
Exports
Imports

Government  purchases

Federal

Defense
Nondefense
State  and  local

49.5
15.5

66.9
51.8

42.6
19.8
5.7
17.1

12.7
16.0
-3.4
-3.4

-17.4
-26.6
9.1

34.0

34.7
.7

-18.9 
-23.2 
-3.8 
-19.4 
4.3 

35.6 
30.5 

26-3 
32.6 

27.2 
24.4 

36.4 
11.8 

16.5 
18.7 

17.5 
28.3 

3.5 
-12.7 

17.4 
4.9 

12.6
23.7

49.7 
38.3 

10.6 
24.4 

45.7 
14.2 

24.4 
6.5 

17.0 
11.4 

18.5 
34.1 

9.3 
-12.9 

38.4 
20.2 

-15.8
-17.0

17.3 
3.8 
4.4 
9.1 

17.6 
14.9 
2.9 
3.2 

22.3 
-1.1 
9.1 
14.2 

2.0 
2.0 
-.1 
.2 

22.4 
13.9 
2.7 
6.0 

-8.0 
-5.2 
-2.8 
-.2 

-2.1 
-6.6 
1.4 
3.0 

10.5 
8.4 
2.2 
-1,8 

-14.1 
-9.6 
-4.5 

15,7 
11.8 
3.9 

-18.6 
-3.8 
-14.8 

12.1 

-10.8 

22.9 

8.6 
5.8 
-3.9 
6.7 

8.4 
10.9 
-2.6 
-5.7 

-.6 
5.1 
-5.7 

30.0 
9.9 
8.8 
11.3 

7.8 
5.7 
2.1 
-3.7 

-.9 
.2 
-1.1 

-5.4 
-15.0 
-.4 

10.0 

-4.9 
-5.2 
.4 
-2.6 

7.4 
14.5 
-7.4 
.4 

-2.1
-9.9
-10.2
18.0

6.2 
5.4 
.7 
6.5 

-8.1
-6.2
-1.9
-6.7

28.4
35.5
-7.0

-5.7 
-6.4 

.7 

-21.1 
-23.5 
2.4 

5.1 
5.6 
.5 

6.3 
2.8 
-.9 
3.7 
3.5 

-6.3 
7.0 
13.3 

-7.5 
-8.9 
-3.3 
-5.6 
1.3 

2.8 
21.0 
18.2 

28.7 
23.9 
3.1 
20.8 
4.8 

24.6 
20.8 
-3.7 

-6.7 
-8.1 
-7.4 
-.8 
1.5 

-2.2 
17.1 
19.2 

-10.8 
-. 7 
10.1 

7.8 
5.7 
2.0 
3.8 
2.1 

-4.8
-6.9
4.5
-11.4
2.1

16.2 
19.1 
2.8 

6.0
-. 3
-4.7
4.4
6.3

12.5 
16.5 
4.1 

-11.1
-5.9
5.2

187.1
163.0

117.9
78.5

56.4
-4.9
11.7
49.6

26.6
25.6
1.0
-4.5

69.2
66.3
3.0

24.1
80.5
56.4

15.3
5.3
10.2
-4.9
10.0

47.0
25.0

51.5
13.6

21.1
5.7
-20.4
35.8

-. 8
1.4
-2.2
-6.8

-4.6
-3.0
-1.6

22.0
28.6
6.7

138.6 
103.0 

172.9 
128.7 

104.6
36.4
21.9
46.4

24.3 
27.7 
-3.4 
-. 2 

-34.4
-28.2
-6.3

35.6 
68.3 
32.7 

8.6

-5.4
-4.9
-. 5
13.9

73.9 
46.1 

69.2 
39.1 

31.1 
-5.9 
5.9 
31.0 

21.8
19.8
2.1
-13.8

4.9
-11.9
16.8

27.8 
56.3 
28.4 

2.3

-9.6
-5.6

-4.0

12.0

CONFIDENTIAL  - FR
CLASS 

II  FOMC

GROSS  NATIONAL  PRODUCT  AND  RELATED 

ITEMS
(Net  changes,  billions  of  1982  dollars)

Projection 

1991 

-------------------------- 
2 

01 

03 
Q3 

1992 
------------------------------ 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992

(fourth  quarter  to  fourth  quarter,
net change)

04 

1 

August  15,  1990

Projection

1990 

----------- 

Q3 

04 

12.0 
1.5 

16.8 
8.3 

11.5 
5.2 
-2.3 
8.6 

2.5 
2.5 
.0 
-5.7 

-4.8 
-6.9 
2.0 

10.6
10.3
-. 2

-2.0
-4.0
-2.5
-1.5
2.0

5.0 
-5.1 

12.1 
2.1 

4.3 
-4.1 
-.5 
8.9 

-1.4 
-.4 
-1.0 
-.9 

-7.1
-8.1
1.0

10.1 
7.7 
-2.4 

.0
-2.2
-2.4
.2
2.2

Real  GNP
Gross  domestic  purchases

Final  sales
Private  dom.  final  purchases

Personal  consunption  expend.

Durables
Nondurables
Services

Business  fixed  investment

Producers'  durable  equipment
Nonresidential  structures

Residential  structures

Change  in  business  inventories

Nonfarm
Farm

Net  exports
Exports
Inports

Government  purchases

Federal

Defense
Nondefense
State  and  local

13.5 
7.3 

12.3 
6.9 

9.8 
-.6 
1.4 
9.1 

-2.3 
-.6 
-1.7 
-.7 

1.2 
.2 
1.0 

6.2 
9.1 
2.9 

-. 8

-3.0
-3.7

.7
2.2

4 2 

25.6 
18.5 

24.1 
16.7 

12.2 
.9 
2.0 
9.3 

3.4 
4.4 
-1,0 
1.1 

25.4 
20.5 

19.3 
18.2 

13.7 
1.8 
2.5 
9.3 

4.0 
5.1 
-1.1 
.6 

25.0 
23.1 

20.9 
18.4 

13.8 
1.9 
2.5 
9.4 

4.1 
5.2 
-1.1 
.5 

23.6 
18.5 

22.8 
10.0 

13.7 
3.1 
1.4 
9.2 

2.7 
3.7 
-1.1 
1.7 

21.0 
17.5 

15.6 
12.9 

12.1 
1.6 
1.4 
9.1 

.5 
1.7 
-1.2 
.3 

5.4
5.3
.1

3.5 
11.4 
7.9 

5.1 
12.9 
7.8 

7.1 
14.1 
7.0 

4.9 
12.4 
7.5 

2.0 
10.3 
8.3 

-. 3
-2.5
-3.1
.6
2.2

-3.8
-5.8
-2.9
-2.9
2.0

.6
-1.4
-2.9
1.5
2.0

26.5 
25.4 

21.4 
20.0 

14.4 
2.2 
2.7 
9.5 

4.3 
5.4 
-1.0 
1.3 

5.1 
5.0 
.1 

1.1 
11.4 
10.3 

26.6
24.4

22.5
20.1

14.1

1.8
2.7
9.5

4.5
5.4
-1.0
1.5

4.1
4.0
.1

2.2  1

11.6
9.5

.3

-1.7
-3.0
1.3
2.0

73.9
46.1

69.2
39.1

31.1
-5.9
5.9
31.0

21.8
19.8
2.1
-13.8

4.9

-11.9
16.8

27.8
56.3
28.4

2.3
-9.6
-5.6
-4.0
12.0

47.0 
25.0 

51.5 
13.6 

21.1 
5.7 
-20.4 
35.8 

-. 8
1.4

-2.2
-6.8

-4.6 
-3.0 
-1.6 

22.0 
28.6 
6.7 

15.9
6.0

-3.9

9.9
9.9

83.6 
61.8 

74.7 
54.5 

47.8 
5.0 
6.1 
36.7 

4.3 
9.3 

-5.0 
2.3 

8.9 
7.6 
1.3 

21.8 
47.4 
25.6 

-1.6

-10.4
-13.5
3.1
8.8

103.5
93.4

84.1
76.6

55.8
7.7
10.4
37.7

16.9
21.1
-4,2
3.9

19.4
19.0
.4

10.2
45.7
35.6

-2.7
-10.7
-11.6

.9
8.0

CONFIDENTIAL  (FR) CLASS 

II

August  15,  1990

FEDERAL SECTOR  ACCOUNTS 1
(Billions of dollars)

Fiscal years

1989a 

1990 

1991 

1992 

Ia 

IIa 

III 

IV 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

I 

II 

III 

IV

1990 

1991 

1992

Not  seasonally  adjusted

991 
1143 
-152 
-207 
55 

1038 
1261 
-223 
-285 
61 

1120 
1337 
-216 
-285 
69 

1211 
1354 
-143 
-219 
76 

230 
310 
-80 
-94 
14 

319 
331 
-12 
-41 
29 

261 
321 
-60 
-72 
12 

244 
350 
-106 
-112 
7 

256 
332 
-76 
-96 
20 

341 
330 
11 
-15 
26 

279 
325 
-46 
-63 

17 

262 
346 
-83 
-92 
9 

279 
334 
-55 
-77 
22 

369 
336 
33 
6 
27 

301 
339 
-38 
-55 
18 

279
354
-76
-86
10

-143 

-166 

-146 

-117 

-77 

11 

-35 

-85 

-57 

28 

-31 

-71 

-47 

37 

-36 

-75

140 
3 
8 

267 
2 
-47 

208 
3 
5 

133 
0 
10 

90 
8 
-18 

41 
-16 
-13 

73 
-4 
-9 

94 
13 
-2 

58 
5 
12 

22 
-25 
-8 

33 
10 
2 

76 
10 
-2 

37 
5 
13 

-5 
-20 
-8 

25 
5 
7 

72
10
-7

25

BUDGET 

Budget  receipts 2  
Budget  outlays 2  
Surplus/deficit(-) 2  
(On-budget) 
(Off-budget) 

Surplus excluding RTC

spending 3  

Means  of  financing:
Borrowing 
Cash  decrease 
Other 4  

Cash  operating balance,

end of period 

41 

38 

35 

35 

18 

35 

38 

25 

20 

45 

35 

25 

20 

40 

35 

NIPA FEDERAL SECTOR 

Receipts 
Expenditures 
Purchases 
Defense 
Nondefense 
Other  expend. 
Surplus/deficit 

FISCAL INDICATORS 5

High-employment  (HEB)
surplus/deficit(-) 
Change  in  HEB,  percent
of potential  GNP 
Fiscal  impetus  measure

(FI),  percent 

1038 
1174 
400 
301 
99 
774 
-136 

1091 
1245 
413 
306 
107 
831 
-154 

1176 
1310 
424 
306 
118 
887 
-135 

1267 
1366 
427 
301 
127 
938 
-99 

1081 
1249 
411 
307 
103 
838 
-168 

1104 
1257 
421 
310 
111 
836 
-153 

1124 
1267 
422 
308 
114 
845 
-143 

1139 
1287 
422 
307 
115 
865 
-148 

1171 
1317 
425 
308 
117 
891 
-146 

1189 
1318 
425 
305 
119 
893 
-129 

1204 
1321 
424 
303 
121 
897 
-116 

1223 
1341 
424 
301 
123 
917 
-117 

1262 
1368 
429 
303 
126 
939 
-106 

1281 
1374 
429 
301 
128 
946 
-93 

1302 
1380 
428 
299 
130 
951 
-78 

1325
1399
428
296
132
972
-74

Seasonally  adjusted  annual  rates

-162 

-163 

-116 

-71 

-182 

-161 

-143 

-137 

-128 

-107 

-92 

-92 

-79 

-65 

-49 

-45

.1 

0 

-.9 

-. 8 

.3 

-. 4 

-.3 

-. 1 

-. 2 

-.4 

-. 3 

0 

-. 2 

-. 2 

-.2 

-. 1

-3.5 * 

-4.3  * 

-4.9  * 

-4.6  * 

-2.3 

.7 

-. 5 

-1.7 

-2.3 

-.9 

-. 7 

-1.4 

-2 

-. 6 

-.6 

-1.3

a--actual

*--calendar year

Note:  Details  may not  add to  totals due  to rounding.

1.  Staff projections.  The  FY1990,  FY1991  and FY1992  deficits 

in  OMB's  Mid-Session  Review  (July  1990)  are  $220  billion, 

$176  billion 

and  $134  billion,

respectively.  These  estimates  incorporate  approximately  $53  billion 
$70  billion 

in  FY1992.  CBO's  FY1990,  FY1991  and  FY1992  baseline  deficits 

of  cuts  from the  adjusted  Gramm-Rudman-Hollings  baseline  in  FY1991  and

(July 1990)  are  $195  billion, 

$232  billion 

and  $239  billion, 

respectively.

2.  Budget  receipts,  outlays, and  surplus/deficit  include  social  security  (OASDI)  receipts,  outlays  and  surplus,  respectively.  The OASDI  surplus  is

3. 

excluded  from the  "on-budget"  deficit  and shown  separately  as  "off-budget",  as  classified under  current  law,  The  Postal  Service deficit  is  included
in  off-budget  outlays  beginning  in  FY1990.
The  Administration's  deficit 
respectively.  CBO's  July  deficit 
respectively.

projections,  excluding RTC  spending,  for  FY1990,  FY1991 and FY1992,  were  $163  billion,  $114  billion  and  $93  billion,
$162  billion,and  $179  billion,

estimates,  excluding  RTC  spending,  for  FY1990,  FY1991  and  FY1992,  were  $159  billion, 

4.  Other  means  of  financing  are  checks  issued  less  checks  paid,  accrued  items;  and  changes  in  other  financial  assets  and  liabilities.
5.  HEB 

is  the  NIPA  measure  in  current  dollars  with  cyclically-sensitive 

output  growth.  Quarterly figures  for  change in HEB  and  FI  are  not  at  annual  rates.  Change  in  HEB,  as  a  percent  of  nominal  potential  GNP, 
in  sign.  FI  is  the  weighted difference  of discretionary  federal  spending  and tax  changes  (in 1982  dollars),  scaled  by real  federal  purchases.  For
change  in  HEB  and  FI, 

indicates  restraint.

(-) 

receipts  and  outlays  adjusted  to  a  6  percent  unemployment  rate  and  2.5%  potential
reversed

is 

DOMESTIC FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS

Recent Developments

Short-term interest  rates  fell during  July in  response  to  the

announcement that  the  System  had eased  and the  subsequent  1/4  percentage

point drop  in the  federal  funds  rate  on July  13.  Bond yields  fluctuated

over  a  fairly wide range  last month, but  at  the  beginning  of August  they had

shown little net  change.  A  rally  in  equity markets  pushed  several major

stock price  indexes  to  record highs  early in the  intermeeting  period.

However, prices  in  financial markets  reacted sharply  to  events  in  the Middle

East  and to  the  associated  runup  in  oil  prices.  These  circumstances

apparently heightened expectations  of  an  easing of  monetary policy, but  also

deepened the  uncertainty  about  the  course  of  the  economy and  interest  rates

and the  concern about  inflation pressures.  The  result  has  been a  further

decline  in  short-term rates,  a  jump  in bond yields,  and a  sharp  selloff in

equity markets.  Treasury bill  rates  have  fallen about  30  basis  points  since

the  July 3  FOMC,  while bond  yields have  risen  nearly  40  basis points.  The

reversal  in the  equity market  has  left  most major  stock price indexes

roughly 5-1/2  percent  below the  levels  recorded at  the time  of  the  last FOMC

meeting.

The  monetary aggregates changed  little  in  July,  as  they had over the

previous  three months.  Even abstracting  from  deposit  shifts  associated with

a  reserve-evasion tactic, growth  of M2  remained well below  rates that  would

have  been  expected in  light  of  recent  income  growth and movements  in

opportunity costs.  Growth  in  bank  assets  remained moderate,  and the  assets

of thrift  institutions  evidently  continued to  contract  last month.  With

I-18

I-19

funding needs  subdued, M3  was unchanged in  July, after edging  down over  the

second quarter as  a whole.  The  rise  in M3  thus  far  in  1990  has been  at  an

annual  rate  of  only  1 percent,  leaving this  aggregate at  the  lower end of

its  new  target  range.

Bank  credit  expanded at  a pace of nearly  5-1/2 percent  in July, about

the  same  as  that  over  the second quarter.  July growth was buoyed by an

increase  in  security  loans  at  several  large  banks and a rise  in real  estate

loans  as  a result  of RTC  transfers  from insolvent  thrift  institutions  at  the

beginning of  the month.  Aside  from  these activities,  the  growth of  bank

credit  was  noticeably more  restrained than it  was  during the  second quarter.

Government  security acquisitions dropped off  sharply, as  purchases  of

mortgage-backed securities by banks  slowed.  Abstracting  from RTC transfers,

growth  in real  estate  loans  continued to  be  weak--a development  consistent

with the  responses to the  Survey of  Senior  Loan Officers at  large  banks

taken in  early  August.  Respondents  indicated a significant  tightening of

standards  for  loans  for  commercial  real  estate  and  construction and

development.

Business  credit  flows  appear to  have weakened in  July.  Loans at  banks

and commercial  paper  outstanding both  declined.  Some of the  commercial

paper runoff evidently was  financed by bond offerings brought  to market  in

June,  when a number  of firms  exploited earlier declines  in  bond yields by

substituting longer-term debt  for  short-term paper.  Gross  public bond

issuance was quite high  in June,  but  declined substantially  in July.  The

weakness  in bank loans to businesses evidently has been prompted in part  by

supply  factors.  A significant minority of  large domestic banks  responding

to  the  Survey of Senior Loan Officers  indicated a further tightening of

I-20

standards  and lending terms  for  business borrowers  of all  sizes.

Separately,  an even  larger  share  of  officers  at  branches and  agencies of

foreign banks  responded that  they  had tightened lending standards  and loan

terms during the  past  six months.  Some  businesses  have apparently turned to

alternative  sources of credit  or  sought  ways to bolster  lender  confidence  in

recent  months.  Data on  finance  company loans  to businesses  are  not

available  for  July, but  such  loans  again grew  smartly in  June.  Moreover,

the  Small  Business Administration  reported a jump  in  loan guarantee

applications  in recent  months.  Equity issuance picked up  in July, but  a

number of  nonfinancial  firms  withdrew plans  for  new stock  issuance  in the

wake  of  the August  price  declines.

In the  household sector,  credit  demands appear to have  remained

sluggish.  Installment  credit  in  June was  up only  1 percent  at  an annual

rate,  so that  the  increase over the  first half  of the  year was held to  just

2-1/2  percent,  the  smallest rise  in a decade.  The  slow  growth of

installment  credit  in  large measure  reflects weakness  in consumption,

especially consumer durables.  Household use  of  home  equity credit  has  also

been a factor  in trimming the growth of consumer credit.  Home  equity credit

again grew briskly in July at  banks,  despite  reports  that  some lenders  in

the Northeast may have tightened terms on new  loans  in response to weakening

in  real estate  values and to  increases  in delinquencies.  Recent  declines in

construction activity and home  sales  appear to  have held down growth  in

total mortgage debt  relative to  the  average in recent  years.  In addition to

the weakness  of growth of real  estate  lending at  commercial  banks,  holdings

of mortgage assets  at  thrift  institutions  are expected to have  contracted in

July, as their  liabilities continued to drop  sharply.

I-21

The  federal  government  is borrowing heavily  in  the third  quarter to

meet  a deficit  of  $60  billion.  The  staff  anticipates that  the Treasury's

total marketable borrowing will  reach a record $68  billion in  the current

quarter,  split  about  evenly between  the  bill  and the  coupon markets.

Treasury borrowing  for  RTC working capital  is  again expected to bulk  large,

although spending  since early  July for  thrift  resolutions has  slowed to a

trickle.  Municipal borrowing declined  in  July after a relatively  large

volume of  offerings  in  June that  had been bolstered by heavy  short-term debt

issuance by New York  State.  In  July,  short-term issuance  fell back  to a

more  normal pace,  and offerings  of long-term debt  also weakened.

Outlook

Events  in the Middle East  have  intensified uncertainty in financial

markets  about  the  likely course  of  output  and inflation.  This  uncertainty

may accentuate  lenders'  caution and delay  any reversal of  the  recent  trend

toward tighter credit  standards.  Nonfederal borrowing in the near  term is

now expected to  be  somewhat weaker  than was  anticipated at  the time  of the

last  Greenbook,  in  line  with the  smaller projected rise  in nominal  GNP  in

the  second half of this  year.  Growth in nonfederal  debt  next  year  is

expected to  edge down  further, before  firming in  1992.

Growth  in business  credit  should moderate over the projection period.

Corporate  restructuring activity has  dropped substantially  in recent months,

in part  because of the  higher cost  of  credit  for  highly leveraged

transactions;  we  anticipate  that  such  activity will  remain  at  current  lower

levels  over the  next  year and a half.  Moreover, a reduction  in projected

capital spending  has  lowered anticipated borrowing needs, even though  cash

flow  should be  weaker.  The  projected economic  setting suggests that

I-22

downgrades  and defaults  in both the  financial  and nonfinancial  sectors  will

continue to constrain lending to businesses.

Household debt  is  also  expected to  decelerate,  in  line with  the

anticipated weakness  in income  growth and  spending.  With  consumption

subdued, growth  in consumer credit  likely will  remain quite  slow over the

next  year.  Mortgage debt  also  is  likely to extend its  recent  lower  growth

path in line  with reduced construction levels  and  slower advances  in house

prices.

In municipal markets,  debt  growth is  projected to  remain moderate.

While  spending pressures  from demographic changes  and other  underlying needs

should continue  for  some  time,  relatively high interest  rates,  concerns

about  credit  quality, and voter  resistance  are likely to  restrain debt

issuance.

Growth in  federal debt  is expected to  reach 11  percent this year, the

fastest  rate  since  1986.  Projected RTC activity accounts for  roughly 3-1/2

percentage  points  of this  growth, as  borrowing for working capital purposes

is  assumed  to total nearly  $70  billion.  Lower net  outlays  by RTC in  1991,

in part  reflecting anticipated sales  of  some assets,  and implementation of a

deficit-reduction package are  expected to  restrict  federal debt  growth  to

around  8 percent.

The acceleration in  federal  debt  in 1990  is  expected to  raise the

growth of the nonfinancial  debt  aggregate to  about  7 percent, the midpoint

of  its monitoring range.  As  federal borrowing declines  in  1991,  expansion

in total  nonfinancial debt  is  anticipated to slow to roughly  6 percent, in

the  lower half of the provisional  range  adopted at  the July  FOMC meeting.

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS

Recent  Developments

The  weighted-average  foreign  exchange value  of  the  dollar  in terms  of

the  other  G-10 currencies  has  declined nearly 5  percent  since  the  July  FOMC

meeting.  The  dollar  depreciated 5-1/2  percent  against  the mark and 2-1/2

percent  against  the  yen.  Signs  the  U.S.  economy might be  weakening,  a

slight easing  of U.S.  monetary policy,  and  some  tightening  of monetary

conditions  abroad contributed  to  downward pressures  on  the  dollar.  Late  in

the  intermeeting period, the  dollar received  some  temporary support  from the

rise  in  international  tensions  associated with  the  Iraqi  invasion of  Kuwait.

Short-term market  interest  rates  in Germany  and Japan rose  about  1/4

percentage  point  during  the  intermeeting period.  The  Bank of  Japan has

allowed the  rise  in  rates  because  of  concerns  about  inflation pressures.  In

Germany,  the  call money  rate  remained near  the  8  percent Lombard  rate,  where

it  has  been since  German monetary union in  early July.  Following  the  Iraqi

invasion of Kuwait  and the  subsequent rise  in world  oil prices,  gold prices

rose  significantly  and stock and bond prices declined  sharply  in most  major

foreign countries.

market

The  U.S.  Treasury purchased  over  $400  million in  the

Economic  indicators  for  the  second quarter  suggest  continued robust

real growth  in Japan and  West Germany.  In the other major  foreign

industrial  countries, the  pace of  activity  appears  to have  slowed.  Economic

developments  in West Germany have been  dominated by the  process  of

I-23

I-24

unification.  The  treaty  implementing economic  and monetary union went  into

effect  on July 1, and  the  initial  adjustment,  at  least with respect to

monetary unification, proceeded relatively  smoothly.

Measured inflation rates  have either  remained unchanged or

have  declined slightly recently  in each  of  the major  industrial countries,

except  the United Kingdom.  Authorities  in  many countries  nevertheless

remain  concerned about  a possible  increase  in  underlying inflation pressures

as  indicated by high capacity utilization rates  in Japan and France, higher

wage  settlements  in  Italy  and Canada, and economic  and  financial  strains

arising  from economic  unification of Germany.

Output  growth  in Latin America has  slowed somewhat  so  far  this  year

compared with 1989.  Disinflation programs  initiated  in Argentina and Brazil

have  caused a contraction  in economic  activity  in  those  countries,  although

activity  in Brazil  appears  to  have  stabilized  in June and July.  Growth  in

Mexico  has  slowed marginally as  fiscal and monetary policies  there  have

been tightened.  In contrast,  growth has picked up  recently  in some Asian

countries, particularly Korea and Singapore.

The U.S.  merchandise  trade  deficit widened slightly in May to  $7.7

billion  (seasonally adjusted, Census basis).  A rise  in nonagricultural

exports  in May was more  than offset by  increases  in  imports  of  oil  and non-

oil products.  For April-May combined, the  deficit was  $9 billion smaller

than  it was  in  the  first-quarter  (annual rate,  balance of payments basis).

This  improvement was  due  largely to  a decline  in  the value  of  oil  imports.

World oil prices  reversed declines  of  the preceding few months  in

July,  following  an initial  informal  agreement  among Persian Gulf producers

that was  later  formalized in  an accord to  reduce production by 1 million

barrels  per  day.  Oil  prices  rose  further  in  response to  threats  from  Iraq

and  the movement  of Iraqi  troops  toward  the border with Kuwait.  The

I-25

invasion of  Kuwait  resulted  in a peak  spot price  for  West Texas  Intermediate

of nearly  $30  per barrel  on August  7.  World oil  prices  retraced  some  of

their  rise  during the  following days,  as  forces  moved to  protect  Saudi

Arabia and  some producers  indicated a willingness  to  increase  production.

The  average price  of U.S.  non-oil  imports  declined slightly  in  the

second  quarter,  partly  in  response  to  an appreciation of  the  dollar

against  the  yen that was  largely offset by depreciation against other

currencies.  Prices  of U.S.  exports  rose  4 percent  at  an annual rate  in  the

second quarter,  led by  increases  in  agricultural prices.

Outlook

Compared with the June Greenbook, the  current  forecast  incorporates

higher prices  for oil over  the  forecast period and  a lower  dollar.  Higher

oil prices  contribute  to  a weaker outlook for  foreign growth  in the  near

term  and also  result  in a larger projected U.S.  nominal  trade  deficit over

the next  few quarters  than in  the  preceding forecast.  The  effects  on

foreign growth are  more muted  than  in  the U.S.  case because  of lower  energy

dependence  and a larger excise  tax wedge  in retail  prices of  energy

products  abroad, on average.  In  the longer  term,  the  lower  dollar,  along

with a pick-up  in  growth abroad and an  assumed backing-off of oil  prices,

leads  to  a downward revision  in  the projected trade  deficit.  In  sum,  the

trade  deficit  is  now projected to  widen somewhat  in  the  second half of this

year,  to narrow  significantly during 1991,  and to  level  off during  1992.

The  current account follows  a similar pattern.

The  Dollar.  The  foreign exchange value  of the  dollar  in  terms  of  the

other  G-10 currencies  is  projected to  remain unchanged over  the  forecast

horizon at  its  recent average  level  of  about 88  on  the  staff's  index.  The

dollar's  level  is  noticeably lower  than that  in  the  last Greenbook,

consistent with its  movements  in the  interim  and the  slightly  lower U.S.

I-26

short-term interest rates.  The  uncertainties  associated with  this  outlook

for  the dollar  are  large,  in  light  of recent  developments  in  the Middle  East

and world oil markets  and the  wide  range  of possible policy responses  to

these  and future  developments.

Against  the currencies  of  eight major  developing  countries,  the  dollar

is  expected to  appreciate  slightly  in  real terms  in  1990  and then  to  retrace

part of  that  rise  over  the  remainder of  the  forecast horizon.

Foreign  Industrial Countries.  The  staff outlook for  the major  foreign

industrial  countries  incorporates  increases  in  short-term interest rates by

authorities  in several countries.  In West Germany, high rates  of capacity

utilization and rapid growth heighten the  risk  that  the  recent rise  in world

oil prices will  intensify upward pressures on prices.  As  a result,  the

Bundesbank is  expected to  allow short-term market  interest  rates  to  increase

1/2 percentage point  from current  levels  through mid-1991.  Rates  are

expected to  remain at the higher  level  over the  remainder  of the  forecast

period.  The Bank of Japan is  expected to  allow for  a slight further rise  in

short-term rates of about  1/4  percentage point from current  levels  through

the  end of  this  year.  With Japanese  real  growth  expected to  slow a

little  over  the  forecast period, short-term interest  rates  may  edge  down in

1991  and 1992  if  inflation does  not rise  significantly.  Short-term interest

rates  in  the United Kingdom are  expected to  decline  slightly during the

remainder of  this  year and to  trend  down over  the  rest  of  the  forecast

period,  for  a net  decline  of 3 percentage points  from current levels.  U.K.

rates  are very high and real  activity is  already  showing signs  of  slowing.

Moreover,  the United Kingdom  is  expected to join the  exchange rate  mechanism

of  the European Monetary  System later  this  year, which would provide scope

for  the downward adjustment of interest  rates.

I-27

Real growth  in  the  foreign industrial  countries  in  the  second half of

1990  is  expected to  average  a bit more  than  2 percent,  down  from 3-1/4

percent in  1989  and 3-1/2  percent  at  an annual  rate  in  the  first half  of

1990;  both monetary restraint and  the  effects  of  the  oil price  increase

contribute to  this  slowing.  The higher  oil prices  assumed for  the  second

half of  this  year have  resulted  in  a lowering of  the  forecast  for  growth  in

the  second half of 1990  (by 1/2  percentage point  at  an annual  rate)  that  is

partially offset by a slightly  stronger expansion in  1991.  Growth is

projected  to pick up  to  3-1/4 percent  in 1991,  and  to  remain at  about  the

same  rate  through  the end  of  the  forecast horizon.

Growth  in West Germany  is projected to  rise  to  4-1/2  percent  (fourth

quarter  to  fourth  quarter)  this  year  and 4-3/4 percent  next year,  rises  that

reflect mainly  the  effects of German reunification and  the  liberalization of

East European economies.  In 1992,  German  growth is  expected to  moderate  to

about 4 percent  as  monetary restraint begins  to  bite.  Japanese growth  is

expected to  slow to  about  4 percent  over  the  forecast  period, in response  to

continuing  tightening of monetary policy instituted  to  contain  growing

inflation pressures.  After sharp  slowdowns  this  year,  Canadian and U.K.

growth  are both projected to  recover  in  1991  and to  increase  further  in

1992.  U.K. activity is  expected  to  be boosted by lower  interest  rates.

The  average increase  in  consumer prices  in the  foreign G-10  countries

is  expected to  rise  to  about 5 percent  (fourth quarter to  fourth

quarter) this  year, almost 1/2  percentage point above the  increase projected

in  the  June Greenbook.  Foreign  inflation  is  then expected to  decline  to

slightly less  than 4 percent  in  1991  and 1992,  somewhat  below the preceding

projection.

Developing Countries.  Growth  in the  developing countries  on average

is  expected  to be  about  3 percent  (year over year)  in  1990  and  then to

I-28

rebound to  about 4 percent  in  1991  and  1992.  Activity  is  expected  to

strengthen particularly  in Latin America, as  a result of recovery  in Brazil

and Argentina.  This  outlook calls  for  slower  growth  this  year and next  than

the  June  forecast,  as  a result  of  the higher world oil  prices,  the  loss  of

output  expected for  Iraq  and Kuwait,  and the  slower growth  expected in

exports  to  the  industrial countries.

U.S.  Merchandise Trade  Quantities.  Growth of  the quantity  of U.S.

nonagricultural exports  is  projected to  ease  slightly  in  the  second half  of

this  year  as  foreign growth slows,  and then to  pick up  during  the next  two

years  in response  to  the  recent decline  in  the  dollar and a rebound in

growth  abroad.  (See  the  table  below.)  The  quantity of  U.S.  agricultural

exports  is  expected to  continue  to  rise  much  less  rapidly  than other

exports will,  because  Soviet purchases  are  not expected  to expand  further

during  the next  two years.  Relative  to  the June projection, the  path of

total  exports  is  slightly  lower  in  the near  term in  response  to  slower

growth abroad, but somewhat higher thereafter as  a result  of  the lower

dollar.

TRADE QUANTITIES  *
(Percent change,  annual  rate)

1989-04 
1988-Q4 

1990-Q2 
1989-Q4 

---  Projection  ---
1992-04
1990-Q4

1990-04 
1990-Q2 

12.2 
12.1 

6.6 
2.4 

7.7 
-2.4 

1.7 
5.8 

6.5 
5.5 

2.1 
-10.6 

10.0
1.0

5,4
5.1

Nonagricultural  exports 
Agricultural exports 

Non-oil  imports 
Oil  imports 

*  GNP basis  data.

Growth  in  the quantity of non-oil  imports  is  projected to  remain

sluggish  in  the  second half of this  year, and to  rebound over the  next two

I-29

years  as U.S.  economic growth picks  up.  Relative  to  the June  projection,

the  forecast  for  the  level  of imports  has been revised downward this  year

because  of slower U.S.  growth, and next year because  of  the  projected lower

level  of  the  dollar.  The volume  of  oil  imports  eased somewhat  in  the  second

quarter  from  the  unusually high rate  in  the  first  quarter and  is  expected  to

decline gradually through  the  rest  of  the year,  as  domestically-held stocks

of crude oil  are  reduced  to  more normal  levels.  This  projection assumes

that  events  in  the  Middle  East will  not  induce users  to  increase  stocks  of

refined products  substantially.  Next year,  oil  imports  are  projected to

expand considerably faster, as  domestic production of crude  oil  trends  down

and  as  economic activity picks  up.

On balance,  total  real  net exports  of merchandise  are  expected to

increase moderately  in the  current  quarter and more strongly  in  the  fourth

quarter.  Next year,  the  expansion will be  sustained by  increases  in

shipments  to  Europe, as  real  activity  there  strengthens.  Compared with  the

June  forecast,  real  net exports of  goods  rise  somewhat  faster  in  the  second

half of  1990  (from a revised, weaker  second quarter),  and are  roughly $7

billion  (1982  dollars)  stronger on average by the  end of 1991  (annual rate).

Much of  this  revision can be  accounted for by the  lower path for  the  dollar.

A greater downward adjustment of projected real  growth in  the  United States

than abroad also  contributes, particularly in  the  near-term.

Merchandise Trade  Prices.  The  fixed-weight index of prices  of

nonagricultural exports  is  expected to  rise  moderately this  year  and next,

at  about  the projected rate  of  increase  in domestic  producer prices  (export-

share weighted),  shown in  the  table  below.  The  revisions  to  the  outlook for

the  dollar  and foreign  inflation have raised the projected rate  of  increase

in prices  of non-oil  imports  somewhat.

I-30

The  average  price  of  oil  imports  is  expected to  follow  the  pattern of

spot  oil  prices  discussed  in  the  section on domestic nonfinancial

developments.  The  import  price  is  assumed to  average  $25  per barrel  in  the

fourth quarter,  to  decline  to  about $20.50  by  the  third quarter  next year,

and then to  resume  a  gradual  upward trend.  From  the  third quarter  of  next

year  through  the  end of the  forecast period, oil  import prices  are

approximately  $3  per barrel  higher  than those  incorporated  in  the  June

forecast,  largely reflecting  the  results  of the  July OPEC  accord.

SELECTED  PRICE  INDICATORS
(Percent change,  annual  rate)

1989-Q4 
1988-Q4 

1990-Q2 
1989-Q4 

1990-Q4 
1990-Q2 

1992-Q4
19 9 0-Q 4

---  Projection  ---

PPI  (export-share weighted) 
Nonagric.  exports  (Fx-Wt) 

3.4 
0.0 

Non-oil  imports  (Fx-Wt) 
Oil  imports 

-1.0 
36.8 

2.2 
2.3 

2.6 
-18.7 

4.2 
4.5 

5.6 
146.3 

2.3
2.3

3.7
-6.2

Nominal  Balances:  Trade and  Services.  The  merchandise  trade  deficit

is  expected  to  increase  significantly  in  the  second half of this  year,

largely  in  response to  rising oil  prices,  and  to narrow next year.  It

is  then projected  to  stabilize  at  an annual  rate  of  about  $85  billion during

1992.  Net portfolio  payments  to  foreigners  are  expected to  rise

significantly over  the  forecast period because  of rising U.S.  international

indebtedness.  This  deterioration  is  not  significantly different than  that

projected  in the June  forecast.  These rising net payments  are  expected to

be more  than fully offset by increases  in net  receipts  on services,

transfers,  and net direct  investment  income.  As  a  result,  the  current

account  balance  is  projected to  improve  somewhat  more than the  trade  balance

over  the  forecast  period, to  less  than $70  billion at  an  annual  rate  by the

end of  1991  and roughly  $60  billion throughout  1992.

I-31

Strictly Confidential  (FR)  Class  II-FOMC

Outlook  for  U.S. Net  Exports and  Related Items
(Billions  of  Dollars,  Seasonally  Adjusted Annual  Rates)

1. GNP  Exports and Imports 1/

1990~m- 

I 

192-P 

-Q3-P9 P4-P

Q1-P 

1991 

_ 

-Q2-P 

-03-P  -q4-P  Q1-P 

1992
-Q2-P  -Q3-P 

-Q4-P

Current  0, Net

Exports of  0+S
Imports of  O+S

Constant 82  8,  Net
Exports of G+S
Imports of 0+S

-30.4 
-13.7 
4.4
673.9  733.2  800.4
704.3  746.9  796.0

-36.9

-27.6 
679.4  693.1
730.0
707.1 

-26.5
707.9
734.4

-9.6 

-15.6 
-3.1
723.7  741.3  759.8
739.3  750.9  762.9

3.4
-35.9  -12.8 
630.8  667.8  716.4
666.7  680.6  713.0

-35.9  -25.9 
632.5  640.2 
668.5  666.1 

-19.7  -16.2  -11,1 
-4.1 
649.3  660.7  673.6  687.7 
669.0  676.9  684.7  691.7 

1.7 

4.7
777.0  791.7  808.1
775.2  788.2  803.3

3.5 

7.5
824.8
817.4

0.8 

6.1
700.0  710.3  721.7  733.4
699.2  707.5  717.8  727.3

3.9 

2.8 

2. Merchandise  Trade Balance 2/

-103.6  -94.6  -84.0  1-102.0  -113.6  -105.4  -95.8  -91.1  -86.1 

-84.3  -83.9  -83.9  -84.0

Exports

Agricultural
Non-Agricultural

Imports

Petroleum and Products
Non-Petroleum

3. Other Current Account  Transactions

Capital Gains and Losses  3/
Other  D.I.  Income,  Net
Portfolio  Income,  Net
Other Current Account,  Net

4. U.S.  Current  Account Balance

Including Capital G/L
Excluding  Capital O/L

5. Foreign  Outlook 4/

390.2  430.8  478.3
47.9

42.9 
44.8 
347.3  386.0  430.4

391.7  401.5 
43.4 
349.1  J58.1 

42.6 

412.1  423.6  436.7  450.8
45.9

44.5 

43.9 

45.0 
391a.7  405.0 

368.2  379. 

462.4  473.2  483.7
48.2

493.7
49.3
415.9  425.8  435.5  444.4

46.5 

47.4 

493.8  525.5  562.3
70.7
432.1  458.2  491.5

67.2 

61.7 

59.7 

493.7  515.0 
546.7  557.1  567.6  577.8
74.9 
68.3 
72.8
434.0  440.1 
478.3  487.1  495.8  504.9
/--~---~----~--------~-------  ~~---------------------------

517.6  519.5  527.9  537.0 
66.9 
446.6  454.2  462.1  470.0 

65.2 

70.0 

65.8 

71.8 

71.0 

0.0 
47.7 

0.2 
44.7 

0.0
49.0
-42.7  -45.8  -49.3
24.1

18.5 

11.6 

0.0 
46.9 

0.0 
47.7 
-42.9  -43.7 
11.8 

12.7 

0.0 
48.2 

0.0 
47.9 

0.0 
47.2 
-44.4  -45.2  -46.2  -47.2 
18.9 

0.0 
47.5 

18.4 

20.1 

16.6 

0.0 
48.6 

0.0 
48.6 

0.0
50.0
-48.0  -48.9  -49.8  -50.7
23.6

0.0 
48.6 

23.2 

25.5 

24.4 

-89.8  -74.2  -60.2 
-90.0  -74.2  -60.2 

- - - - - - - - - - - -4  -

-85.4  -97.8 
-85.4  -97.8 

- - - -

-84.9  -74.8  -69.7  -67.2 
-84.9  -74.8  -69.7  -67.2 

- - - - - - - - - - - -

- - - - - - - - -

-60.4  -59.7  -59.7  -61.1
-60.4  -59.7  -59.7  -61.1
-
- - - - - - -

- - - -

- - -

Real  GNP--Ten  Industrial  5/
Real  GNP--LDC 6/
Consumer  Prices--Ten Ind. 5/

3.2 
3.0 
4.6 

2.8 
3.9 
4.3 

3.3
4.2
3.7

2.1 
3.4 
4.0 

2.1 
3.8 
5.0 

3.0 
4.1 
4.0 

3.5 
4.1 
4.9 

3.6 
4.0 
3.1 

3.4 
4.0 
3.7 

3.2 
4.0 
3.7 

3.2 
4.3 
4.1 

3.1 
4.7 
3.5 

3.2
5.1
3.8

1/ National  Income and  Product  Account data.
2/ International  accounts  basis.
3/ The  net  of gains  (+) or  losses  (-) on  foreign-currency  denominated assets  due to  their  revaluation at  current  exchange rates and
other valuation adjustments.
4/ Percent  change, annual  rates.
5/ Weighted by multilateral  trade-weights of 0-10  countries  plus Switzerland;  prices  are  not  seasonally adjusted.
6/ Weighted by share in  LDC GNP.
P/ Projected




==== GREENBOOK | 1990-08-21_fomc19900821gbpt219900815.txt ====

Prefatory Note 

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 

available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain. 

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 

gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.    

1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Confidential  (FR)  Class  III  FOMC

August  15,  1990

RECENT  DEVELOPMENTS

Prepared  for  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee
By  the  staff  of the  Board  of Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Section 

Page

II

DOMESTIC  NONFINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS 
Employment and unemployment....................................... 
Labor  costs........................................................ 
Industrial production ............................................. 
Personal  consumption expenditures................................. 
Autos  and light  trucks ............................................ 
Business  fixed  investment .........................  .. ............ 
Business  inventories.............................................. 
Housing markets.................................................... 
Federal  sector .................................................... 
State and local  government  sector...............................  .
Energy prices  and  supplies........................................ 
....... 
Food prices  and agricultural  conditions............................ 
Prices ............................................................ 
Appendix A:  Annual  revision to the  national  income

1
3
9
13
17
19
25
29
30
33
35
37
41

and product  accounts..........................................II-A-1
Appendix B:  Mid-session  review of the budget.....................II-B-1

Tables
Changes  in employment............................................... 
Selected unemployment  rates...................................... 
Employment  cost  index:Private  industry workers...................... 
Negotiated wage  rate  changes  under major

collective bargaining settlements............................. 

Employment  cost  index .................... 
.......................... 
Growth  in selected  components of  industrial production............ 
Percent  change  in orders  for manufactured goods.................... 
Capacity utilization  in  industry.................................. 
Retail  sales....................................................... 
Sales  of automobiles  and light trucks................................. 
Business capital  spending  indicators.............................. 
Changes  in manufacturing and trade  inventories................... 
Inventories  relative  to  sales..................................... 
Private  housing activity ......................................... 
Federal  government outlays  and receipts............................ 
Monthly average  prices--West  Texas Intermediate................... 
U.S. agricultural  production and inventories....................... 
Recent  changes  in producer prices.................................. 
Recent  changes  in  consumer prices.................................. 
Price  indexes for  commodities and materials ....................... 

Charts
Other  labor market  indicators..................................... 
Unemployment  insurance............................................ 
Employment  cost  index:  Private  industry workers................... 
Employment cost  index............................................. 
Real  business  fixed  investment.................................... 
Investment  and  cash  flow.......................................... 
Recent  data on orders  and shipments.............................. 
Nonresidential construction  and  selected indicators............... 
Ratio  of  inventories to sales.................................... 
Private  housing starts............................................ 
Real  federal purchases of  goods  and services....................... 
Fiscal  position of  the  state and local  sector...................... 

2
2
6

6
8
10
10
12
14
16
20
24
24
28
32
36
38
40
40
42

4
4
7
8
18
18
22
23
26
28
32
34

Daily spot  and posted prices  of West  Texas  Intermediate........... 
Index weights  ..................................................... 
Commodity price measures.......................................... 

36
42
43

DOMESTIC FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS 
Monetary aggregates  and bank credit.............................. 
Business  finance.................................................. 
Thrift  industry developments..................................... 
Treasury  and sponsored agency  financing.......................... 
State  and local  government  finance.................................. 
Mortgage markets.................................................. 
Consumer  installment credit....................................... 

III

Tables
Monetary aggregates ............................................... 
Commercial bank  credit and short-  and  intermediate-term

business  credit................................................ 
Gross offerings  of  securities by U.S.  corporations................. 
Treasury and  agency  financing..................................... 
Gross offerings  of municipal  securities........................... 
Mortgage-backed security issuance................................ 
Consumer  credit.................................................... 
Consumer  interest  rates ........................................... 
Retail  sales  of  auto dealers and automobile  credit................ 
Delinquency  rates  on  home  equity lines  of  credit at  banks.......... 

Charts
Long-term Treasury yields  and implied forward rates............... 
Interest  rates  on selected M2  instruments

and six-month Treasury bills.................................. 
Mortgage  markets................................................... 
Growth in  consumer  installment credit  and consumption............. 

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS 
U.S. merchandise  trade............................................. 
Import and export prices.......................................... 
U.S.  international  financial transactions.......................... 
Foreign exchange  markets .......................................... 
Developments in  foreign  industrial  countries...................... 
Developments in  East  European economies ........................... 
Economic  situation  in major developing countries.................. 

IV

Tables
U.S.  merchandise trade:  Monthly data......................  ...... 
Oil  imports........................... ............................ 
U.S.  merchandise trade:  Quarterly data............................ 
Major trade  categories............................................. 
Import  and export  price  measures................................ 
Summary of U.S.  international transactions........................ 
International banking data....................................... 
Selected financial markets indicators ............................. 
Major industrial  countries

Real GNP and industrial  production.............................. 
Trade  and current  account  balances............................. 
Consumer  and wholesale prices.......................  ............. 

Charts
Weighted average  exchange value  of the dollar..................... 

5
11
12
13
16
17
21

4

8
10
14
17
19
20
20
22
24

2

6
18
22

1
3
6
10
14
22
24

1
2
3
4
5
8
9
13

15
16
17

11

DOMESTIC  NONFINANCIAL
DEVELOPMENTS

DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL  DEVELOPMENTS

The Commerce  Department's  advance estimates  indicate  that  real  GNP  grew

at  a 1-1/4  percent  annual  rate  in the  second quarter,  and the  available

evidence  suggests  continued  slow  growth in the  current  quarter.  Labor

demand has been  sluggish, but  even so,  wage  increases have  not abated.  The

underlying  inflation trend appears  to  have been no  better than stable

through the first  half of  the year,  and the  recent  oil price  shock presages

some  bad price  figures  in coming months.  In addition,  the  steep  rise  in

energy prices  is  likely to  result  in a significant  erosion of  consumer

purchasing power.

Employment  and Unemployment

Employment  growth slowed  substantially  in the  second  quarter, and the

labor market  continued to weaken  in July.  Nonfarm payrolls  shrank  219,000

last  month--pushed down,  in part,  by a 162,000  decline  in Census  employment.

Private  payroll employment  dropped 45,000,  after small  gains during the

second quarter.

The  services  industry  lost  11,000  jobs  in July, as  employment declined

in business  services  and hiring slowed  in health  services.  The pace  of

hiring at  retail  and wholesale  trade establishments also  appears  to have

slowed  considerably in  recent months.  Construction employment  fell  in July

for  the fifth consecutive month and has  now more than  retraced  its  winter

spurt.  Manufacturing payrolls  also  declined  further,  albeit  at  a pace

slower than that  over  the  first  half  of the year;  all of the  job  loss  in

July occurred  among  supervisory workers,  while  the  employment  of production

workers  edged up.  By  industry, the  losses  in manufacturing  last month were

II-1

II-2

CHANGES  IN  EMPLOYMENT 1
(Thousands of employees;  based on  seasonally  adjusted data)

1988 

1989 

1989 
Q4 

1990 

Q1 

Q2 

May 

1990
June 

July

--------------- Average  Monthly Changes----------------

Nonfarm payroll  employment 2  
Excluding census workers 

276 

206 

158 

Private 

Manufacturing 

Durable 
Nondurable 
Construction 
Trade 
Finance,  insurance,  real  estate 
Services 

Total  government 

Private  nonfarm production workers 
Manufacturing production workers 

Total  employment3  
Nonagricultural 

248 
29 
20 
9 
14 
64 
11 
118 
27 

197 
20 

192 
193 

177 
-8 
-13 
5 
8 
48 
12 
99 
29 

156 
-23 
-24 
0 
-7 
44 
11 
87 
2 

144 
-10 

129 
-19 

146 
145 

156 
164 

286 
247 

205 
-22 
-8 
-14 
43 
33 
12 
121 
81 

167 
-24 

149 
147 

166 
83 

34 
-21 
-21 
0 
-50 
20 
5 
66 
132 

36 
-13 

18 
-31 

369 
169 

109 
-20 
-9 
-11 
-14 
31 
12 
77 
260 

86 
-28 

234 
62 

155 
166 

118 
-23 
-18 
-5 
-28 
8 
3 
142 
37 

135 
-12 

-219
-57

-45
-7
-10
3
-51
14
6
-11
-174

-55
7

39 
-4 

-436
-174

1. Average  change  from final  month  of preceding period to  final  month of period  indicated
2. Survey  of  establishments.
3. Survey of  households.

SELECTED  UNEMPLOYMENT RATES
(Percent; based on  seasonally  adjusted data)

1988 

1989 

1989 
Q4 

1990 

Q1 

Q2 

May 

1990
June 

July

Civilian,  16  years  and older 

5.5 

5.3 

5.3 

5.2 

5.3 

5.3 

5.2 

5.5

Teenagers 
20-24  years  old 
Men,  25  years  and older 
Women,  25  years  and older 

15.3 
8.7 
4.2 
4.3 

15.0  15.2 
8.9 
4.0 
4.3 

8.6 
3.9 
4.2 

14.5 
8.4 
4.1 
4.2 

14.8 
8.7 
4.1 
4.1 

15.5 
8.5 
4.1 
4.1 

White 
Black 

4.7 
11.7 

4.5 

4.5 
11.5  11.8 

4.6 
10.8 

4.6 
10.4 

4.6 
10.4 

14.1 
8.2 
4.1 
4.1 

4.5 
10.4 

16.3
8.3
4.4
4.2

4.6

11.3

Fulltime workers 

5.2 

4.9 

5.0 

4.9 

4.9 

4.9 

4.8 

5.0

Memo:

Total National1  

5.4 

5.2 

5.3 

5.2 

5.2 

5.3 

5.1 

5.4

1. Includes  resident  armed forces  as  employed.

II-3

concentrated in  electrical machinery and construction-related industries,

such as  lumber  and stone,  clay, and glass.

Although employment  declined and the  unemployment  rate moved up to

5.5  percent  in July,  other data paint  a more  sanguine  picture  of  underlying

labor  market conditions.  Hours  of production and  nonsupervisory workers

edged up  in  July to  a level  about  1-1/2  percent  at  an annual  rate  above  the

second-quarter average.  Also, data  from the household survey  indicate that

the number  of  recent  layoffs  as  a percentage of  employment  fell  last month.

Finally,  initial  claims  for  unemployment  insurance  have  fluctuated around

the  350,000  to 360,000 per week average  pace observed  in the first  half  of

1990.

Labor  Costs

As measured by the  employment cost  index  (ECI),  hourly compensation  for

private  industry  workers rose  5-1/4  percent  over the twelve  months ended in

June--about  3/4  percentage point  faster than  over the  comparable  period in

1989. 1  Wage  and salary  inflation edged  up to  a 4-1/2  percent  pace over

the past  twelve months  from the  4 percent  rate that  had prevailed for  nearly

2
a year  and a half. 

Benefit  costs  continued to  increase  faster than wages

and salaries.  The 7 percent  increase in benefit  costs over the  past  twelve

1. The  BLS  recently has made available  unpublished, seasonally adjusted
data  for the  Employment Cost  Index  on a confidential  basis  (table).  These
data will be  available  officially in  January  1991,  with the  release  of data
for the  fourth quarter of  1990.  The new  seasonally adjusted  series  do not
differ significantly  from those  produced in the past  by  Board  staff.  Hourly
compensation  increased at  a 5.1  percent  annual  rate  in  the second  quarter,
as  benefits decelerated  to a 5.4 percent  annual  rate,  while  wages  and
salaries  increased at  a 5.1  percent  annual  pace.

2. The April increase  in the minimum wage  from $3.35  to  $3.85  per hour

appears to  have had  only a minor  influence  on average  wages,  even within the
service  sector.  According to  the BLS,  the  ECI  figures  suggest  that  the
minimum wage  increase added  at most  0.1  percentage point  to private  sector
wage growth over the year  ending in the  second quarter.

II-4

OTHER  LABOR MARKET  INDICATORS

Layoff  Rate 1

Percent

Aggregate  Hours
r-

1977=100
-- 

136

July
*

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990

i 

.

. I L 
1 

.
il 

l  11111111111  1  li I I I 

1  1  1 I  ll  lll

1.  Recent  layoffs as  a percentage of household employment.

132

128

124

120

116

Initial Claims 

UNEMPLOYMENT  INSURANCE

(Weekly data;  seasonally adjusted,  FRB  basis) 2

Thousands

-

435

400

365

330

295

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

2.  Only the  stale program components of these seres  are seasonally adjusted.

260

1990

II-5

months  reflected, in part,  a 12 percent  increase in  employers' health

insurance  costs  as  well as  increases in both the  social security  tax rate

paid by employers  and the social  security tax base.

By  industry,  hourly compensation in the  goods-producing and the

service-producing  sectors  increased at  about the  same pace  over the

12  months  ended in  June.  Hourly compensation in the  service-producing

sector  has been rising at  a bit  above  a 5 percent  annual  rate over  the past

year, while  hourly compensation costs  in goods-producing industries have

accelerated  from 3-1/2  percent  to  5-1/4 percent  over  the  same period.

In the  union sector,  hourly compensation rose  a bit more  than  4 percent

over the  past  12 months,  up a percentage point  from the preceding year.  The

acceleration  in union wages also  was apparent  in the  second-quarter  data on

major  collective  bargaining agreements--those  covering  1,000 workers or

more.  The  first-year adjustments  in these contracts  averaged  4-1/4 percent,

2 percentage points  larger than in the  agreements they  replaced, most  of

which had been signed two or three years  ago.

Contract negotiations  between the  UAW and the  Big Three automakers

began  in mid-July.  In early  September, the UAW will  target  one of  the three

firms and negotiate  exclusively with that  firm until a settlement  has been

reached.  Ford's  strong economic  position relative to  Chrysler and GM would

seem to make  it  a likely choice as the  target  company.  Executives at

Chrysler have  indicated that  they would like  to  be the  target  company  in

order  to pursue  "innovative" discussions of  a proposed multi-employer  health

care  trust as  well  as  other  issues.  Despite  Ford's and  Chrysler's

positions, union members  publicly are  urging union leaders to  select  GM as

the target  company.  GM reportedly has  angered UAW members by  laying  off

II-6

EMPLOYMENT COST  INDEX
(Private industry  workers;  12-month percent  changes)

Total  compensation  costs:

1988 

1989 

June 

1989 
Sept.  Dec.  March 

1990

June

Private  industry workers 

4.8 

4.8 

4.5 

4.8 

4.8 

5.2 

5.2

By  industry:

Goods-producing 
Service-producing 

By occupation:

White-collar 
Blue-collar 
Service  workers 

By bargaining status:

Union 
Nonunion 

By region:

Northeast 
Midwest 
South 
West 

Memo:

4.4 
5.1 

4.3 
5.1 

3.6 
5.2 

4.1 
5.3 

4.3 
5.1 

5.1 
5.1 

5.2
5.2

5.0 
4.5 
5.3 

5.2 
4.1 
4.4 

5.2 
3.7 
4.6 

5.4 
4.1 
4.1 

5.2 
4.1 
4.4 

5.3 
4.8 
4.7 

5.5
4.7
4.9

3.9 
5.1 

3.7 
5.1 

3.1 
4.9 

3.3 
5.3 

3.7 
5.1 

4.3 
5.4 

4.1
5.5

5.9 
4.7 
4.4 
3.8 

6.4 
4.1 
4.2 
4.2 

6.6 
4.0 
3.4 
3.8 

7.2 
4.1 
3.9 
4.1 

6.4 
4.1 
4.2 
4.2 

5.8 
4.7 
5.1 
4.6 

5.3
4.8
5.7
4.5

Wages and  salaries 
Benefits 

4.1 
6.9 

4.1 
6.1 

4.1 
5.6 

4.3 
6.0 

4.1 
6.1 

4.2 
7.2 

4.5
6.9

NEGOTIATED  WAGE RATE CHANGES
UNDER MAJOR COLLECTIVE BARGAINING SETTLEMENTS
(Percent change)

1987 

1988 

1989 

Same  parties 
under  prior 
settlements 

1990
First
six
months

All  industries

First-year adjustments 
Average  over life  of  contract 

2.2 
2.1 

2.5 
2.4 

4.0 
3.3 

Workers  affected  (in thousands)  2037 

1799 

1847 

2.3 
2.2 

-- 

4.2
3.8

810

1. Contracts  covering  1,000  or more  workers;  estimates  exclude  lump-sum

payments  and potential gains  under cost-of-living clauses.

II-7

EMPLOYMENT  COST INDEX
Private Industry Workers

Percent change from  year earlier

/ 

\ 

Hourly  compensation

-L 

4 

--- 

-.

Benefits 

Q2

/L o/

1982 

1983 

1984 

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990

Compensation  Per Hour

Percent change from  year earlier

Service-producing

Goods-producing

1982 

1983 

1984 

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990

Compensation  Per Hour 

-

----
----- 
--

Northeast
South
MIdwest
*-West

Percent change  from  year earlier

Q2

i.

'~<\N/

1 

I 

F 

I 

I 

I

1984 

1985

1986 

1987 

1988

1989 

1990

II-8

EMPLOYMENT COST  INDEX
(Percent change  from preceding period at  compound annual  rates;
based on  seasonally adjusted data 1 )

1989 

1990

Mar. 

June 

Sept.  Dec. 

Mar.  June

Total compensation  costs:

Private industry  workers 

(FRB Seasonals) 

4.6 
4.6 

4.9 
4.5 

4.9 
5.3 

4.8 
4.8 

5.6 
6.0 

5.1
4.7

By  industry:

Goods-producing 

(FRB Seasonals) 

Service-producing 
(FRB Seasonals) 

Memo:

Wages  and salaries 
(FRB Seasonals) 

Benefits 

(FRB Seasonals) 

3.7 
3.7 

5.4 
5.9 

4.6 
3.7 

5.5 
8.1 

4.1 
4.1 

5.4 
4.5 

4.1 
4.1 

7.1 
5.4 

5.3 
4.9 

4.9 
5.3 

4.1 
4.5 

6.6 
5.7 

4.4 
4.8 

4.4 
4.8 

6.0 
6.4 

5.2 
5.6 

4.4 
4.0 

4.0 
4.4 

5.2 
5.2 

10.1 
12.6 

5.1
4.7

5.9
5.1

5.1
4.7

5.4
4.2

1. Changes  are from  final month of  preceding period to  final month of

period indicated.  Percent  changes are  seasonally adjusted by the Bureau of
Labor  Statistics.  These data are unpublished and confidential until released
by the BLS in January 1991.

Employment Cost  Index

Percent change from three  months earlier, annual rate

-

-

-

-

Seasonally  adjusted by  BLS
- Seasonally  adjusted by  FRB

1981 

1982

1983 

1984 

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990

II-9

thousands  of workers over the  last  three  years,  despite  job  security

measures  negotiated under the  1987  contract.

Under  the  expiring  UAW agreement,  workers  received  a 3  percent wage

increase in  1987  and  lump-sum payments  in  1988  and  1989  equal to  3  percent

of the previous  year's earnings.  COLAs  and profit  sharing also boosted

autoworkers'  earnings  over the  term of  the  last  contract.  The  job  security

program negotiated in  1987  was  the  centerpiece of the  agreement  and

guaranteed employment  levels  on a  plant-by-plant basis.  However,

automakers, particularly GM, circumvented this agreement  by "indefinitely

idling"  rather  than permanently  laying off  workers. 

The  union is

currently  challenging GM in court.

Negotiations  this  year  reportedly will  focus  on  job  security, COLAs  for

pensions,  outsourcing, wage  increases,  overtime  reductions,  and  reductions

in overall work time.  The  last  strike in  the auto industry,  which occurred

in  1976  against Ford,  involved  166,000  workers and lasted approximately

three  weeks.

At  this  point,  information on wage developments  in the third  quarter  is

limited to average  hourly earnings  for  July, which  increased 0.6 percent.

Sharp  increases in  services  and finance,  insurance, and real  estate  were

only partly  offset  by moderate  gains  in manufacturing and construction.

Over the past  12  months, this  narrow measure of  labor  costs  grew  4 percent,

as  it  has  since mid-1988.

Industrial  Production

Total  industrial production, which  had increased a total  of  1 percent

over  the preceding two months, was  unchanged in  July.  Assemblies  of both

3. The  number  of autoworkers is  now  32,000  below the  September  1987 level.

II-10

GROWTH  IN  SELECTED  COMPONENTS  OF  INDUSTRIAL  PRODUCTION
(Percent change from preceding  comparable period)

Proportion 
in  total  IP  -

1989 

1990 

1990

1989:Q4 

H2 1  

HI 1  

Q1 

Q2 

May 

June 

July

Total  index 

100.0 

-0.5 

2.3 

0.6 

4.0 

0.6 

0.4 

0.0

Excluding motor  vehicles

and  parts 

95.7 

0.1 

2.1 

2.1 

2.2 

0.2 

0.3 

0.2

--------

Annual  rate------- 

---Monthly  rate----

Major  market groups:
Products,  total 

Final  products 

Consumer goods 

Motor  vehicles 
Other  consumer  goods 

Business  equipment 
Motor vehicles 
Computers 
Aircraft 
Other 

Construction  supplies 

Materials 
Durable 

Consumer parts 
Metals 
Nondurable 

Chemicals 

Major  industry groups:
Manufacturing 

Excluding motor vehicles

and  aircraft 

Motor  vehicles  and parts 

Mining 
Utilities 

61.2 
46.6 
25.9 
1.4 
24.5 

15.2 
1.1 
2.5 
1.1 
11.6 
6.0 

38.8 
19.8 
4.0 
2.8 
8.8 
3.7 

84.9 

77.8 
4.3 

7.4 
7.8 

-0.1 
-0.4 
1.7 
-16.1 
2.8 

-3.6 
-13.9 
2.8 
-18.5 
-3.9 
1.4 

-1.2 
-2.3 
-9.8 
-4.5 
-0.9 
-2.5 

1.5 
2.8 
0.9 
3.2 
-3.1 
-0.1 
11.1  -36.1 
-1.0 
-0.7 

8.3 

6.6 
14.2  -32.4 
18.2 
14.9 
92.2 
49.5 
8.7 
6.4 
3.6 
-2.1 

-0.6 
1.6 
2.8 
-1.1 
3.0  -13.7 
-3.7 
1.5 
1.3 
1.2 
5.2 
2.2 

4.2 
5.6 
2.9 
93.0 
-0.5 

10.1 
92.9 
11.7 
16.3 
4.2 
-7.5 

3.8 
6.9 
22.9 
6.9 
1.1 
-0.8 

0.6 
0.7 
0.2 
10.3 
-0.3 

1.6 
11.1 
-0.3 
1.0 
1.1 
-0.8 

0.5 
1.5 
5.1 
-0.9 
-0.9 
-2.0 

0.4 
0.5 
0.7 
6.9 
0.3 

0.2 
6.2 
-0.5 
1.0 
-0.2 
0.0 

0.5 
0.6 
-0.3 
2.6 
0.7 
1.8 

-0.4
-0.5
-0.4
-7.2
0.1

-0.6
-7.7
-1.5
1.3
0.4
-1.1

0.7
0.5
0.1
1.4
0.5
0.7

-1.1 

2.7 

1.9 

3.6 

0.7 

0.3 

-0.1

0.4 
-14.4 

1.7 
2.3 
7.1  -27.6 

1.2 
58.4 

0.3 
8.6 

-0.8 
8.2 

4.1 

2.5 
-5.4  -16.8 

5.8 
7.5 

-0.3 
0.3 

0.1 
3.8 

0.0 
1.9 

0.2
-4.8

1.0
-0.4

1.  From  the  final  quarter of  the  previous period  to  the  final quarter  of  the  period

indicated.

PERCENT  CHANGE  IN  ORDERS  FOR  MANUFACTURED  GOODS 1
(For industries  that  report  unfilled orders;  seasonally adjusted)

1990 

1990

Q1 

Q2 

April 

May 

June

Durable  goods  excluding civilian

aircraft,  defense,  and  motor
vehicles  and parts 

-0.2 

1.2 

-0.1 

Nonelectrical machinery 

Nondurable  goods 

2.1 

2.8 

1. Percent  change  from prior comparable  period.

-2.5 

-3.5 

2.3 

1.4 

-1.5 

1.9 

3.7 

-2.4

-2.5

-0.9

II-11

autos  and trucks  fell  back last  month, after  rebounding  in May and June.

Excluding motor vehicles,  total  industrial output  rose  0.2 percent  in July,

continuing the  2-1/4  percent  annual  rate  of growth  that  has persisted since

January.

In  July,  the  gain in production outside  of the motor  vehicle industry

was  concentrated  in  further increases  in industrial materials.  Gains were

spread  among metals,  paper, and chemical and  energy materials.  In  contrast,

output  of  construction supplies  declined  further, consistent  with the

weakness  in building activity.  Among final products,  output  of  consumer

goods  other  than motor  vehicles  changed little  in July,  as  drops  in the

output  of  appliances and miscellaneous  home goods  largely  offset  small

increases  in most  categories of  nondurable goods.  Production of  both

defense  equipment  and business  equipment  other than motor vehicles  was

unchanged.  Within  business  equipment,  output  of  industrial equipment and

equipment  used  in commercial  aircraft  rose while production of  information

processing equipment  declined for  a second month.

In the  second quarter,  total  IP  is  now estimated to  have grown at an

annual  rate  of  4.0  percent--boosted  almost  2 percentage points by a rise  in

assemblies of motor vehicles  and parts.  Increased production at  industries

that  supply  materials to automakers  likely  contributed an  additional

1 percentage point to  total  IP  growth.

Capacity  utilization  in total  industry  declined  0.2  percentage point  in

July to  83.4  percent.  The  rates  for manufacturing and utilities  declined,

while  the  rate  for mining increased about  1 percentage point.  The  rise  in

operating rates  for mining reflected gains  in production of  coal, metal

ores, and crude  oil.  Within manufacturing, utilization  in advanced

II-12

CAPACITY  UTILIZATION IN  INDUSTRY
(Percent of  capacity;  seasonally adjusted)

1967-89  1978-79  1988-89 

1990

Avg. 

High 

High 

Jan. 

May 

June 

July

Total  industry

82.2 

87.3 

85.0 

82.7 

83.4 

83.6 

83.4

Manufacturing

81.5 

87.3 

85.1 

82.0 

82.8 

82.9 

82.6

Primary processing

Textile  mill  products

Lumber and products
Pulp  and  paper
Chemicals  and products
Petroleum products
Stone,  clay  and glass
Primary metals

Iron and  steel
Nonferrous  metals

Fabricated metal products

Advanced processing

Furniture  and fixtures

Nonelectrical  machinery
Electrical  machinery
Motor  vehicles  and  parts
Aerospace  and miscellaneous

82.3

86.0
82.7
92.2
79.8

85.1

78.3
79.8

79.4
80.8
77.7

81.1
82.7

81.3

80.4

76.7

89.7

90.5
87.6

98.2

85.1

89.5

87.0
102.4

110.4
90.5
83.9

86.3

86.6

92.1

89.4

93.0

89.0
91.2

91.2
97.7

86.8
90.3
86.4
91.6
92.0

95.0
85.1

83.6

88.3
83.5

83.1

85.5

85.7

86.9
86.3

93.1
82.6
89.7

85.3
82.6
79.3
87.8
80.8

80.5

84.5
81.9

80.5

58.1

84.9

88.1
81.7

90.7

81.1
86.4

82.1
83.4

79.9
88.8
81.8

82.0
86.4

82.8

80.8
77.9

85.2

88.2

81.3
91.2

81.4

89.0

81.5
86.0

84.4
88.6
81.5

81.9
85.9

82.1

80.9
80.7

transport  equipment

Instruments

75.3 

83.1 

80.5 
92.5 

86.2 
83.9 

83.4 
79.8 

84.5 
79.1 

84.3 
78.2 

85.5

87.5
80.9

93.7

81.5

90.5

80.3
87.3

86.2
89.0

81.8

81.4
86.1
81.5

80.3

76.7

84.7
78.4

Mining

Utilities

Electric  utilities

87.3 

95.2 

87.2 

87.8 

89.0 

89.1 

90.2

86.8 

89.0 

88.3 

88.3 

92.3 

96.2 

84.8 

89.5 

84.7 

90.5 

86.2 

92.2 

85.7

91.7

II-13

processing industries  fell,  while  that  in primary processing industries  rose

slightly to  85.5 percent.  Operating rates  increased notably  for pulp  and

paper, petroleum refining, and steel  in June  and  July.

Over the  past  year,  capacity utilization trends have  mirrored the

patterns  in production.  Manufacturing utilization  fell  2-1/2  percentage

points  between the  second  quarter of  1989  and January  1990.  Since then the

factory operating rate  has remained  in a narrow  range  between  82.5 percent

and 83.0  percent.  Aside  from primary aluminum ingot,  which is  being

exported  in volume,  utilization rates  for metals,  paper, chemicals, plastics

and synthetic  fibers, petroleum refining, lumber  and stone,  clay,  and glass

are  significantly below earlier cyclical  highs.

The  runup  in crude  oil prices,  if  sustained,  is  likely to  result  in an

increase in  domestic  exploration activity.  As  of  July,  1,071  rotary  rigs

were  in operation in  this country,  up  from a low of  870  last  year but  well

below  the peak  of almost  4,000  in 1981.  Similarly, oil  and gas well  footage

drilled has recovered a bit  from its  1989  trough but  still  is  only one-third

of  its  pace in  1981.  Industry contacts  suggest that  if  crude  oil prices

were to  rise  to about  the  $30  per barrel mark,  rotary rigs  in use might

increase to a bit more  than 1,500  within  12 months.  A lack  of  skilled labor

in the  drilling and supplier  industries  is  thought  to be  a constraint  on the

rate  at  which exploration activity can be  expanded.

Personal  Consumption Expenditures

Total  retail  sales  are estimated to  have edged  up  0.1  percent  in  July

in nominal  terms  according to  the advance  report  from the Census  Bureau.  In

the control  category, which excludes  automotive dealers  and building

material  and supply  stores,  sales  in  July were  essentially unchanged  from

II-14

RETAIL  SALES
(Seasonally adjusted percentage  change)

1989 

1990 

1990

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

May 

June 

July

Total  sales

Previous  estimate 1

Retail  control 2

Previous  estimate 1

GAF 3

Previous  estimate 1

Durable  goods  stores

Previous  estimatel

-. 4 

2.7 

1.2 

2.3

1.3 

2.4 

-3.2 

3.7 

Automotive  dealers
Furniture and appliances
Other durable  goods

-5.0

.8

-1.1

3.7 
2.8 
4.0 

Nondurable  goods  stores
Previous  estimate 1

1.2 

2.1

Apparel
Food
General merchandise 4
Gasoline  stations
Other  nondurables5

.4
1.2
1.9
1.5
1.0

1.0
1.6
2.8
2.4
2.4

-. 9 
-1.4 

.0 
-. 5 

-. 7 
-1.1 

-3.1 
-3.3 

-3.6

-. 3

-3.2

.4
-. 3

2.0
1.1
-2.1
-. 7
1.1

-. 1
-. 6

-. 2 
-. 7 

-. 4 
-. 5 

-. 2 
-. 3 

1.0
.6

2.0
1.2

.4
-. 1

.1 
-. 4 
-. 5 

-1.4

.6

.9

.0
-. 7

2.8
-. 6

-1.8
1.0
.6

1.5
.9

2.1
.7
3.5
1.0
1.1

-. 6
2.5
.9

-. 0

-. 9
.4
.8
-. 3
-. 6

Memo:

Motor  vehicle  sales 6

Autos
Light  trucks

13.1

14.4

14.0

13.8

8.8
4.3

9.8
4.6

9.5
4.4

9.4
4.4

14.3
9.8
4.5

14.4
9.7
4.7

1. Based on  incomplete  sample  counts  approximately  one  month ago.
2. Total  retail  sales  less  building material  and  supply  stores  and

automotive dealers,  except  auto  and home  supply  stores.

3. General merchandise,  apparel,  furniture,  and appliance  stores.
4. General merchandise excludes  mail order  nonstores;  mail  order

sales  are  also  excluded  in the  GAF  grouping.

5.  Includes  sales  at  eating  and  drinking places,  drug and proprietary

stores.

6. Millions  of units  at  an annual  rate;  BEA  seasonals.

II-15

their  June  level.  The  July  sales  results were mixed across  categories of

stores,  with  increases at  food stores,  general  merchandise  outlets, and

furniture and appliance  stores  offsetting declines  at  apparel  stores,  and at

miscellaneous  other durable  and nondurable  goods  stores. 4

The  July  retail  sales  report also contained large  upward  revisions to

the  estimates  for May and June.  Growth in  sales  during those months  now  is

estimated at  -0.2  percent  and  1.0 percent,  respectively, a cumulative upward

adjustment  of  0.9  percent.  The revisions were  concentrated among nondurable

goods  stores  and were especially large  in dollar terms at  food  stores.  For

the  second quarter as a whole,  previous estimates  had  shown a decline in the

retail  control  grouping of  roughly  2 percent  at  an annual  rate;  the  revised

data now  show  the  second-quarter level  as  about  unchanged  from the first

quarter.  This  upward revision  likely will be  translated by the BEA into  a

sizable upward adjustment  in second-quarter  real personal  consumption

expenditures--perhaps as much as  $6 billion, which  would boost  estimated

growth in total  real  PCE during the quarter  from a decline  of  1/4  percent at

an  annual  rate to  an advance  of about  1/2  percent.

Despite the  upward revision to  second-quarter PCE,  we  still expect  the

revised data to  show real  outlays  for goods  declining during the first  half

of  1990 at  about  a 1 percent  annual  rate.  In contrast,  outlays  for  services

are estimated to have  grown  so  far this year  at  a 3-1/2  percent  average

annual  rate.

4. Included among  "other durable  goods  stores" are  camera and photographic

supplies  stores,  sporting  goods  stores,  optical goods  stores, and book
stores.  The  "other nondurable  goods  store"  category includes eating and
drinking places, drug  and proprietary  stores,  fuel  and ice  dealers,  florist
shops, vending machines,  and house-to-house  canvassers.

II-16

SALES  OF AUTOMOBILES AND  LIGHT  TRUCKS 1
(Millions of units  at  an  annual  rate,  BEA seasonals)

1988 

1989 

1990 
Q1 

1990 
Q2 

May 

1990
June 

Autos  and  light  trucks 

Autos 
Light trucks 

Domestically  produced 2  

Autos 
Light  trucks 

Imports 

Autos 
Light  trucks 

15.4 
10.6 
4.8 

11.7 
7.5 
4.2 

3.7 
3.1 
.6 

14.5 
9.9 
4.6 

11.2 
7.1 
4.1 

3.3 
2.8 
.5 

14.4 
9.8 
4.6 

11.2 
7.0 
4.1 

3.2 
2.8 
.4 

14.0 
9.5 
4.4 

10.8 
6.8 
4.0 

3.2 
2.7 
.4 

13.8 
9.4 
4.4 

10.6 
6.7 
3.9 

3.2 
2.7 
.5 

14.3 
9.9 
4.5 

11.1 
7.1 
4.0 

3.2 
2.7 
.5 

July

14.4

9.7
4.7

11.5
7.1
4.3

2.9
2.5
.4

Note:  Data  on  sales  of  trucks  and  imported autos  for  the  current month  are

preliminary  and  subject  to  revision.

1. Components may not  add to  totals  due  to  rounding.
2. Includes vehicles  produced  in Canada  and Mexico  and vehicles made  in U.S.

plants  of  foreign manufacturers.

3. Based  on  seasonals  for  domestic  light  trucks.

Autos  and  Light  Trucks

II-17

In contrast to  spending on other  goods  and services, demand for  motor

vehicles  has been well maintained  so  far this  year, and apparently it  firmed

a bit in  June  and July.  Sales  of domestically produced  and  imported autos

during the  past two months averaged  9-3/4 million units,  while  sales of

light trucks averaged  slightly more  than 4-1/2 million units.

As  of mid-July,  95  percent  of vehicles  sold by the  Big Three automakers

were  covered by incentive  programs;  the  average value  of the  incentives  per

vehicle was  $1,010--nearly equal  (in nominal  terms)  to the  record-high

average  for the  third quarter  of  1989.  The low  level  of inventories

currently on  hand  suggests that  the  domestic  automakers  probably will  not

have  to  sweeten current  programs  substantially to  clear out  1990 stocks.

Indeed,  inventories of domestically  produced automobiles at  the end of July

stood  at  an  estimated 1.1  million units  (BEA basis),  the  lowest  level  since

mid-1983.  In  recent  years,  the only time  that  automakers did not  stage a

big end-of-model-year clearance  sale  was  in 1988,  when  inventory

accumulation  had been held  in check  by cautious  scheduling of assemblies

after  the  1987  stock market crash.

Although production schedules  for  the third  quarter currently call  for

a substantial increase  in assemblies to  7.8  million units  (BEA seasonals),

production was  likely held  down in August  by a five-day walkout of  workers

at  a General Motors plant  in Flint, Michigan, which  ended this  week.

Consistent with  the  corporation's move  in recent  years toward  just-in-time

inventory control,  the disruption in  the supply  of parts began  almost

immediately to  affect assembly  operations, and, over the  course  of the

II-18

REAL  BUSINESS  FIXED  INVESTMENT
(Four-Quarter  Percent Change) 

Producers'  Durable Equipment

-

-- 

- Nonresidential  Structures

Percent

40

30

20

S10

1972 

1975 

1978 

1981 

1984 

1987 

1990

INVESTMENT  AND  CASH  FLOW
(Four-Quarter  Percent Change) 

Real  Domestic  Nonfinancial Corporate  Cash Flow  <1> 

-

-

-

- Real  Business  Fixed  nvestment

-

S- 

-

/ 

Percent

-63

-

-

54

45

36

27

- 18S18

1972 

1975 

1978 

1981 

1984 

1987 

1990

1. Excluding  dividends. With inventory  valuation adjustment and capita  consumption  adjustment.

1.  Exldn 

diiens Wihivnoyvlainajsmn  n  aia  osmto  dule

strike,  total  vehicle assemblies are  estimated to have  been  reduced by about

II-19

300,000  units at  an annual  rate.

Business  Fixed  Investment

According to  BEA's  advance  estimate, real  business  fixed investment

fell  6 percent  at  an  annual  rate  in the  second quarter--reflecting moderate

declines  for both equipment  and structures. 

Decreased purchases of

industrial equipment  accounted for more  than half of the  second-quarter fall

in equipment  spending, although  almost  every other major category of

equipment edged down  as well.  In nonresidential structures,  office  and

other  commercial  construction continued to fall  in the  second quarter, with

some  offset  from institutional building.

Although not  as weak as  last  quarter's  decline would  suggest,  the

underlying trend in  investment  is  decidedly sluggish  (chart).  From the

second quarter  of  1989  to the  second quarter of this year,  equipment outlays

posted  no growth, as  increases in  spending  on computers offset  declines  in

purchases of  industrial  equipment and motor vehicles.  Similarly,  second-

quarter outlays on nonresidential  structures were  essentially unchanged  from

the  level  of a year earlier  as modest  gains  in drilling  and mining and

industrial building offset  declines  in the  commercial  sector.

Recent  indicators  suggest  that  business  investment will  continue  to

post little  or  no growth in  the near term.  With regard to  equipment,  the

nominal value  of  orders  for nondefense  capital goods  (excluding aircraft)

5. The  recent  revisions to  shipments of nondefense  capital goods  during
May and June  were  small  and  suggest little  change  in BEA's  estimate  of  PDE
spending  in the  second quarter.  In contrast,  construction put-in-place  in
June  was much stronger  than  BEA's  assumption, and data  for April  and May
were  revised up.  This  implies about  a $2-1/2 billion upward revision to
real  NRS in  the second quarter, producing a growth rate  of about  2 percent
at  an  annual  rate.

II-20

BUSINESS CAPITAL SPENDING  INDICATORS
(Percentage change  from preceding  comparable periods;
based  on seasonally  adjusted  data)

1989 

1990 

1990

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Apr. 

May 

June

Producers'  durable equipment

Shipments  of nondefense  capital  goods 

Excluding  aircraft and  parts 

Office  and  computing 
All  other  categories 

-2.7 
-. 4 
-2.1 
.1 

4.8 
2.8 
4.0 
2.5 

-. 9 
-1.6 
-1.4 
-1.7 

-2.4 
-4.4 
-4.0 
-4.5 

.0 
.3 
-1.1 
.7 

3.6
1.0
3.8
.3

Weighted PDE  shipments 1  

.8 

2.4 

-1.6 

-3.5 

.3 

.2

Shipments  of  complete aircraft 2  

-42.0 

67.5 

n.a. 

59.0 

-10.2 

n.a.

Sales  of heavy-weight  trucks 

-4.7 

-.6 

-5.9 

-7.6 

4.1 

1.6

Orders  of  nondefense capital goods 

Excluding  aircraft  and parts 

Office  and  computing 
All  other categories 

4.7 
2.2 
-2.5 
3.4 

-3.3 
.5 
1.8 
.3 

-5.8 
-1.5 
-1.5 
-1.5 

-10.6 
-1.1 
-3.6 
-. 5 

-1.8 

.1 
-.8 
.3 

.6
-1.4
-3.7
-. 8

Weighted PDE orders 1  

Nonresidential  structures

Construction  put-in-place 

Office 
Other commercial 
Public utilities 
Industrial 
All  other 

2.6 

.1 

-. 8 

-. 5 

.3 

-1.2

-. 1 
-3.1 
2.9 
2.4 
-1.2 
-2.4 

1.0 
-4.0 
-1.5 
2.2 
8.2 
2.5 

.6 
-3.2 
-3.3 
1.6 
2.8 
5.3 

-. 9 
-2.5 
-2.5 
-. 4 
.3 
.7 

-.4 
-3.4 
-.8 
.9 
-.8 
1.1 

3.2
9.9
.6
.6
2.1
3:8

Rotary  drilling  rigs  in use 

-2.7 

2.3 

21.6 

8.5 

5.5 

3.1

1. Computed as  the weighted  sum of  25  individual  equipment  series
(excluding aircraft)  from  the Census  M-3  report  with weights  equal to
the  fraction of final  business  spending  for each type of  equipment.
2. From the  Current Industrial Report  (CIR) titled Civil Aircraft
and Aircraft  Engines.  Seasonally  adjusted with BEA seasonal  factors.
To  estimate PDE  spending  for  aircraft,  BEA uses  the  aircraft  shipments
shown  in that  report,  not  the  corresponding Census  M-3  series.  The  CIR
does  not  provide  information  on aircraft  orders.

n.a.  Not  available.

II-21

fell 1-1/2  percent  (not an annual  rate)  in the  second quarter, after

increasing  1/2  percent in  the first  quarter.  The  second-quarter  decline

reflected  reduced nominal  orders  for  virtually every type  of nonelectrical

machinery,  although in real  terms,  computer purchases  are  likely to  rebound.

Moreover, outlays  for aircraft  should remain  on an  uptrend, providing  some

support for  gains  in  real  equipment purchases  in the  current  quarter.

Advance  indicators  for  nonresidential structures  paint  a generally weak

picture.  Construction permits  and contracts have  trended down during the

past  year  in most  sectors  (chart).  Although  office  construction  activity

reportedly rose  in June,  the  sector  remains  quite  weak.  In contrast,  the

Baker-Hughes  count  of  oil  and gas  rigs  in  use is  up significantly this  year.

The  outlook  for  increases  in drilling activity over the  near term is  quite

favorable given the  recent oil price  developments.

In  addition to the  indicators discussed  above, potential  constraints on

both internal  and external  finance  also may be  affecting investment  spending

in the  near term.  Growth  in real  gross business  fixed  investment and  real

cash  flow have moved together  in recent  years  (chart),  with cash  flow

generally  leading investment  in the  1980s by one  or two quarters. 

The

decline  in internal  cash flow  during the past  year  likely has  been a factor

restraining capital  spending thus  far  in  1990,  and  is  likely  to  restrain

expenditures  in coming months.  With  regard to external  finance,  anecdotal

reports  suggest  cutbacks  in lending  for  commercial  real  estate developments,

and  construction put-in-place  data  for  the  second  quarter indicate

reductions  in building activity  in this  area.  Outside  of the  commercial

6. Cash  flow is  defined here  as  the  sum of  undistributed after-tax  profits

and capital  consumption allowances, with  capital  consumption and  inventory
valuation adjustments.

II-22

RECENT  DATA ON  ORDERS  AND  SHIPMENTS

Office and Computing  Equipment

Orders
Shipments

--- 

Billions of  dollars

1985 

1986 

1987

1988 

1989 

1990

Other Equipment  (excluding  aircraft and  computers)

Blillions  of  dollars

---

--- 

Orders
Shipments

/JJ

/-(cid:127)-

iQRi 

IQARF

1987 

1988

1989 

1990

110

80

70

290

II-23

NONRESIDENTIAL  CONSTRUCTION  AND  SELECTED  INDICATORS  <1>
(Index,  Dec.  1982  = 100,  ratio scale)

Total 

Public Utilites

-- 

175 

-- 

1984 

1986 

1988 

1990 

1984 

75 

I 

I 
1986 

I 

1988 

1990

Office 

-

Other Commercial

--

160 

---- 

/- 
(CN

, 

-, 

~  240

2120 

S1t 

() 

I 

I 
1984 

1986 

IL 

I 
1988 

1990 

( (CG )

________ 

1984 

1986 

1988 

1990

90

140

90

Industrial 

-(NC)- 

(NO) 

\r 

(()

-12o

-II

Institutional

-- -- 

240 

-- 

180 

-

) 

120 

60

--

180

-

150
1,,

,  ,, 

--  120

-

-1  90

11111 
1984 

I 

1986 

1988 

1990 

liII 
1984 

t  I 
1988 

60

I 
1990

1986 

- 1  Si  mnnth mnvlna  avamna  for al  s arl f  hown:  data end  In  June  1990.

II-24

CHANGES  IN MANUFACTURING AND  TRADE  INVENTORIES
(Billions of dollars  at  annual  rates;
based on  seasonally  adjusted data)

1989 

1990 

1990

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Apr. 

May 

June

13.2 
27.7 
.8 
14.9 
-2.5 
-14.5 
12.0 

14.2 
6.9 
-5.7 
7.7 
12.2 
7.3 
4.9 

-7.0 
9.1 
2.7 
2.2 
-11.8 
-16.1 
4.3 

-25.0 
-2.4 
1.7 
-1.1 
-25.6 
-22.6 
-3.0 

14.5 
12.3 
-4.9 
9.1 
10.3 
2.2 
8.1 

n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 

28.6 
36.0 
6.6 
18.5 
3.4 
-7.4 
10.9 

27.6 
33.3 
13.2 
13.8 
.6 
-5.7 
6.3 

52.2 
43.2 
1.0 
27.6 
23.6 
9.0 
14.6 

30.0 
28.5 
2.1 
22.9 
5.0 
1.5 
3.5 

-37.2
-42.3
-22.3
-18.7
3.8
5.1
-1.3

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n-a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

Current-cost  basis:

Total 

Total excluding retail  auto 
Manufacturing 
Wholesale 
Retail 

Automotive 
Excluding auto 

Constant-dollar basis:

Total 

Total  excluding retail  auto 
Manufacturing 
Wholesale 
Retail 

Automotive 
Excluding auto 

n.a.  Not  available.

INVENTORIES RELATIVE TO SALES 1
(Months supply;  based on  seasonally  adjusted data)

1989 

1990 

1990

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Apr. 

May 

June

Range  in
preceding 12  months: 2

Low 

High

Current-cost  basis:

Total 

Total excluding retail  auto 
Manufacturing 
Wholesale 
Retail 

Automotive 
Excluding auto 

1.47 
1.45 
1.56 
1.24 
1.55 
1.81 
1.46 

1.53 
1.50 
1.65 
1.28 
1.62 
2.07 
1.51 

1.51 
1.48 
1.60 
1.27 
1.62 
2.04 
1.50 

1.49 
1.46 
1.60 
1.25 
1.55 
1.84 
1.48 

1.48 
1.45 
1.56 
1.25 
1.59 
1.92 
1.50 

1.49 
1.47 
1.59 
1.26 
1.57 
1.89 
1.49 

1.49 
1.46 
1.56 
1.27 
1.59 
1.91 
1.50 

1.46
1.44
1.54
1.24
1.57
1.92
1.48

1. Ratio  of  end of  period inventories  to  average monthly  sales  for  the  period.

Constant-dollar  ratios  are  not  available  because sales  data are  under revision.

2. Highs  and lows  are  specific to  each  series and are  not  necessarily

coincidential.  Range  is  for  the  12-month period preceding the  latest month for
which  data are  available.

II-25

construction sector,  however, tightened lending standards or  reduced

availability of  external  funds do  not  appear to have had a significant

effect  on  investment  in the  first  half of  this  year.

Business  Inventories

Business  inventory investment was moderate  in the  second quarter,  and,

at  the  current pace  of  sales, imbalances  do not  seem to  be widespread.

Excluding retail  auto  dealers, manufacturing and trade  inventories rose  in

the second  quarter at  a $12.3  billion annual  rate,  a pace  similar  to the

average pace  of  stockbuilding in  the first  three months of  1990.  The

inventory-sales ratio  edged down  to  1.45 months  in the  second quarter,  at

the low end of  the range  over the  past  year.  Nonetheless,  there was

substantial  variation in the pace  of  inventory accumulation over the course

of the  second  quarter, as manufacturing and trade  stocks excluding auto

dealers  fell  at  a $42.3  billion annual  rate  in current-cost terms  in June,

after an average increase  of  about  $40  billion in April and May.

In  the  retail trade  sector, nonauto  inventories  fell at  a $1.3  billion

annual  rate  in current-cost  terms  in  June,  following average  increases of

about  $13  billion per month in April  and May.  For the  second quarter as a

whole,  nonauto retail  trade stocks  increased $8 billion, with the  bulk of

the  increase occurring at  stores that  sell  durable goods,  food, and apparel.

With the gains  in sales,  stock-sales  ratios  dropped back  in  June  after

widespread increases  in April  and May.  On  the whole,  there  did not  appear

7. In  its  advance  report  of GNP,  BEA assumed a $5 billion  current-cost
increase in  June  in manufacturing and trade  inventories  excluding retail
autos.  Based on the actual  current-cost  data,  the  staff expects  a sizable
downward revision to  nonfarm inventory investment  (in constant  dollars)  in
BEA's preliminary  GNP  estimate  for  the  second quarter.

II-26

RATIO OF INVENTORIES  TO SALES
(Current-cost data)

Manufacturing 

- '.. 

' 

S, 

,, 

"Total

Mo
Months

2.1

1.9

1.7

'une 

5

Excluding transportation  equipment

S 

I 

I 

1984 

1986 

I 

1988 

1.3

1990

Wholesale

S1.4

1984 

I  I 

1986 

I 
1988 

Retail

Total 

Months

1.5

June

1990

Months

1.3

1.2

1.1

1.7

1.6

-

" 

es 

.

** 

, 

1.5

,' Excluding auto 

1.41.4

1984

1986 

1988

1990

II-27

to be  serious  imbalances in  retail  inventories at  the  end of the  second

quarter.

In wholesale  trade, machinery  and miscellaneous  nondurable goods

accounted  for  the bulk  of the  second-quarter accumulation.  Because roughly

one-fourth of  the machinery stocks  at  the wholesale  level  consists  of

construction machinery, the  accumulation of  inventories in this  category

may,  in part,  reflect  the widespread weakness  in the construction  industry.

As  for the  diverse miscellaneous nondurable  goods  category, the  rise  in

stocks  in the  second quarter  reversed declines during the  previous two

quarters.  Indeed, the  level  of  wholesale nondurable miscellaneous  stocks at

the  end of  June  was  little  changed from a year earlier.

In manufacturing, inventory  drawdowns in  June  (in current-cost  terms)

more  than reversed  buildups  in April  and May.  The  bulk of the  liquidation

occurred in  stocks held by  two key  industries--machinery and transportation

equipment.  Moreover, stage-of-processing  data indicated that  a significant

portion of the  June  reduction was  in materials and work-in-process

inventories  in the machinery industry.  Given the  relatively large

accumulation of machinery stocks at  the wholesale  level  in April and May,

the  runoff  in the manufacturing sector in  June may reflect  some intended

inventory adjustments  upstream in the  overall  channel of machinery

production and distribution.  Thus  far,  there  has been no  evidence of  excess

buildup of  finished goods  inventories  in the manufacturing sector,  and the

overall  inventory-to-shipments  ratio has  continued to trend  down  (chart,

upper  panel).

II-28
PRIVATE  HOUSING ACTIVITY
(Seasonally adjusted  annual  rates;  millions  of  units)

1989 

1989 

1990 

1990

Annual 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2P 

Aprr 

Mayr 

June p

1.34 
1.38 

1.38 
1.35 

1.42 
1.45 

1.09 
1.20 

1.11 
1.22 

1.07 
1.21 

1.11
1.18

.93 
1.00 

.98 
.99 

.96 
1.08 

.80 
.89 

.81 
.90 

.80 
.89 

.80
.89

All  units

Permits 
Starts 

Single-family units

Permits 
Starts 

Sales

New  homes 
.65 
Existing homes  3.44 

.65 
3.54 

.59 
3.44 

.55 
3.32 

.53 
3.33 

.54 
3.30 

.58
3.34

Multifamily  units

Permits 
Starts 

Vacancy  rate

.41 
.37 

.41 
.36 

.47 
.37 

.29 
.31 

.30 
.32 

.26 
.31 

.31
.29

Rental  units 
Owned  units 

9.3 
7.1 

8.8 
6.8 

9,4 
7,6 

8.5 
7.9 

n.a. 
n.a. 

n.a. 
n.a. 

n.a.
n.a.

1.  Percent.  Owned units  consist mainly  of  condominiums.  All  vacancy

rate
P

data are  revised.
Preliminary. 

r Revised  estimates. 

n.a.  Not  available.

PRIVATE  HOUSING  STARTS

(Seasonally adjusted  annual  rate)

Millions of  units

1981 

1982 

1983 

1984 

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990

Housing Markets

II-29

Residential construction activity  remained weak  in June,  as  total

housing starts  edged down  further to  an annual  rate  of  1.18 million units.

In the  single-family  sector,  starts were  about  unchanged at  892,000  units  in

June--despite  a decline  in mortgage  interest  rates  during May.  On the

demand  side,  sales  of new  homes  increased somewhat  in  June,  but remained  at

a comparatively  low level.  The  firming of  sales resulted  in  some  drawdown

in the  stock  of  homes  for  sale;  however,  for the  second quarter overall, the

weakness  of  sales  caused the months'  supply of  new homes  to  rise  to  its

highest  level  since mid-1982.

More than  likely, the reduced demand  for  single-family homes  partly

reflects  damped expectations  of house  price  appreciation.  The  constant-

quality new home  price index  was  about unchanged in the  second  quarter  from

its year  ago level.  In  June  the average  price  of  new homes  sold  (not

quality adjusted)  was down  slightly  from its year-earlier  level,  while the

median price  of new  homes  was up  6 percent.  This  pattern of  larger

increases in median prices  indicates that  new home  demand is  relatively weak

in the  upper part  of the price distribution and is  consistent  with anecdotal

reports of  weak  sales  and swollen inventories of  homes  for  sale  in that

price  range.

8

On a regional  basis,  new  home  sales  in the  Northeast were  about

5 percent  lower during the  first  half of  1990 than their  1989  average,  while

sales  declined 10  to  18  percent  in  other areas  of the  country.  During the

same  period, median new home  prices  increased 5 to  8 percent  in  the Midwest,

8. This  pattern holds  for  each region  as  well  as nationally.  Therefore,
shifting geographic composition of  sales  does  not  account  for the  different
rates  of increase  in average  and median prices.

II-30

South,  and West  but  have  fallen  4 percent  in the  Northeast.  The weakness of

prices  in the Northeast  suggests  that  the  relative stability  of  sales there

may  reflect the  price  concessions being  offered by  builders to  help  reduce

bulging inventories  of new  homes.

In  the multifamily sector,  construction  activity  remained weak.  Starts

dropped 9 percent  further in  June to  285,000  units--the  lowest  level  since

early  1982.  However,  with multifamily  construction  slow for the past  three

and one-half  years,  some progress  seems  to  have  been made toward  working off

the persistent  overstock of  rental units.  The vacancy rate  for multifamily

rental  properties  during the  second quarter declined almost  1 percentage

point  to  8.5  percent.

Federal  Sector

According to  BEA's  advance  estimates,  real  federal purchases  of  goods

and  services, excluding  the  CCC,  rose  at  an annual  rate  of  5.4  percent

during the  second  quarter.  Nondefense purchases grew  at  an  annual  rate  of

11.7  percent  during this period, owing partly to  spending on  the decennial

census.  Real  defense  purchases increased more  than  3 percent  at  an annual

rate.  Increases in defense are  not expected to  continue,  given that  nominal

spending  in this category  is  constrained by flat  budget  appropriations  for

procurement  and for  operations  and maintenance  over  the past  five  years.

"Operation Desert  Shield" is  expected to  have  only a small effect  on  defense

spending in the  near term because  it  is  composed mainly of personnel  and

operations  and maintenance expenditures  that  have  already been incorporated

into  this year's  budget  or  can be  accommodated by reallocating  existing

outlay plans.  As  yet,  no  "imminent danger  pay" has been authorized for the

vast majority  of the military personnel  involved  in the  operation.

II-31

In  June,  the  federal government  recorded an  $11  billion deficit,

compared with  an  $8 billion surplus  in the  same month of  1989.  Rising

payments by the  Resolution Trust  Corporation  for the  thrift  bailout

accounted for  the increase.  For  the October-to-June period, the  deficit

stood  at  $163  billion, compared with  $105  billion during the  same  period a

year earlier.  The increase  reflects  sluggish receipts  growth, surging

deposit  insurance outlays,  and growth  in most  other  outlay functions with

the exception  of defense  and agriculture.

Net  spending by  the RTC totaled  $23  billion in the  second quarter,

compared with  a $4-1/2 billion average  pace during the previous  two

quarters.  The Oversight  Board approved a $36  billion net  spending plan

($41 billion in  resolutions and advances  less  $5 billion in  REFCORP

borrowing) for  the July-to-September  period to  resolve  another  77  cases.

Both RTC Chairman Seidman and Under  Secretary of the  Treasury Glauber have

suggested that  RTC will hit  its  obligation limits  in the  fourth quarter. 1 0

The Office  of Management  and Budget  released  its Mid-Session  Review  of

the Budget  showing a deficit  estimate  of $219  billion for FY1990--$161

billion excluding RTC  (see appendix  B for  details).  The GRH baseline

deficit  estimate  for FY1991  of  $148  billion implies an  $84  billion sequester

if  no  further legislation  is  passed by October  15,  or  roughly $100  billion

9. Deposit  insurance outlays  were  $31  billion higher  than a year earlier.

10.  Under  the  currently implemented interpretation of  FIRREA's  "note cap"
provision, RTC  is  essentially required  to keep  a 15  percent  capital  cushion,
denominated in  unused REFCORP  funds,  against  working capital  borrowing.
This  requirement effectively prevents  full  use  of the original  $50  billion
spending  authority and could stop  RTC activity  in early October if planned
third-quarter resolutions are  carried out  and Congress  does  not  approve
additional budget  authority.

II-32
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OUTLAYS  AND RECEIPTS
(Billions of  dollars,
except  where  otherwise noted)

June 

October-June

Net 

Percent

1989 

1990 

FY1989 

FY1990 

change  change

Outlays 

National  defense 
Net  interest 
Social  Security 
Medicare  and  health 
Income  security 
Deposit  insurance 
Agriculture 
Other 

100.5 
29.0 
13.4 
22.3 
12.4 
9.8 
1.5 
0.5 
11.5 

Receipts 

108.3 
Personal  income  taxes 
49.9 
Social  insurance  cont.  31.3 
Corporate  income taxes  20.9 
Other 
6.2 

121.8 
27.9 
14.5 
24.0 
13.8 
11.0 
17.5 
0.2 
13.0 

110.6 
49.6 
34.3 
18.6 
8.1 

854.5 
227.7 
125.6 
174.2 
98.8 
103.2 
10.8 
16.8 
97.5 

749.1 
334.4 
273.7 
79.9 
61.2 

940.8 
226.5 
135.4 
186.0 
114.2 
112.8 
41.9 
11.4 
112.7 

777.7 
350.3 
287.4 
72.5 
67.6 

86.3 
-1.2 
9.8 
11.8 
15.4 
9.6 
31.1 
-5.4 
15.1 

28.6 
15.9 
13.6 
-7.4 
6.4 

10.1
-0.5
7.8
6.8
15.6
9.3
288.5
-32.0
15.5

3.8
4.8
5.0
-9.2
10.5

Deficit 

-7.8 

11.4 

105.4 

163.1 

57.7 

54.7

Details  may not  add due  to  rounding.

REAL FEDERAL  PURCHASES  OF  GOODS  AND  SERVICES
(NIPA basis)

Billions  of  1982 dollars

-- 

400

Total  exduding  CCC

-

-

F---- 

F

/

Defense

-- 

350

-

250

-

200

I 

1980 
1980 

I 

i 

1982 
1982

I 

1984 
1984 

I 

I 

1988 
1986

I

I 

I 

I

woo
1990

II-33

if  the  Food Stamp program is reauthorized.  11  Most  spending  is  protected

from sequestration by law,  and the  President has exercised  his option to

exempt  military personnel as well;  thus, a $100  billion  (7 percent)  cut  in

baseline  outlays,  if  it  were to  occur, would make  a sizable  dent  in affected

programs:  Outlays  of affected nondefense programs  would be  cut  38  percent

while affected defense  accounts would be  reduced 41  percent.  Budget

negotiators made little  progress  before  Congress adjourned,  and none of  the

thirteen regular appropriations bills that  control  discretionary spending

has  been passed.

State  and Local Government  Sector

Real  purchases of goods  and services by state  and local  governments

were essentially  flat  in the  second  quarter, after  having  risen  for  three

years.  During the  second quarter,  construction  spending  fell  9.5  percent  as

highway construction  declined substantially following the  earthquake-related

surge  last  winter.  Revenues  appeared to  have  been little  changed with both

sales  tax accruals  and  federal  grants declining.  As  a  result, the  deficit

of  operating and capital  accounts, which  excludes  social  insurance funds,  is

estimated to have widened  further.  As  a share of  state  and  local  government

expenditures,  the  deficit  currently  stands  in the range  last  seen during the

1973-1974 recession.

A recent  survey by the  National League  of  Cities  suggests that  local

governments,  along with  state governments,  are facing more  fiscal pressure

11.  The  GRH baseline  deficit  estimate essentially  uses  current  laws  to

estimate  revenues  and mandatory spending and estimates  discretionary
spending by boosting  FY1990  spending by  the  rate  of  inflation.  The OMB
presented an  alternative baseline  that  includes  the  reauthorization of the
Food Stamp  program and  RTC  spending and adjusts  for the  end  of the  decennial
census.  These  adjustments yield  an FY1991  deficit  of  $231  billion, or  $169
billion excluding RTC.

II-34

FISCAL  POSITION  OF THE  STATE  AND  LOCAL SECTOR*
(Quarterly)

Surplus  (Deficit)

1972 

1975 

1978 

1981 

1984 

1987 

1990

Surplus (Deficit)  as a  Percent of Expenditures

Percent

1958 
1970 
"Data are for operating and  capital accounts,  excluding social  insurance  funds.  Q2 is  a staff estimate.

1974 

1978 

1966 

1962 

1982

1986 

1990

II-35

than they did last  year.  The  problems are  widespread but appear to  be most

severe  in the  Northeast.  To  cope  with these  pressures, many cities  have

increased  or  implemented new  fees  and charges and raised property  tax rates.

On  the expenditure  side,  more  than 50  percent of  the cities  have  cut  the

growth  of  operating outlays  and nearly 40  percent  have  reduced the level  of

capital  spending.  Even  with these adjustments,  54 percent  of cities,

compared with between 24  and 40  percent during the prior  six  fiscal years,

reported expenditures  outstripping  receipts  in FY1990.

Energy Prices  and  Supplies

The  Iraqi invasion  of  Kuwait  resulted in  a significant  runup  in crude

oil prices.  Although U.S.  crude  and product  prices  had been  rising  since

early  July following an OPEC accord to  reduce  overproduction, 

12

the recent

invasion  so  far  has  added $5.75  to both the  spot and contract  prices of West

Texas  Intermediate  crude  oil  (chart).  On balance,  spot and  contract  prices

of WTI  have  risen $10  and  $9.50,  respectively,  since their trough in early

July.

These movements in  crude  oil prices already have  resulted  in a runup  in

spot  prices  for  gasoline and heating oil.  Data  from the most  recent

Lundberg  survey  point  to a substantial increase  at  the  wholesale  level in

August.  While prices at  the  retail level  usually lag wholesale prices  by

about  a month, surveys of  gasoline  stations  by  Lundberg and the AAA  indicate

that  retail  prices nationwide  rose  14  cents per  gallon in the  first two

weeks  after  the  Iraqi  invasion.  Thus,  the price  response  is  occurring much

12.  See  the  International Developments Section  for the  details of the  July

OPEC  accord.

DAILY  SPOT AND  POSTED  PRICES  OF WEST  TEXAS  INTERMEDIATE

II-36

Dollar per barrel

Spot

,I'A% IC
\ 
Ifr  1.

I

4 

Sep 

Oct 

Nov 

Dec 

Jan 

Feb 

Mar 

Apr 

May 

June 

July 

Aug

SPosted prices are evaluated as  the mean of the range  listed in the  Wall Street Journal.

MONTHLY AVERAGE  PRICES-WEST  TEXAS  INTERMEDIATE

Month 

September 
October 
November 
December 
January 
February 
March 
Apri 
May 
June 
July 
August * 

*  Price through August 14,  1990.

Posted 

18.31 
19.25 
19.07 
19.32 
21.21 
21.27 
20.08 
17.77 
17.55 
16.15 
17.23 
22.94 

Spot

19.59
20.09
19.82
21.09
22.64
22.12
20.42
18.58
18.24
16.87
18.64
25.68

II-37

faster than usual,  and the  surge  in  the consumer price  index for  energy  is

likely to be  spread  over both August  and September.

Prior to  the OPEC  accord and  Iraqi invasion, energy prices were

weakening  somewhat.  In the  July PPI,  which was  sampled  in the  second  week

of the month, finished  energy prices  fell  0.5  percent.  PPI  gasoline  prices

dropped 5.3  percent  in July, reflecting the  lagged response  to  earlier

declines  in crude  oil costs  as  well as  some pickup  in production after  a

series  of  refinery  shutdowns in the  spring.  However,  this drop  in gasoline

prices  was partially offset  by  a jump  in  natural  gas prices and a small

increase  in the  price of  home heating oil.  Energy prices  also  were down in

the  July PPI  at  the  intermediate and crude  stages of  processing.

The United States  appears  better prepared to  weather a disruption of

crude  oil  supplies  than it  was  in  either  1973  or  1979.  Although  oil imports

have  returned to  1979 peak  levels, oil  inventories,  including the  Strategic

Petroleum Reserve, are  significantly higher than  in 1979.  Privately held

inventories  amount  to  about  65  days  of  supply,  as in  1979,  but the  Strategic

Petroleum Reserve now  adds  another 35  days  of  consumption.

Food Prices  and Agricultural Conditions

Food prices  jumped  0.8  percent  in the  June  CPI--after changing  little

in April  and May.  Prices  for fresh vegetables picked up  substantially,

owing mainly to  a sharp  runup in tomato  prices.  In  addition,  the CPI  for

meats, poultry,  fish, and eggs  rose  1-1/2  percent  in June,  and  this  index

now is  7 percent  higher  than a year earlier.  Much of the  recent  increases

can be traced to  farm prices  for  hogs,  cattle,  and poultry, which were quite

strong through June;  however,  farm prices  for  hogs  and poultry have  slipped

downward  in recent  weeks.  Indeed, prices  for  finished  consumer foods  in the

II-38

U.S. AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION AND  INVENTORIES 1

1980  to  1989 

Millions  of  bushels

High 

Low 

Ave. 

1988 

1989 

Projected  for  1990
as  of 
June  12 

as  of
Aug.  9

2785

1812 

2342

1812

8875

4174 

7153

2036

7527

1927

2689

8100

1925

2706

7850

1836

4929

1549

CROP  PRODUCTION

Wheat

Corn

Soybeans

2190

1549 

1893

CROP INVENTORIES

Months'

supply at  end of  marketing year

1980  to  1989

Marketing year beginning

Wheat

Corn

High
11.69

Low
2.35

Avg.
6.44

7.93

1.80

4.42

Soybeans

3.42

1.17

1.99

1988
3.52

3.19

1.31

1989
2.35

1.88

1.95

Projected  for 1990

as  of 
June  12
3.88

as  of
Aug.  9
4.20

1.79

2.20

1.82

1.44

LIVESTOCK PRODUCTION

Percent  change  from previous  year

Projected

1990 

1991

as  of 

as  of 

as  of 

as  of

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989  June  12  Aug.  9  July 12  Aug.  9

Red meats  and poultry 

Beef 
Pork 
Poultry 

Milk 

1.7 
.6 
.1 
4.9 
5.7 

1.7 
2.8 
-5.0 
6.3 
.7 

2.0 
-3.3 
2.3 
9.5 
-. 7 

3.7 
.1 

9.1 
4.2 
2.1 

1.8 
-.2 
.9 
7.1 
-. 8 

2.1 
.0 

-1.8 
7.4 
2.1 

1.4 
-1.2 
-2.6 
7.1 
2.4 

-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 

3.2
1.3
3.3
5.1
1.3

1. Derived from data  in  USDA's  World Agricultural  Supply and Demand Estimates,

August  9, 1990.  Production, consumption,  and stocks  are measured on  a  "marketing year" basis,
which differs  from crop to crop.

II-39

PPI  for July  were  flat,  as  substantial declines  in prices  for beef,  pork,

and  eggs  offset  a surge  in fresh  fruit prices.  USDA production estimates

indicate that  the trend in output  of  red meats  should pick up  in  coming

quarters, and  futures prices  for  cattle  and hogs  seem to  corroborate a

general  expectation of  expanding supplies and falling prices near the  end of

1990.  In addition, broiler prices  have  fallen  sharply in  recent  weeks,

reflecting a return of  seasonal  weather patterns  in the  Southeast  which

reduced the production problems that  were associated with excessive heat  and

drought  in June and July.

Developments in markets  for  the major grains  help  shape, to  a large

degree, the  longer-term outlook  for  livestock production, and according to

August  estimates of  production by the  USDA  (table),  output  of  corn and

soybeans  now is expected to  be  smaller than was  indicated  in June,  prior to

the  last Greenbook.  This weakness  reflects poor  weather conditions in the

Cornbelt while  the crops  were being planted,  as  well as  the hot,  dry weather

in  the  South.  In terms  of months'  supply  of  grain, inventories of both corn

and soybeans  are  near the low end of the  range  seen  during the past  decade.

As  a result, prices  of both crops  have  been particularly  sensitive to

reports of  crop  conditions  of late,  and news  of  fluctuations in  demand or

production prospects  have  caused considerable  swings  in  farm prices  for

grain.  In contrast,  wheat  stocks  now are  rebuilding, and this year's  bumper

crop  in  the United States,  along with good harvests  abroad, is  depressing

prices.

II-40

RECENT  CHANGES  IN  PRODUCER PRICES
(Percentage change;  based on  seasonally  adjusted  data) 1

Relative 
importance
Dec.  1989 

1989 

1990 

1990

1988 

1989 

Q4 

01 

Q2 

June 

July

------ Annual  rate-----  -Monthly rate-

Finished  goods 

Consumer foods 
Consumer  energy 
Other  finished  goods 

Consumer  goods 
Capital  equipment 

Intermediate materials 2  

Excluding food  and energy 

Crude  food materials 
Crude  energy 
Other crude materials 

100.0 
25.9 
9.2 
64.9 
39.5 
25.4 

94.9 
82.S 

41.9 
40.S 
17.5 

4.0 
5.7 
-3.6 
4.3 
4.8 
3.6 

5.3 
7.2 

14.2 
-9.5 
7.5 

4.9 
5.2 
9.5 
4.2 
4.4 
3.8 

5.0 
12.4 
-5.3 
3.6 
4.2 
2.0 

2.5 
.9 

-. 4 
-1.0 

2.8 
17.9 
-3.6 

19,2 
13.2 
-15.3 

7.1 
10.6 
24.7 
3.6 
3.5 
4.0 

2.5 
1.0 

9.1 
.5 
4.0 

.3 
-2.9 
-14.3 
3.9 
5.1 
1.7 

-1.1 
.7 

-11.5 
-38.9 
10.9 

.2 
-.4 
-.9 
.6 
.7 
.4 

-.2 
-.1 

.4 
-6.2 
-.6 

-. 1
.0
-.5
-. 1
-.2
.3

-. 1
.1

1.0
-.1
.9

1. Changes  are  from  final month  Of preceding period to final  month of  period indicated.
2. Excludes  materials  for  food manufacturing  and animal  feeds.

RECENT  CHANGES  IN  CONSUMER  PRICES
(Percentage change;  based on  seasonally  adjusted data) 1

Relative 
importance
Dec.  1989 

1989 

1990 

1990

1988 

1989 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

May 

June

------Annual  rate-----  -Monthly  rate-

100.0 
16.3 
7.4 

76.3 
25.2 
51.1 

4.4 
5.2 
.5 

4.7 
4.0 
5.0 

4.6 
5.6 
5.1 

4.4 
2.7 
5.3 

4.9 
5.5 
3.9 

4.7 
3.4 
5.7 

8.5 
11.4 
14.8 

7.5 
7.8 
7.2 

3.5 
2.1 
-2.0 

3.9 
.7 
5.5 

.2 
.0 
-.7 

.3 
.1 
.4 

.5
.8
.6

.4
.1
.6

100.0 

4.4 

4.5 

4.6 

8.3 

3.2 

.1 

.6

All  items 2  

Food 
Energy 
All  items  less  food

and  energy 
Commodities 
Services 

Memorandum:

CPI-W 3  

1.  Changes  are  from final month of  preceding period to  final month  of period indicated.
2.  Official  index  for  all  urban consumers.
3.  Index  for urban wage  earners and  clerical workers.

Prices

II-41

Excluding  food and  energy items,  the CPI  advanced  0.4 percent  in June.

Service  prices  rose  0.6 percent,  boosted by  a  jump  of about  1 percent  in the

index  for  owners' equivalent  rent.  Prices  of  commodities  less  food and

energy edged up  only 0.1  percent,  despite  a  sharp  increase  for  tobacco

products,  owing to discounting  for  house furnishings,  apparel,  and motor

vehicles.

Over  the  first  six months  of the year,  the  CPI  less  food and  energy

rose  at  a  5-3/4  percent  annual  rate,  a percentage  point  or more  above the

increases  in  1988  and  1989.  Prices  of nonenergy services  registered a

6-1/4  percent  rate  during the  first  half of the  year,  compared with  5 and

5-1/4  percent,  respectively,  in 1988  and 1989.  This  acceleration reflected

large  increases  for  a variety  of  items,  including airfares,  cable

television, and medical, legal,  and  financial  services.  The  index  for

commodities  less  food and  energy rose  at  a  4-1/4  percent  rate  through June,

up from the  reduced 2-3/4  percent pace  last  year but  not  much  above the  1988

increase of  4 percent.  Apparel prices more than  accounted for  the

acceleration  in this  component.

Producer  prices  of  finished goods excluding food  and energy  fell

0.1  percent  in  July following a  0.6 percent  increase  in  June.  Much of the

movement  between these  two  months  reflects  swings  in tobacco  prices,  which

are  distorted by inappropriate  seasonal  factors.  In  addition,  car  prices

fell  0.5  percent  in  July,  after  a  large  runup  in June,  as  the  enhancement  of

incentive programs  more  than offset  announced increases  in  sticker prices  on

1990  model  vehicles.  Prices  of  intermediate materials  less  food  and energy

II-42
PRICE INDEXES FOR COMMODITIES  AND MATERIALS 1

Percent change

2

1990 

Memo:

To 
June 

3
June 26 
to 

1988 

1989 

263 

date 

Year
earlier

to date

3.1 

7.1 

-3.1 

.2 

-2.6

14.2 
-9.5 
7.5 

2.8 
17.9 
-3.6 

2.3 
-11.5 
3,9 

.2 
-.1 
.4 

4.8

-12.0

1.6

7.6 

-3.6 

3.6 

.9 

1.7

Last 
obser- 

vation 

July 

July 
July 
July 

July 

Aug. 14 
Aug. 13 

8.5 
7.3 

-9.0 
-5.9 

2.0 
5.7 

1.3 
1.1 

1. PPI  for crude materials4  

la.  Foods  and feeds 
lb. Energy 
ic.  Excluding  food and energy 
Id.  Excluding food and energy,

seasonally adjusted 

2. Commodity Research Bureau

2a.  Futures prices 
2b.  Industrial  spot prices 

3. Journal of Commerce  industrials 

Aug.  14 

3.8 

1.3 

.1 

1.7 

4. Dow-Jones Spot 

Aug. 14 

6.9 

-10.1 

1.9 

1.9 

5. IMF  commodity index4  

5a.  Metals 
5b.  Nonfood agric. 

July 
July 
July 

12.6 
33.7 
-9.4 

-12.9 
-23.4 
-4.6 

-1.0 
4.1 

.4 

6. Economist  (U.S. dollar index) 

6a.  Industrials 

Aug.  7 
Aug.  7 

17.7 
18.9 

-22.8 
-23.8 

2.5 
2.7 

.9 
3.2 
1.3 

2.5 
6.7 

1. Not seasonally adjusted.
2. Change  is measured to end of period,  from last observation  of previous period.
3. Week of the June Greenbook.
4. Monthly observations.  IMF  index includes items  not shown separately.
n.a.  Not  available.

Index Weights

EO 

Food  Commodities 
El

Precious  Metals 

Others*

PPI for crude materials

CRB Futures 

CRB Industrials

Journal of Commerce  Index

10 

12 

Dow-Jones

IMF  Index

Economist

37 

44 

19

.

62 

14 

14

100

88

58 

17 

25

43 

57

*Forest products,  industrial metals,  and other industrial materia.

6.4
-. 6

.9

2.7

-4.8
-.3
-3.6

-1.8
1.5

II-43

COMMODITY  PRICE  MEASURES  *

-
-

-

Journal  of  Commerce  Index,  total 
Journal  of Commerce  Index,  metals 

Total

T- 

Ratio  scale,  index 
(1980=100) 

130

S125 

-- 

-- 

' 

' " 

, 
4,
SAt 

t 

.

, 
14 

-
--  115 

1Aug 

, 

I I 

105

.

, t 

Jul 
1990

105

104

-

102

100

Aug

-

-trr 

85

f  ,,Metals 

,  , 

1983 

I 1 

I ,  , 

1984 

9 
I 
1985 

.
1986 

I  ,  ,  ,  I I 
1987 

*  I 

1988 

1989 

I  ,  ,  ,  I  ,  , 
1991 

1990 

75 

Jul 
1990

Aug

CRB Spot  Industrials

Ratio  scale,  index
(1967=100) 

Aug  13  -

40

320
-

300 

CRB Industrials

S  ,  I  ,  ,  ,  I  ,  '  ,  I  ,  , .
1986 

1984 

1985 

1983 

I  ,  , I 
1987 

1 
, 

,  I I 

1988 

,  ,  I  ,  , 

1989 

1990 

- 280

-

260 

240 

240 

- 220

I 

' '  200

1991

Aug

Jul 
1990

CRB  Futures

-

S-- 

Ratio  scale,  index
(1967=100) 

-

-

-. 

A A A- 

/  Aug 14

320

310

290 

250 

230 

CRB Futures

270 

-230

112
1

110

108
108

324

318

312

238

234

* Weekly data, Tuesdays; Journal  of Commerce data monthly  before  1985

Dotted  lines  ndicate  week  of

last Greenbook.

II-44

were  little  changed over the two months  and have  risen at  about  a 1 percent

annual  rate  so  far  this year.

More  recently, however, prices  on spot  commodity markets have  turned up

markedly  for most  industrial  metals  as  well  as  for gold.  Most  of the

increases  for  industrial metals occurred  before the  Iraqi  invasion of

Kuwait.  The  Journal  of  Commerce  index for  industrial metals  (upper panel  of

chart)  moved back  around its  recent  high reached early  in April  but

remained,  nonetheless, below its  levels  during most  of  1989.  Supply

disruptions have  contributed to upward pressures on  some metals,  notably

copper;  and,  according to market  reports,  world metal markets  generally  have

been  supported by continued demand from Europe and East  Asia.  Prices  of

steel  scrap  surged in  late  July and  are  currently  just  below their most

recent  highs  reached in  1988-1989.  Although aluminum prices  also turned  up

sharply in  late  July, they have  retraced  just  a fraction of their  steep

decline  from mid-1988 until  early this  year.

ANNUAL REVISION TO THE NATIONAL  INCOME AND PRODUCT ACCOUNTS

APPENDIX A

The Commerce  Department  released its  annual  revision to the  National

Income  and Product Accounts  on July  27.  This  revision  incorporated new
source  data and  revised estimates  of  seasonal  factors back  to the  first
quarter  of  1987.  The new  figures  show that  growth in  real  activity was
somewhat  slower  over 1987-89 than was  previously estimated.  Real  GNP  growth
was  revised down  0.4  percentage point  over  1987  and 0.8  percentage point
over  1989,  while  the  estimate  for  1988  was  little changed.  The  revision did
not  greatly affect  BEA's  estimates  of  inflation.  The GNP  fixed-weight price
index  continues to  show increases  of about  4 percent  over 1987  and  1989  and
about  4-1/2  percent  over  1988.

With this  revision, real  growth over  1989  now  stands at  1.8  percent.
A sharply  lower  estimate of  real  consumer  spending accounts  fully  for  the
downward adjustment  to  output growth  last year.  Most of  the revision  to
real  PCE occurred in  spending  for  services  and  reflected the  results of  the
Census  Bureau's  Service Annual  Survey  for  1989.  This  adjustment  was
concentrated  in medical  care  services,  though there were  smaller downward
revisions  for  various  other  nonhousing-related services.  Outside  the
consumer  sector,  revisions to  spending growth last  year were  small on  the
whole.  For  1987,  the  lower  estimate of  real  GNP  growth  reflects, in large
part,  a downward adjustment  to growth  in business  purchases  of computing
equipment,  along with  smaller  estimated increases  in  purchases by  state  and
local  governments.  State  and  local  purchases were  revised down in  1988  and
1989  as  well,  and the trend  growth in this  sector  is  now shown to  have been
lower  in  recent  years than  previously estimated.

On the  income  side of  the  accounts,  the  most  significant  change was the

$58  billion downward adjustment  to the  level  of  wages  and  salaries  in 1989.
The revised  figure  is based on  fairly comprehensive  tabulations of payroll
2
data  submitted by  firms to  state  unemployment  insurance offices. 
result  primarily of  the new  figures  on wages  and  salaries,  disposable
personal  income  was  revised down  $53  billion last  year.  Because  this
downward adjustment to  income  substantially exceeded  that to  personal
outlays,  the  estimate  of the personal  saving rate  in  1989  was  lowered
0.8  percentage  point  to  4.6  percent.  This  revision  considerably mutes,  but
does  not  eliminate, the pickup  in the  saving rate  over  the past  two years.
Among other  components  of  income, the level  of  corporate profits  was  raised
about  $10  billion across  the  entire  1987-89  period.  Accordingly, the share
of  corporate profits  (with the  inventory valuation and  capital  consumption
adjustments)  in nominal  GNP  was  revised up  0.2  percentage point  in each
year.  However,  this  level  adjustment  did  not  alter  the  sharp  decline in  the
profit  share  over the  four quarters  of  1989.

As  a

1. Excluding the  1989-Q1  rebound in  farm output  from the  1988  drought,

real  GNP  growth over  1989  is  only  1.3  percent.

2. The downward-revised  level of  wages  and  salaries  suggests  that
employment  growth over  1989 may have been  somewhat  weaker  than is  now
reported in  the BLS  data on payroll  employment.  Revisions to  the BLS
employment  data will be  available in  early September.

II-A-1

II-A-2

REAL GROSS  NATIONAL  PRODUCT  AND  RELATED  ITEMS
(Percent change  from  previous period)

1986-Q4  to 
1987-Q4 

1987-Q4  to 
1988-Q4 

1988-04  to
1989-Q4

1.  Gross national product 
Previous 

2.  Gross  domestic purchases 

Previous 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

Personal consumption expenditures 

Previous 

Business fixed investment 

Previous 

Residential  structures 

Previous 

Government purchases 

Previous 

ADDENDA:

7.  Change in net exports  1 
Previous 

8.  Net exports 2 
Previous 

9.  Change in nonfarm  inventories 2 

Previous 

10.  Nominal GNP 
Previous 

11.  GNP fixed-weight  price index 

Previous 

12.  GNP implicit price  deflator 
Previous 

13.  Real disposable personal income 

Previous 

1.  Over four quarters  of the year, billions of  1982 dollars.
2. 

End of period,  billions of 1982 dollars

5.0 
(5.4) 

4.2 
(4.6) 

2.3 
(2.2) 

6.1 
(8.5) 

-2.2 
(-4.2) 

2.0 
(2.1) 

24.1 
(25.6) 

-111.3 
(-109.8) 

55.4 
(55.6) 

8.2 
(8.6) 

3.8 
(4.0) 

3.0 
(3.0) 

2.7 
(3.0) 

3.5 
(3.4) 

2.6 
(2.4) 

4.1 
(3.8) 

5.3 
(4.2) 

-. 1 
(3.2) 

1.1 
(1.8) 

35.6 
(36.0) 

-75.7 
(-73.8) 

27.2 
(31.9) 

7.8 
(7.5) 

4.6 
(4.5) 

4.1 
(4.0) 

4.3 
(4.0) 

1.8
(2.6)

1.1
(1.9)

1.2
(2.5)

4.5
(3.7)

-7.1
(-7.0)

.3
(.5)

27,8
(26.6)

-47.9
(-47.2)

15.3
(18.0)

5.6
(6.4)

4.0
(4.1)

3.7
(3.7)

1.7
(3.6)

II-A-3

Personal  Income
(Revisions  in level,  billions of dollars)

1987 

1988 

1989

1.  Personal income 

2. 

3. 

Wages  and salaries 

Other personal  income 

4.  Personal tax  and nontax payments 

5.  Disposable  personal  Income 

6.  Personal  outlays 

7.  Personal  saving  rate  1 

Memo:

8.  Corporate  profits with inventory valuation
and  capital consumption adjustments 

9.  Profit share as a  percent of GNP  ' 

1.  Revision  in level,  percentage  points.

-11.2 

.3 

-11.5 

-. 1 

-11.2 

-1.9 

-. 3 

9.6 

.2 

6.3 

2.1 

4.2 

5.0 

1.4 

.5 

.0 

9.0 

.2 

-43.0

-57.9

14.9

10.3

-53.3

-20.7

-. 8

10.3

.2

PERSONAL SAVING  RATE 

Percent
Percent

PROFIT  SHARE

Percent

'  Before  revision

11N

After revision

I-

-I  3

1981 

1984

1987

1990 

I  I  I 
1981

I 

I 
194 
1984 

I  I I  I
98 
1987

19
1990

APPENDIX B

MID-SESSION  REVIEW OF THE  BUDGET

The Administration has  released  its Mid-Session Review of the  Budget.

The document  contains  new deficit  estimates, which  are substantially  higher
than those  presented in  last  January's budget;  it  also  provides a
preliminary  assessment  of the  sequester amounts  that are  required to meet
the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings targets  for  FY1991.  The  Congressional  Budget
Office  (CBO) has  issued  its  usual  summer report,  The Economic  and Budget
Outlook:  An Update, as  well;  apart  from  spending by the  Resolution Trust
Corporation  (RTC),  CBO's deficit  projections  for FY1990  and FY1991  are
similar  to those  of the Administration.

Near-Term Budget Developments  and Prospects

The Administration now projects  a baseline  deficit  of  $219  billion in

FY1990,  compared with  a figure of  $122  billion  in the  January budget
(table 1). 
Higher  outlays by the  RTC account  for  about  half  of the
increase.  But  the expected deficit  excluding the RTC  also has been raised
substantially;  at  $161  billion,  it  stands  a bit above  the actual  deficits
that  were  recorded during FY1987-89.  For  FY1991, the  Administration now
estimates the  baseline deficit--including the  reauthorization of the  food

Table 1

EVOLUTION OF  PROJECTIONS FOR THE
BASELINE  BUDGET DEFICIT
(Billions of  dollars)

Fiscal 
year 

Administration 
January 
July 

CBO

March 

July

1990 
1991 

1990 
1991 

------ Deficit  including  RTC  spending------

122 
101 

219 
231 

159 
161 

195
232

------Deficit  excluding  RTC spending------

120 
93 

161 
169 

126 
130 

159
162

1. Administration  figures  are  for  the  "adjusted

consolidated  baseline deficit."  The CBO baseline  includes
"additional RTC  spending  needs."  Both baselines  include
the extension  of the  food  stamp  program, which is  scheduled
to  expire  at  the end of  FY1990.

II-B-1

II-B-2

stamp  program and full  funding for  the RTC  1 --at  $231  billion;  the deficit
excluding the  RTC also  is  expected to  edge  up  further.

As table  2 shows,  OMB has  raised its  projections of baseline  outlays

$68  billion  in FY1990  and $96  billion in FY1991.  The  largest change  is  in
net outlays  for the RTC,  which  are now expected to  total  $57  billion this
year  and $63  billion next  year;  in the January budget,  these outlays were
$2 billion  and $7 billion respectively.  A substantial  rise  in projected
interest  outlays--especially in  1991--reflects the  larger projected deficits
and  higher  interest  rates  (table 3),  which now are  assumed to  be  roughly a
percentage point  above those  in the  January budget.  Other notable  upward
revisions this year  are for  defense,  the  financing of  foreign military
sales, and the  FDIC.

OMB has made a significant  downward revision to  its estimates of
receipts for  this year  and next--$29  billion and  $35  billion  respectively--
largely in  response to  the  information on  incoming collections.  In
particular,  the  level this  spring  of  final  settlements of  1989 individual
income tax liabilities was  lower  than expected.  The  shortfall probably
reflects,  in part,  the lower  level of  personal  income  now estimated for
1989.  (See Appendix A for  a discussion of the  revisions to personal
income.)  But  it  also  suggests  that  temporary phenomena were  a bigger factor
in the  strong  final  payments  in early  1989 than had been thought previously
and hence  that the  permanent  component was  somewhat  smaller.  Moreover, OMB
has reduced its  projection of  corporate taxes,  based not  only on a
reassessment  of the  effects  of tax reform but  also on  the  lower profits  now
expected  for  1990  and 1991.

As  noted above,  the  revisions to  interest  rates  and  to corporate

profits  add significantly to  the deficits  in FY1990  and  in later years.
Among other key  economic  assumptions,  real  growth this  year  has  been slower
than OMB  had  forecast  in  January, and inflation has  been more rapid.  On the

1. Under  current  law, the  food  stamp program is  scheduled to expire  at  the

end  of FY1990.  In  addition, the  estimates of RTC  net outlays  in the  G-R-H
baseline  are  constrained by the  $50  billion provided by FIRREA to cover
losses  and by provisions  limiting borrowing for  working capital.  The latter
will  likely become  binding within the  next  few months and would hold RTC
spending essentially to  zero next  year.  Given the  virtual  certainty that
additional  funding will be authorized for these  programs,  OMB provides  some
alternative baselines, one  of which  includes the  continuation of  food
stamps,  full  funding  for  RTC,  and other accounting adjustments  and shows  a
deficit of  $231  billion  in FY1991.  CBO  also offers  an alternative  baseline
(with "additional RTC").

2. Over the  first  three quarters  of  FY1990,  net  RTC  outlays totaled

$32  billion, and for  the  July to  September period, the Oversight  Board  has
approved  a $36  billion  net  spending plan.  For  FY1991, the Administration
has  developed three  scenarios based on different  assumptions for  loss  rates
and  for  the  number  of thrifts  to be  resolved.  The estimated budget  effects
in these scenarios  range  from $32  billion to  $63  billion.  OMB  uses the
higher number,  which  is  based on  1,027  failed thrifts and a "medium" loss
rate,  in the  adjusted baseline  and policy estimates.

II-B-3

Table  2

CHANGES  TO THE ADMINSTRATION
(Fiscal years, billions

BASELINE  DEFICIT
of  dollars)

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995

Total  changes 

Excluding the  RTC 

97 
42 

131 
76 

132 
91 

96 
101 

67 
108 

Changes to  outlays

RTC 
Net interest 
Other 

55 
6 
7 
68 

55 
21 
20 
96 

41 
31 
19 
92 

-5 
35 
21 
51 

-42 
39 
31 
28 

Changes  to  receipts 

-29 

-35 

-40 

-45 

-39 

90
110

-20
43
28
51

-40

ECONOMIC ASSUMPTIONS OF  THE ADMINISTRATION FOR 1990 AND 1991

Table  3

1990

1991

-Percent  change,  Q4 to  Q4-

Real GNP
July
January

CPI

July
January

-Percent,  annual  average-

Three-month

Treasury bill  rate

July
January

Ten-year Treasury  note rate

July
January

7.7
6.7

8.5
7.7

Corporate profits as  a

percent  of  GNP

July
January

II-B-4

whole,  however, the  changes  to the  forecasts of  real  growth and inflation
are relatively  small  and thus have  only a modest  effect  on the  overall
deficit projection.

Apart  from the RTC,  the  latest estimates  from the  CBO are  similar to

those  of the Administration.  Its baseline  deficit--excluding  RTC  spending--
edges  up to around  $160 billion  in both FY1990  and FY1991,  a bit  above the
actual  deficits  of the past  few years.  CBO's  figures  show  RTC spending  in
FY1990  at  only $36  billion;  this estimate  was developed in  June  and now
looks  low  in light  of  the  sharp pickup in  resolutions  since  late  spring;  its
RTC estimate  for FY1991--$70 billion--is  close  to  the Administration's.

Table  4

ADMINISTRATION DEFICIT-REDUCING PROPOSALS 1
(Change from baseline  in billions  of  dollars,
fiscal years)

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995

Total 

January recommendations 
Additional June  proposals 

Receipts 

Outlays

Defense 
Discretionary 
Entitlements/mandatory

Medicare 
Other 

User  fees 
Undistributed offsetting

receipts 
Net  interest 

53 
41 
12 

14 

7 
5 

6 

11 

6 

1 
2 
39 

70 
50 
20 

12 

13 
7 

9 
15 
6 

1 
7 
58 

85 
61 
24 

4 

21 
10 

12 
18 
6 

0 
12 
80 

109 
80 
30 

7 

30 
13 

15 
21 
6 

1 
18 
102 

130
98
32

6

37
16

18
23
6

0
23
124

1. Consists  of policy recommendations  in the Administration's  January
budget  (with minor  reestimates)  and additional  proposals  submitted to  the
Administration/Congressional  Budget  Summit on  June  20.

3. OMB's  July  forecast  anticipates a pickup  in real  activity  in the  second

half of  1990,  while  prices  are  expected to  rise  less  rapidly than in  the
first  half.  In the past  few weeks,  however, private  forecasters generally
have  raised their  inflation projections and  have  become more  pessimistic
about  the outlook  for  real  GNP.

The President's Deficit-Reducing Proposals

II-B-5

The Mid-Session Review also  presents the  outlook for the  budget  on the

assumption that  the deficit-reducing measures  presented by the
Administration to the  Budget  Summit  on  June  20  are  enacted.  As  table  4
shows,  these measures add $12  billion to  the proposals  outlined in the
January budget  and bring the Administration's  total  package for  1991  to
$53 billion.  Nonetheless,  the  resulting deficit--assuming  full  funding of
the  RTC--would still be more than  $100  billion above the GRH target.

The Administration's  June  proposals include  $7 billion of  reductions  in
defense  spending in  FY1991.  Recent  events  do  not  rule  out  the prospect  of a
cut  of  about  that  size.  However, they  clearly lessen the odds that
significantly larger  reductions--such as those proposed earlier by  some
members of  the  Congress--will be  enacted this year.

GRH Accounting:  RTC and the  Size  of  a Possible  Sequester

The  ultimate  size  of a sequester will  depend, of  course,  in part  on how
the  Congress decides  to modify the  GRH calculations, as  well as  on  spending
and tax actions  taken between now and mid-October. 
sequester calculations, the Administration  assumes that  RTC  spending will  be
excluded from the  baseline totals--in part  because current  law limits  RTC
spending and in part  because many believe  that  RTC expenditures  should  be
excluded  from Gramm-Rudman-Hollings  (GRH) sequester calculations.  With this
assumption, the baseline  deficit will  be  $169 billion--if,  as  seems  likely,
the  food stamp program is  reauthorized.  The Administration will  issue an
initial sequester report  on  August  25  and  a final report  on October  15.  If
no  deficit-reducing actions  are taken and the  GRH procedures are  not
modified before the  final  report  is  released, a sequester of  roughly $100
billion will be  required.

In  presenting its

The  cuts  would  fall primarily  on defense  and on  nondefense

discretionary programs.  Under the GRH law,  Social  Security and many other
benefit  programs,  as well  as  net  interest  and outlays  from commitments
already  in place, are  exempt  from the sequester;  cutbacks  also are  limited
in  several nonexempt programs,  notably Medicare,  Stafford  student  loans,  and
veterans' medical  care.  Thus,  the  sequester would be  concentrated on a
relatively  small portion of  the budget.  A sequester of  $100  billion, which
would be  split  equally between defense  and  nondefense programs,  would  impose
across-the-board  cuts  of  38  percent  on affected nondefense programs.  The
President has exercised his  option to exempt  military personnel  from the

4. The Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Act provides  for  the expedited consideration

of a joint  resolution  suspending the act  in  the event  that  (1) the
Department of  Commerce  reports  real GNP  growth of  less  than 1 percent  at  an
annual  rate  during the  immediately preceding two  quarters  or  (2) either  CBO
or OMB  projects  that  real GNP  will  decline  for  two consecutive quarters.  A
joint  resolution must  be passed by  the Congress  and  signed by the  President.
However, a final  sequestration order  issued before  the enactment  of  a joint
resolution is  not  suspended.

II-B-6

sequester;  as  a result,  cuts  in the  rest  of the  defense budget  would reach
41  percent.

The Long-Run  Budget  Outlook

As  tables  5 and  6 show, the Administration and CBO both expect  the
baseline  budget  to  remain in  substantial deficit  through the mid-1990s.  The
Administration  now projects  the baseline  deficit  (excluding the  RTC)  to  fall
only to about  $100  billion in  FY1995,  in contrast  to the  small  surplus shown
for that  year  in the  January budget.  CBO,  using less  favorable economic
assumptions  (table 7),  expects the  deficit  (excluding the  RTC)  to  remain
above  $150  billion through FY1995.

II-B-7

Table  5

ADMINISTRATION  BUDGET PROJECTIONS
(Fiscal years, billions of  dollars)

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995

1,263 
1,044 
219 

1,353 
1,122 
231 

1,400 
1,195 
205 

1,414 
1,279 
135 

1,443 
1,363 
80 

1,518
1,441
77

1,264 
1,044 
220 

1,312 
1,135 
176 

1,340 
1,206 
134 

1,332 
1,283 
49 

1,339 
1,370 
-32 

1,392
1,447
-55

Baseline

Outlays 
Receipts 
Deficit 

Proposed

Outlays 
Receipts 
Deficit 

Memo

RTC net  outlays 
Deficit  excluding RTC:

Baseline 
Proposed 

57 

63 

41 

-5 

-42 

161 
163 

169 
114 

164 
93 

141 
55 

121 
10 

-20

97
-35

1. Figures  are  for the  "adjusted consolidated baseline  budget."

Table  6

CBO BASELINE BUDGET PROJECTIONS
(Fiscal years, billions  of dollars)

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995

1,238 

1,355 

1,426 

1,455 

1,483 

1,555

1,044 

1,123 

1,188 

1,260 

1,337 

1,417

195 

232 

239 

194 

146 

138

Outlays 1  

Receipts 

Deficit 

Memo

RTC net  outlays 
Deficit  excluding RTC 

36 
159 

70 
162 

60 
179 

13 
182 

-30 
177 

-18
157

1. Includes  additional RTC  spending  needs  as  forecast  by the CBO.

II-B-8

Table  7

ECONOMIC ASSUMPTIONS OF  THE ADMINISTRATION AND CBO

Forecast 

Projected

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995

----- Percent  change, calendar  year average-----

2.8
2.5

4.2
4.0

4.1
4.2

3.2
2.6

3.7
3.8

3.7
4.0

3.1
2.6

3.4
3.8

3.4
4.0

--------- Percent,  calendar year  average--------

Real  GNP

Adminstration
CBO

GNP deflator

Administration
CBO

CPI 1

Adminstration
CBO

Unemployment  rate
Administration
CBO

Three-month  Treasury bill  rate

Administration 
CBO 

7.7
7.6

Ten-year  Treasury note rate
8.5
8.5

Administration 
CBO 

Corporate profits  as a

percent  of GNP

Administration
CBO

5.6
5.4

7.9
7.8

6.0
5.1

5.3
5.5

5.1
6.2

6.1
7.2

6.5
5.2

1. Administration forecasts the CPI-W;  CBO  forecasts the CPI-U.

DOMESTIC  FINANCIAL
DEVELOPMENTS

III-T-1 
SELECTED FINANCIAL MARKET  QUOTATIONS
(percent)
------------  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1

1987

1989

1990

Change from:

Oct  16 

2  March 
highs 

Dec 
lows  Jul  3 

FOMC

Aug 14

Mar 89  Dec 89  FOMC
Jul  3
lows 
highs 

Short-term rates
3

Federal  funds

Treasury bills
3-month
6-month
1-year

Commercial  paper

1-month
3-month

Large  negotiable CDs

4

1-month
3-month
6-month

Eurodollar deposits

5

7.59

9.85 

8.45 

8.28 

8.05 

-1.80 

-.40 

-.23

6.93
7.58
7.74

9.09
9.11
9.05

7.53
7.29
7.11

7.70
7.59
7.45

7.43
7.33
7.18

-1.66
-1.78
-1.87

-.10
.04
.07

-.27
-.26
-.27

7.94 
8.65 

10.05 
10.15 

8.51 
8.22 

8.22 
8.12 

7.98 
7.80 

-2.07  -.53 
-.42 
-2.35 

-.24
-.32

7.92
8.90
9.12

10.07
10.32
10.08

8.52
8.22
8.01

8.23
8.23
8.25

7.93
7.88
7.87

-2.14
-2.44
-2.21

-.59
-.34
-.14

-.30
-.35
-. 38

1-month
3-month

8.00 
9.06 

10.19 
10.50 

8.38 
8.25 

8.19 
8.19 

7.94 
7.88 

-2.25 
-2.62 

-.44 
-.37 

-.25
-.31

Bank prime rate

9.25 

11.50 

10.50 

10.00 

10.00 

-1.50 

-.50 

.00

Intermediate-  and  long-term  rates

U.S. Treasury  (constant maturity)

3-year 
10-year 
30-year 

9.52
10.23
10.24

9.88
9.53
9.31

7.69
7.77
7.83

8.28
8.4-0
8.40

8.08
8.66
8.78

-1.80
-.87
-.53

.39 
.89 
.95 

-.20
.26
.38

Municipal  revenue

(Bond  Buyer)

Corporate--A  utility

recently  offered
7

Home  mortgage  rates
S&L  fixed-rate
S&L  ARM,  1-yr.

Stock prices

9.59

7.95 

7.28 

7.48 

7.51 

-.44 

.23

11.50 

10.47 

9.29 

9.92 

10.16 

-.31 

.87

11.58
8.45

11.22 
9.31 

9.69 
8.34 

10.15 
8.45 

10.08 
8.39 

-1.14 
-.92 

.39 
.05 

-.07
-.06

Record
highs 

Date

1989

Lows 
Jan  3 

1990

Percent  change from:

FOMC

Jul  3  Aug  14

Record  1989 
highs 

FOMC
lows  Jul  3

Dow-Jones  Industrial
NYSE  Composite
AMEX  Composite
NASDAQ  (OTC)
Wilshire
-
-- 

-- 

-- 

-- 

-- 

-

-

2999.75
201.13
397.03
485.73
3523.47
-- 
-- 
-

7/16/90
7/16/90
10/10/89
10/9/89
10/9/89

-

-- 

-

-- 

2144.64
154.98
305.24
378.56
2718.59
-- 
-
-- 

2911.63
196.61
360.67
461.76
3441.27
-- 
-

-

2747.77
186.10
339.94
410.33
3223.69
-- 
-- 

-

-8.40
-7.47
-14.38
-15.52
-8.51
-- 
-

-- 

28.12
20.08
11.37
8.39
18.58
-- 
-

-- 

-5.63
-5.35
-5.75
-11.14
-6.32
-- 
- -

-

-

-- 

-

-- 

-

-- 

1/ One-day quotes  except as noted.
2/ Last business day prior to stock market  decline on Monday

4/ Secondary market.
5/ Bid rates  for Eurodollar

Oct.  19,  1987.

3/ Average for two-week reserve maintenance period closest to

date shown. Last  observation is  average for the
maintenance period ending August 8, 1990.

deposits at  11  a.m. London time.
6/ Based on  one-day Thursday quotes
and futures market index  changes.

7/ Quotes  for week ending

Friday closest to date shown.

Selected  Interest  Rates *
(percent)

Short-Term

Daily

12

Federal  Funds

-I  9

3-month Treasury  Bill

-I  6

I 

I 

I 

l 

S 
7/3 

l 
i
8/14

1988 

1989 

1990

Long-Term

Weekly (Fridays)

I\

f\

/ 

\ 
f 
\ 

Primary Mortgage
(mid-week) 

, 

\

-- l1

-

Primary Mortgage
(wIekly)

Corporate  Bond (A Utility)

--  9

Corporate  Bond
(wkey)

30-year Treasury Bond

8 

-

30-year Treasury Bond
(dally)

I 

I I  I 

I  I  1.  I 

I 

I 

1  I 1 

I 

1988 
*-Fdday week 

1989 

through August 10,  Wednesday weeks through August  1.

1 I

I 
1990

7 

-1 

7/3 

I 

14
8/14

DOMESTIC  FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS

Financial  markets experienced some  notable turbulence as  the

intermeeting period  unfolded, with  investors  responding  first  to a System

easing move,  next  to  soft  economic  data and finally to the  Iraqi  invasion of

Kuwait.  On July  13,  the  System acted to  offset  an  apparent  crimp  in  credit

availability by  easing reserve market  conditions;  short-term rates  quickly

incorporated the  resulting  1/4  percent  decline  in the  federal  funds  rate,

and bond yields  eased a bit.  Bond yields  backed up  after  a disappointing

report  on  consumer  prices, but  rates  fell  across  the maturity spectrum later

in  July,  when the release  of  data on  second-quarter GNP  and revisions  to GNP

estimates  for  earlier quarters  provided fresh  evidence  of  a weak economy.

Market  conditions  changed dramatically in  the wake of  Iraq's  invasion

of  Kuwait  on August  2.  Short-term rates  dropped further,  with Treasury

bills  benefiting  from a "flight  to  quality" and from the  perception that

higher  energy prices might  tip the  economy into  recession.  Bond yields

surged, however,  as  investors  reassessed  the  inflation outlook.  In

addition, hopes  for  a budget  compromise  faded as market participants

perceived that  the combination of  a weaker  economy and higher gasoline

prices might make  it  more difficult  for policymakers to  reach agreement  on

steps  to achieve  significant  deficit  reductions.  With the  inflation outlook

less  favorable  and more uncertain, the yield curve  has steepened

significantly  (chart);  implicit  forward rates  for three years and beyond

have  risen by  1/2  to  3/4  of  a percentage point.  On balance,  the thirty-year

bond rate  is  up  nearly  40  basis points  since the  July  FOMC meeting, while

bill  rates  are  down  about  25  basis  points.

III-1

Long-Term  Treasury Yields and  Implied  Forward  Rates

III-2

Coupon  Bond Yield Curves

Percent

8/14 

..------

7/13 

_

30

Percent

-1  8.8

8.4

0 

10 

20 

Maturity

Derived  One-Year  Forward  Rates

---------------------------------------------------------

8/14

/ 

,--- 

--- 

-

-

1 

7/13

7/3

I!
I

I

Years Ahead

III-3

After  recording new highs  early  in the  intermeeting period, equity

prices  began  to  retreat late  in  July  in  response  to  weak  second-quarter

earnings  reports  and economic  data  suggesting a torpid economy.  Selling

pressures  intensified  in the  first  week  of August  as the market  concluded

that  the  sharp  rise  in  oil  prices  would  depress  future  corporate  earnings

and prevent  interest  rates  from  falling.  Price  declines  were  quite  steep at

times,  triggering price  limits  on stock  index  futures  as  well  as  program

trading  restraints  in the  cash markets.  Equity prices managed to  recover

from their  lows,  but  most major indexes  remain  about  5-1/2  percent  lower

than  they were  at  the  time  of  the July  FOMC  meeting.

M2  expanded  at  only a 1 percent  rate  last  month, moving near the  lower

bound of  its  annual  target  range.  Total  core  deposits  remained quite  weak

as  the  restructuring of  the  thrift  industry  continued to  weigh on the

aggregates.  M3  was  again  flat  in  July, as  bank  credit  slowed and thrifts

apparently  continued to  pare  their balance  sheets.  The  latest  data  suggest

some  strength  in  M2  in early August,  including a boost  in the  second week  of

this month  from the transfer of  balances  from stock  and bond  funds  to  money

funds.

Private  credit market  borrowing apparently tailed off last month.

Business  loans  and outstanding commercial  paper of  nonfinancial  firms

contracted in  July, and bond issuance  slumped after  a surge  in  June.  State

and local  governments  cut  back on their  security  offerings,  while  available

data  suggest that  both consumer  credit  and mortgage credit  were  soft  again

last  month.  By  contrast,  the federal  government  has  been borrowing  heavily

in the third  quarter,  largely driven by  funding needs  to  close  ailing

thrifts.

MONETARY  AGGREGATES
(based  on  seasonally  adjusted  data  unless otherwise  noted)

III-4

1.  Ml
2.  M2
3.  M3

Selected  components

4.  M1-A

5. 
6. 

Currency
Demand  deposits

7. 

Other  checkable deposits

8.  M2  minus  Ml2

Overnight  RPs  and Eurodollars, NSA
9. 
10.  General  purpose  and  broker/dealer  money

market  mutual  fund  shares

Savings  deposits  plus  MMDAs
Small  time  deposits

11.  Commercial  banks
12. 
13. 
14.  Thrift  institutions
15. 
16. 

Savings  deposits  plus  MMDAs 3
Small  time  deposits

3

1989 1

1990

Q1

1990

2Q

1990 
May 

1990 
Jun 

Growth
1990  Q4  89-
Jul  pe Jul  90pe

------------ Percent  change  at  annual  rates

4.8 
6.1 
2.6 

3.6 
2.4 
0.3 

-2.8
-2.6
-2.8

6.1
2.0
-0.1

------------ Percent  change  at  annual  rates-----

-

0 
1 
0 

3t
3½
1

Levels
bil.  $
Jun  90

4.2 

1.6 

-3.7

4.8
-2.8

10.3 
-0.9 

9.2
-4.6

7.8 
-13.8 

9.3
0.0

6 

515.7

10 
2 

253.4
274.6

1.0 

5.9

5.9 

6.5 

7.2 

2.0 

-0,8

-2.6

9.9 

-11 

294.0

0.6

1 

2460.7

-9.2 

30.7 

-10-8 

45.9 

-53.1

-12 

77.8

29.7
7.5
-1.7
19.0
-0.2
-9.3
5.8

18.8
8.5
9.3
7.8
-1.7
2.8

-4.3

-1.0
10.4
8.7
12.1
-5.4
1.5
-9.5

-20.0
13.3

6.0
20.8

-13.1

-7.7

-16.5

6.0
14.1
9.4
18.7
-16.0
-7.7
-21.0

12 
13 
7 
20 
-12 

-5 
-16 

321.0
1122.7

563.7
559.4
938.0
354.0
584.0

17.  M3  minus  M2'

-1.4 

-10.7

-7.9 

-3.3 

-8.8

-3 

785.4

18.  Large  time deposits
19. 
20. 
21.  Institution-only  money  market

At  commercial  banks,  net
At  thrift  institutions

5

mutual  fund  shares

22. 
23. 

Term RPs,  NSA
Term Eurodollars, NSA

MEMORANDA:

6

24.  Managed  liabilities at commercial

banks  (25+26)

25.  Large  time deposits, gross
26.  Nondeposit  funds
27. 

Net  due  to related  foreign

institutions

7

28. 
29.  U.S.  government deposits  at  coammercial

Other

banks

8

4.2
9.9
-7.8

17.1
-16.0
-21.7

-8.3 
-1.6 
-24.7 

10.2
-39.8
-51.2

-10.6
-3.0
-30.4

11.5
0.9
-21.7

-6.7

5.5

-40.3

5.6 
3.9 
36.3 

-6.5
1.5
-29.5

0.0
20.6
-58.1

531.7
396.9
134.8

107.3
94,6
64,8

17 
-27 
-24 

----- Average monthly change  in billions  of  dollars----

5.9 
2.6 
3.3 

2.2 
-2.3 
4.5 

3.3 
1.2 

-3.2 
-1.6 
-1.6 

-0.8 
-0.7 

-0.3 
-0.5 
0,2 

7.8

-7.7

-0.3 

-0.6

0.4 

-2.6

-4.2
-2.0
-2.2

-9.7
7.6

1.8

716.8
452.6
264.2

14.8
249.5

2 
8 

-6 

20.4

1.  Amounts shown  are  from  fourth quarter  to  fourth quarter.
2. Nontransactions  2M is  seasonally adjusted  as a  whole.
3.  Commercial  bank savings deposits excluding  MMOAs grew during  June and July at  rates of 9.3

percent  and  6 percent,  respectively. At  thrift  institutions, savings deposits  excluding MMDAs  grew
during June and  July at  rates of  -3.2 percent  and  -1  percent,  respectively.

4. The non-MZ  component of M3  is  seasonally adjusted as  a whole.
5.  Net  of  large  denomination  time  deposits  held  by  money market  mutual  funds  and  thrift 
6,  Dollar  amounts  shown under memoranda are calculated on an end-month-of-quarter  basis.
7.  Consists of  borrowing from other  than  commercial banks  in  the  form of  federal  funds purchased,  securities

institutions.

sold under  agreements  to  repurchase,  and other  liabilities for  borrowed money  Iincluding borrowing  from the
Federal  Reserve and unaffiliated foreign banks,  loan RPs and other  minor  items).  Data  are partially  estimated.

8.  Consists of  Treasury demand  deposits and note balances at  commercial  banks.
pe  - preliminary estimate

Monetary  Aggregates and Bank  Credit

III-5

Growth in Ml  and M2  remained sluggish  in July,  continuing  the trend  of

recent months.  M1  was virtually unchanged  in July and M2  expanded  at  only a

1 percent  clip.  The continued  lethargic growth of these  aggregates in July

owes,  in part,  to an  innovative  funding  strategy

that  pared  3-1/2  percentage  points  off Ml  growth and 1 percentage point  off

M2  growth.

In early

July, the  subsidiary banks began to  sweep  funds  out  of  NOW accounts  each day

and place them with a nonbank  affiliate;  the  funds  were  then returned  to the

banks  in the  form of large  time deposits,  with lower reserve  requirements.

The maturities of  the time deposit  contracts were  staggered  so  as  to  cover

daily  checks drawn  against  the  OCDs.  The transfer  of  funds  from OCD

accounts  to  large  time  accounts  had no  effect on M3,  which  grew at  an annual

rate  of  1/4  percent  in  July, about  in line  with  its  recent  behavior.

Growth  of M2  in  July continued to  run well below  staff  econometric

forecasts.  These  forecasts, based primarily on  income and  opportunity

costs,  began overpredicting M2  growth in  the second  quarter.  Spreads

between yields  on  six-month Treasury bills  and CDs,  shown  in the

accompanying chart,  have  narrowed in  recent months, especially at  thrifts,

where higher  relative  rates may be  symptomatic  of the  suspension of  RTC

efforts to  replace  high-cost  thrift  deposits.  However, households  typically

respond with a lag to  changes  in  the  opportunity costs  of holding  retail

deposits,  and  staff models  suggest  the  rise  and subsequent  fall  of  deposit

opportunity costs  since  late  last year  provided little  net  boost  to  M2  in

July.  The weakness  in M2  in  recent months  has  coincided with continued

III-6

Interest  Rates  on Selected  M2  Instruments  and 6-mo. Treasury  Bills

-- 
-
-- 

-

-
--- 

6-mo. T-BIl

-Commercial  Bank  6-mo. CD

Thrift 6-mo. CD

Percent

11

10

---- 

/-- 

---

--

J 

F 

M 

A 

M 

J 
J 
1989 

A 

S 

N 

D 

J 

F 

M 

A 

M 

J 

J 
1990

A

III-7

strong  demand in  noncompetitive tenders  for  Treasury  securities.  The

strength  in noncompetitive tenders has  been more  than would normally  be

expected given  prevailing rate  spreads,  perhaps  signalling reduced demand

for  retail deposits  in M2.  Preliminary data  for  August  show  some  rebound  in

M2,  partly owing to  narrower  opportunity  costs,  but  also to  a surge in M2

money  funds  fueled by transfers  from stock  and bond  funds.

M3  was  flat  in July, despite  a pickup in  institutional MMMFs,

reflecting  some  slowing in  bank  credit  and an  apparent  further  retrenchment

of  thrifts.  The continuing  slide  in M3  has  placed  it  at  the  1 percent  lower

limit  of  its  new annual  target  range.  The  runoff  of managed liabilities  at

thrifts  accelerated  somewhat  in July,  and  abstracting from the

effects  of 

action, managed liability growth remained  tepid at

commercial  banks.  Weak  credit  demands,  tight  credit  standards  on some  types

of bank  loans,  and  rapid inflows  of deposits  from thrifts  have  reduced

banks'  need  for managed liabilities.  So  far this year, banks  have funded  85

percent  of  their  total  credit growth with  retail  deposits, about  double  the

proportion of  recent  years.

Bank  credit growth  in July continued  to  show the  effects  of  restraint

in the  supply  of  credit  and subdued  demand,  expanding at  an annual  rate  of

5-1/2  percent.  Much of  the July  increase  in bank  assets  can be  attributed

to  a jump  in  security loans  at  several  large banks  and to  the transfer of

real  estate  loans  to banks  by the RTC  at  the beginning of  the month.  Apart

from the  RTC  real  estate  loan transfer  and the  continuing popularity of home

equity lines,  real  estate  credit  was softer  in  July, reflecting the

depressed residential and  commercial  real  estate markets.  Consumer  loans

continued to  contract,  largely because of an  increased pace  of

COMMERCIAL  BANK  CREDIT  AND  SHORT-  AND  INTERMEDIATE-TERM  BUSINESS  CREDIT

(Percentage changes  at  annual rates,  based on  seasonally  adjusted data)

III-8

1988:Q4

to 
1989:04 

Q1 

Q2 

May 

June 

July  p 

1990 

Levels
bil.$
July  p

-

------------------- 

Commercial Bank Credit  --------------------

6.8 

5.2 

3.3 

7.1 

5.4 

2669,9

15.7 

24.5 

-4.7 

4.5 

6.1 

2.9 

5.5 

-4.0 

614.6

436.7

177.9

6.2 

2055.3

-2,6 

649.8

801.0

376.4

39.9

1.  Total  loans and securities

at  banks

2. 

Securities

U.S.  government  securities

16.8 

9.3 

24.6 

15.1 

3.4 

9.4 

Other  securities

-6.9 

-. 2 

-3.8 

-10.6 

5. 

Total  loans

6. 

Business loans

8.1 

6.8 

3.9 

.6 

4.0 

5.2 

3.2 

-. 6 

3. 

4. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

7.2 

3.9 

9.7 

6.3 

3.8 

.6 

Real estate  loans

12.9 

10.1 

10.0 

12.5 

9.4 

11.0 

Consumer loans

Security loans

3.7 

-1.4 

4.4 

-4.1 

-4.8 

-18.2 

-23.0 

-42.2 

13.4 

126.3 

O0. 

Other loans

11. 

Business loans net  of bankers

acceptances

12. 

Loans  at  foreign branches2

13. 

Sum of  lines  11  &  12

14. 

Commercial  paper issued by

nonfinancial firms

15. 

Sum of  lines  13  & 14

16. 

Bankers  acceptances:  U.S.  trade

-5.0 

-9.0 

-5.1 

-15.8 

15.5 

188.2

---------  Short-  and  Intermediate-Term  Business  Credit----------

-. 8

16.4

.0

24.5 

9.3 

-31.4

4.4 

5.9 

-5.8

-2.1

21.6

-1.4

-13.2

-3.7

641.5

22.6

664.1

144.0

808.0

related '

6.1 

-19.8 

-9.8 

-15.1 

23.0

n.a.

31.95

17. 

Line 15  plus bankers acceptances:

U.S.  trade  related

18. 

3,6
Finance company  loans  to  business

19. 

Total  short-  and intermediate-

term business  credit  (sum of
lines  17  & 18)

3.4 

5.2 

-6.3

4.7 

15.4 

11.9

6.2

25.9

n.a.

n.a.

842.3

270.35

9.9 

3.7 

7.6 

-1.8

10.8

n.a. 

1112.65

1. Average of Wednesdays.
2. Loans  at  foreign  branches are  loans made  to U.S.  firms by  foreign branches
3. Based on  average  of  data  for current  and preceding ends of  month.
4. Consists  of  acceptances  that  finance  U.S.  imports,  U.S.  exports,  and  domestic shipment  and  storage  of goods.
5. June data.
p--preliminary.
n.a.--not  available

of  domestically  chartered banks.

III-9

securitization.  Securitization  of  consumer loans  has been  trending  up for

some  time,  as  some  banks  have  sought  to  reduce assets  in order  to meet  the

new risk-based capital  standards.  Even adjusting for  securitizations,

however, bank  loans  to  consumers remained  soft  in July,  likely owing to

continued  restraint in  household credit demands.

Business  loans  contracted in  July, with  weakness especially pronounced

at  small  banks  and in the  Northeast,  Southeast,  and Southwest.  An August

survey  of  senior  loan officers  at  large banks  revealed  a further tightening

of  credit  standards  for business  borrowers  since the  last  survey in May,

which  had already pointed to  some  firming of  standards  for midsized and

smaller  firms.  Over  40  percent  of  the  respondents  reported that  they had

applied tighter standards  to applications  from midsized  firms  for  non-

merger-related  loans,  while  about  one-third reported  tighter standards  for

larger and smaller  firms.  Terms  on  credit  extensions  were  also  tightened,

with  a sizable minority  of respondents  reporting they  had  cut  the maximum

size  of credit  lines and  increased their  cost,  raised spreads  of  loan  rates

over  base  rates,  and  imposed more  stringent  loan  covenants and more

extensive  collateral  requirements.  The  survey also addressed,  for the  first

time,  lending practices  at  U.S.  agencies  and branches  of  foreign banks.

About  60  percent  of  these  respondents  reported that  they had tightened

standards  for  nonmerger credits to  U.S.  businesses  during the  last  six

months.

In  response  to the more  cautious  bank  lending posture, businesses

apparently have been  seeking credit  from  other  sources  or applying  for  loan

guarantees.  For example,  business  loans  at  finance  companies  increased at  a

26 percent  annual  rate  in  June  and  15 percent  in  the second  quarter,  far

III-10

GROSS  OFFERINGS  OF  SECURITIES BY U.S.  CORPORATIONS
(Monthly rates,  not  seasonally adjusted, billions  of  dollars)

Corporate  securities - total 1  
Public  offerings  in U.S. 

Stocks--total 

Nonfinancial 
Utility 
Industrial 

Financial 

Bonds--total 1  
Nonfinancial 
Utility 
Industrial 
Financial  , 
By  quality

Aaa and Aa 
A and  Baa 
Less  than Baa 

No  rating  (or unknown) 

Memo items:

Equity-based bonds 
Mortgage-backed bonds 
Other asset-backed 
Variable-rate notes 

Bonds  sold abroad  - total 

Nonfinancial 
Financial 

Stocks  sold abroad  - total 

Nonfinancial 
Financial 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990

Year 

Year 

Year 

Q1 

Q2

P   Mayp   Junep   JulyP

24.12 
21.93 
4.45 
2.32 
.57 
1.75 
2.12 

17.48 
6.58 
2.02 
4.56 
10.90 

3.30 
5.22 
2.77 
.07 

.87 
5.19 
.93 
1.88 

2.03 
.94 
1.09 

.16 
.12 
.04 

22.39  19.80 
20.37  17.74 
2.69 
1.09 
.29 
.80 
1.60 

3.53 
1.14 
.24 
.90 
2.39 

16.89  23.30  24.64 
15.00  20.41  21.05 
2.35 
1.67 
.88 
.79 
.68 

3.00  2.33 
1.58  1.29 
.38 
.41 
1.18 
.91 
1.42  1.04 

16.84  15.05 
6.22 
1.75 
4.47 
8.83 

6.17 
1.78 
4.39 
10.67 

12.00  18.08  18.70 
3.77  6.62 
5.20 
2.15 
1.22  2.30 
2.55  4.32 
3.05 
8.23  11.46  13.50 

2.73 
5.50 
2.59 
.04 

.28 
4.72 
1.26 
1.19 

1.93 
.73 
1.20 

3.28 
5.65 
2.39 
.04 

.52 
1.67 
2.02 
1.01 

1.90 
.48 
1.42 

2.64  3.62 
4.27  8.28 
.24 
.07 

.17 
.00 

.05 

.88 
1.64  2.90 
3.28  2.97 
1.39 
.25 

1.62  2.49 
.64 
1.24  1.85 

.38 

4.95 
6.60 
.40 
.00 

.40 
4.50 
2.25 
.01 

3.15 
.51 
2.64 

.09 
.08 
.01 

.16 
.12 
.04 

.27 
.10 
.17 

.40 
.15 
.25 

.44 
.31 
.13 

29.87 
25.87 
2.87 
1.07 
.06 
1.01 
1.80 

23.00 
9.75 
3.60 
6.15 
13.25 

3.35 
12.30 
.27 
.19 

2.01 
1.60 
5.29 
.04 

3.40 
1.00 
2.40 

.60 
.05 
.55 

16.94
13.87
2.37
1.55
.50
1.05
.82

11.50
3.60
1.05
2.55
7.90

4.50
3.75
.18
.00

.1
.7,
2.37
.00

2.80
.45
2.35

.27
.12
.15

1. Securities issued  in the private placement market  are not  included.

Total  reflects gross proceeds  rather than  par value of  original  discount bonds.

2. Excludes equity  issues  associated with  equity-for-equity swaps  that

have  occured  in

restructurings.  Such  swaps totaled  $20.4  billion in  1989.

3. Bonds  categorized  according to Moody's  bond ratings,  or to  Standard

and  Poors'  if

unrated by Moody's.  Excludes mortgage-backed and asset-backed bonds.

4. Includes  bonds  convertible  into  equity and bonds with warrants  that

entitle  the

holder to  purchase  equity in  the  future.

p--preliminary.

III-11

outstripping  growth at  banks.  The Small  Business  Administration has

recorded a pickup in  the demand for  its  loan  guarantees in  recent months,

suggesting  that  some  small  business borrowers may be  coping with

availability constraints  by  seeking credit  enhancements.

Business  Finance

Borrowing  in  the  commercial  paper  and bond markets by  nonfinancial

firms  paralleled the  lagging growth in  business  credit  at  banks.  Gross

public bond issuance  in  July  fell  to  its  slowest  pace  of the year,  and

commercial  paper  also  ran off.  The  fall  in commercial  paper  outstanding may

be  due partly to  the delayed effects  of the  June  surge  in bond issuance,

when  several  firms  saw the drop  in  long-term yields  as  an  opportunity to

substitute  bonds  for  short-term debt.

Concerns  about  credit quality have  continued to  loom  large  in

securities markets.  Downgrades  exceeded upgrades  by more  than  6 to  1 in

dollar terms  in  the  second quarter.  Nationwide, commercial  real  estate

difficulties  and regional  residential property problems  have helped  spur the

downgradings  of many banks.  In the  nonfinancial  sector,  downgrades were

concentrated among  speculative-grade issues.

Even more creditworthy  borrowers have  been  subject  to  closer  scrutiny

by the market.  For example,  rate  tiering in  the A2/P2  commercial paper

category has  become  more marked, with lower  quality paper reportedly trading

at  rates  up to  15  basis  points  higher than more  desirable A2/P2  issues. 1

This  has been due  in  part  to  increasing concern  about  possible  defaults.

The same  concern  led the SEC to  propose a rule  restricting money fund

1. Issuers  of A2/P2  commercial paper  have  investment-grade  long-term debt
ratings ranging  from A+ to BBB.  Nearly  15  percent of  total  commercial paper
outstanding  falls  in the A2/P2  category.

III-12

ownership  of A2/P2  paper to  5 percent  of total  assets.  Currently, money

funds  face  no  restrictions  on total holdings  of  A2/P2 paper,  although they

may not  hold  lower-rated  securities.  Money  funds  have  reportedly become

selective in  purchasing A2/P2  paper.  However,  because money fund  holdings

of  A2/P2 paper  appear  to be  relatively  small,  their reduced presence  in the

A2/P2  market  should  not  by  itself  create  funding problems  for  issuers.  In

the  below-investment-grade  bond market, there  were  some  encouraging

developments,  including the  steps announced by RJR to  buy back  some  of  its

junk bonds  and by  Columbia  Savings  and Loan to  sell  its  large  junk

portfolio.  The  spread between high-yield bonds  and the  10-year  Treasury

note  rate  narrowed a bit as  a result.  Issuance  of  new  junk bonds  remained

negligible  throughout  July.

Gross  equity issuance  by  nonfinancial  firms remained  quite  strong in

July.  Initial public  offerings  exceeded  $1 billion, the  largest  figure  for

the year,  as many high-tech  firms took  advantage of  the high  level  of  stock

prices  in  July to  go public.  However,  the  recent  steep  declines  in stock

prices  chilled the  new issue  market,  reportedly resulting  in the

postponement  of  several  planned issues.

Thrift  Industry Developments

First-quarter losses  for  nonintervened thrifts  fell  sharply  from the

last  quarter  of  1989,  driven largely by  reduced loan-loss provisions.

However,  loan-loss provisions  tend to  be  larger at  year-end,  so  the

improvement  in earnings may be  illusory.  Compared  to the  first  quarter  of

1989, provisions  for  loan  losses  were  up  slightly.  Total assets  declined

about  1 percent  during the  quarter,  contributing to  a small improvement  in

the  ratio of  tangible  capital to  assets.  Thrifts  likely continued to  shed

III-13

assets  at  a rapid pace  in the  second quarter,  judging by the  sizable  runoffs

of  thrift  liabilities.

Because  complete  data  are  not  yet  available,  the  overall performance  of

thrift  earnings  in  the  second quarter  is  hard to discern.  Several

California  institutions  have  released  second-quarter  reports  that  indicated

relatively healthy earnings, but  the trend  in loan-loss  provisions among

them is  disturbing.  Losses  at  Coast  Savings,  HomeFed,  CalFed, and Great

American  Bank were driven mainly by  large  loan-loss provisions for  loans  on

real  estate  in Arizona and Texas,  but  problems  on  California  loans have

begun to  surface.  As much as  37  percent  of  HomeFed's nonperforming assets

are  now in  California, and CalFed cited a deterioration in  its  California

loan  portfolio as  the main reason  for  its  loss.  H.F.  Ahmanson, widely

considered the  healthiest  thrift  in the  country,  also  experienced an

increase  in nonperforming  loans  on  California real  estate.  While  the

California market  is  still  considered  strong relative  to the  rest  of  the

nation, these increases  in nonperforming loans  and  similar experiences  at

California banks  have  raised  questions  concerning the  underlying  strength of

the  state's  real  estate market.

Treasury  and Sponsored Agency Financing

Staff  projections put  the third-quarter federal  government  deficit  at

about  $60  billion, bringing the  total for  the  fiscal year  to  a record  $223

billion.  RTC's  third-quarter needs  for working  capital are  estimated at  $34

billion, although  its  outlays to  this  point  in the quarter amount  to  only

about  $5 billion.  The Treasury  is  expected to  finance  the deficit  with a

record  $68  billion of marketable borrowing  in the third  quarter,  including

$32  billion in  the  bill  market  and  $36 billion  in the  coupon market.  The

III-14

TREASURY AND AGENCY FINANCING 1
(Total for period;  billions of  dollars)

1990

Q2 

Q3e 

Jul.P 

Aug.e

Sept.e

Treasury financing

Total  surplus/deficit  (-)

-12.0 

-60.1 

-24.3 

-55.7

19.9

Means of  financing  deficit:

Net  cash borrowing
from the public
Marketable borrowings/
repayments  (-)

Bills
Coupons

Nonmarketable

Decrease  in the  cash

balance

Memo:  Cash balance
at  end of period

41.0 

72.9 

24.8 

46.1

32.6

.5
32.1
8.3

67.7
31.8
36.0
5.2

21.1
11.3
9.8
3.7

46.0
29.1
16.9
.1

2.1

0.6

-8.6

9.3
1.4

-16.2 

-3.8

2.5 

-16.0

34.6 

38.4 

24.9 

22.4

38.4

Other 3

-12.8 

-9.1 

-10.3

-5.9

Federally  sponsored  credit

agencies, net  cash
borrowing4

FHLBs
FHLMC
FNMA
Farm Credit  Banks
FAC
SLMA
FICO
REFCORP

-8.5
4.9
1.1
.0
.0
1.4
.0
3.5

1. Data reported on  a not  seasonally adjusted,  payment basis.
2. Includes  proceeds  from  securities  issued by federal  agencies under  special

financing authorities  (primarily FSLIC)  and the  face value  of the  zero  coupon
bonds  issued to REFCORP.  The discount  from face  value  is  offset  in  other means of
finance.

3. Includes checks  issued  less  checks paid, accrued items  and other

transactions.

4. Excludes mortgage pass-through securities  issued by FNMA and FHLMC.
e--staff  estimate
p--preliminary

Note:  Details may not  add to totals  due  to rounding.

III-15

gross  sizes  of the  weekly bill  auctions  have  already crept  up  over  the

intermeeting  period from an  average of  $17.2  billion to  $18.4  billion, while

the  auction sizes  of  other  issues  have been  boosted as  much as  $1 billion.

Results  of  the  Treasury's  August midquarter refunding were  mixed, with the

three-  and ten-year  note  issues meeting a cool  reception, while the  thirty-

year bond  sold  surprisingly  well,  contributing  to a brief  12-basis-point

rally in  the market.

REFCORP  returned to  a thirty-year maturity in  its  July  auction.  The  $5

billion offering came  at  a 38-basis-point  spread over the  thirty-year

Treasury bond,  about  10  basis  points  higher  than the  spread  for  the  original

$4-1/2 billion thirty-year  REFCORP bonds  auctioned  in October  1989.

Overall, however,  spreads  for  the  agency market  remained tight  as  total

agency debt  outstanding has  grown slowly.  The  total debt  of  government-

sponsored enterprises  increased only  $10  billion over  the  last  four

quarters,  about  $25  billion lower  than the pace  in the  preceding few  years.

Much  of this  slowdown  is  due to  the decline  in  Home  Loan  Bank debt

outstanding, which stemmed  from paydowns  of  advances  by  thrifts.

In  recent weeks,  the Student  Loan Marketing Association  has  suffered

from its  relationship to  the troubled  Higher  Education Assistance Foundation

(HEAF). 2  About  $2-1/2 billion of  Sallie Mae's  $16  billion loan portfolio

is  guaranteed by  HEAF,  and Sallie Mae  has  extended about  $800  million in

2. HEAF  is  one  of the  largest  of  47  state  and nonprofit  agencies  that
insure Guaranteed Student  Loan Program loans,  insuring  about  10  percent  of
the  $50  billion  in loans  outstanding.  In case  of  losses,  the guarantor
agencies have  recourse to  the Department  of  Education at  a rate  dependent
upon  the  loss  rate  of the  guarantor agency's  loan portfolio.  The  higher the
loss  rate,  the  lower the  reimbursement  rate  from the Department  of Education
on any  nonperforming loans.  HEAF's loss  rate  entitles  it  to only  80  percent
reimbursement  of  its  losses.

III-16

loans  to  HEAF  and HEAF-related entities.  However, Sallie  Mae reportedly

believes  its  risk  of  loss  is  minimal because  its  HEAF  loans  are  fully

collateralized, and the  Department  of Education  has recently  reaffirmed its

backing  of HEAF  guarantees.  The market, though,  is  still  wary;  spreads  on

Sallie Mae's  debt  have  widened about  5 basis points, and  its  stock price  is

down  18  percent  since  HEAF's  difficulties  came  to  light.

Concerns  about  government-sponsored enterprises  (GSEs) prompted the

Treasury  to  submit  a proposal  at  the  ongoing budget  summit  negotiations  that

would require  GSEs  to obtain a triple-A debt  rating by  at  least  two

nationally recognized rating  agencies.  The  ratings are  to  be based solely

on the  GSEs'  financial  health without  reliance on  implicit  federal

guarantees  or  other advantages  of  agency status--a more stringent  standard

than was  proposed  in the  Treasury's May GSE  report.  GSEs  failing  this test

within a prescribed period would be  subject  to  restrictions  and oversight by

the Treasury.

State  and Local  Government Finance

Gross  issuance  of  long-term tax-exempt  securities  is  estimated to  have

slackened  in July from its  strong  June pace.  Offerings  to  finance new

capital  expenditures  and to  refund outstanding debt  were both  off.  Short-

term volume, which had been boosted in June  by New York  State's  heavy

issuance,  returned to a more  normal  level  in July but may  jump  again in

August  as  California recently announced  plans  to  issue  $4.1  billion  in

short-term debt.

The  credit  quality of municipal  issuers deteriorated  further  in the

second quarter,  with  downgrades  outpacing  upgrades by  three  to  one.  The

III-17

downgrades  were  especially widespread among  housing  issues,  owing to  a

decline  in  the  ratings of  banks providing  credit  support.

GROSS  OFFERINGS OF  MUNICIPAL  SECURITIES
(Monthly rates, not  seasonally adjusted, billions  of dollars)

1988 
Year 

1989  1989 
Year 

Q4 

1990 

Q1 

Q2 

May 

1990
June1   July

Long-term 

Total  offerings 1   11.73  11.90  12.78 
Total  tax-exempt  11.41  11.65  12.13 
2  9.54 
9.47  10.76 
2.90 
2.47 
2.35 
6.64 
8.41 
7.01 
1.87 
1.37 
2.17 
.25 
.32 
.34 

Short-term 
Total  taxable 

Refundings 
New  capital 

8.85  14.62 
8.73  14.38 
7.63  11.41 
1.58 
1.45 
9.73 
6.19 
2.97 
1.10 
.23 
.12 

13.41  21.32  10.26
13.22  20.93  10.15
12.03  13.63 
7.57
1.55 
2.65 
.12
7.45
10.49  10.97 
7.30 
1.19 
2.58
.19 
.11
.39 

1. Includes  issues  for  public  and private  purposes;  also  includes  taxable

issues.

2. Includes  all  refunding bonds,  not  just  advance  refundings.
p--preliminary.

The  Congress  recently amended  federal legislation  to  allow  issuers  of

tax-exempt  securities to  invest  a sizable proportion of  proceeds  in  taxable

securities  for more  than two  years.  As  a result,  tax-exempt  entities

undertaking  construction projects  have  a much  stronger  incentive  to  issue

tax-exempt  bonds  in  advance  of  the  projects'  completion  dates  in  order to

earn arbitrage  profits.  California, the  largest  of these  issuers,  has

already announced  its plans to  pursue this  strategy,  and  other  states  are

expected  to  follow suit.

Mortgage  Markets

Available  indicators  suggest  that  mortgage  borrowing remained  subdued

in  July.  Growth  of  real  estate  loans  at  commercial banks  decelerated after

allowance  for  transfers of  mortgage  assets  in  thrift  resolutions.  Sharp

III-18

Mortgage  Markets

Selected  Mortgage  Interest Rates

Weekly

--- 
----

30yr  Fixed-Rate Conventional
lyrARM

r--

SI

/ 

I

-

/ 

V-

A  ^

S"- 

Percent
t

J  Q

-I  s

1 I  I 

I 

M 

I  iL 
J 

I 

S 

I 

I 
D 

M 

I  I  I i 
I 
J 

1 

S 

I 
D 

I I 

M 

J 

I 
I  I  I 
S 

I ! 

M 

D 

M 

I 
J 

I  i

S

Selected  Yield  Spreads 

Weekly

-

30yr FRM  minus 10yr Treasury*

-

-

-

- lyr ARM  minus  1yr Treasury

Basis  Points
Basis  Points

4,

N

(\\ 

[A

l~l1F  tv.
5'

V.I\ 

l 

/

tkl 

,AJ 

1 

V 

'-' 

V 

/ 
r  ~I 

\ 

^-

'I

/

/

i 

I 

I 

S 

I 
M 

[  I  I  I  I 
S 

J 
1987
*30yr FRM  is bond-yield equivalent.

D

lI' 

I 
S 

I 

i 
D 

II

i 

I 
I 

M 

I 
M 

I  I 
J
1988

I I 

I 
S 

I  i  I  i 
M 

D 

I i 

J
1989

iI1
S

I I 
J 
1990

III-19

MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITY  ISSUANCE
(Monthly averages, billions  of dollars,  NSA unless  noted)

Federally  related
pass-through  securities 
ARM- 

Total 

Total 

(SA) 

(NSA)  backed 

Multiclass  securities
Private  FNMA 

Agency
Total  issues 1 REMICs 2 REMICs  strips

FHLMC 

12.5 
16.8 

12.6 
16.7 

2.4
2.6

6.9 
8.1 

4.2
1.4

14.6 

14.5 

2.6

8.0 

4.3

1988
1989

1988-Q4

1989-Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4

15.9
13.5
15.9
21.7

13.7
13.8
17.8
21.6

1990-QI  r
Q2  p

23.2 
18.0 

19.8 
18.4 

1989-July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.

1990-Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
June
July

13.3
15.7
18.7
19.4
23.2
22.6

25.3
21.8
22.4
17.7
18.0
18.2
n.a.

15.5
17.2
20.7
19.3
21.6
24.0

20.7
19.0
19.8
18.0
16.8
20.3
n.a.

1.4
2.2

2.9
2.3
2.2
1.7
1.5
3.3

0.8
1.0
2.5
1.9
2.5
2.2
n.a.

.9
3.1

1.2

1.2
2.4
3.6
5.2

5.0
4.7

4.9
3.3
2.7
5.1
6.1
4.4

3.9
3.5
7.6
4.5
5.0
4.7
6.7

3.3
4.6
5.2
3.9
4.5
3.5

4.2
2.6
4.5
2.2
3.0
3.8
n.a.

1.1
.3
.2
.0
.7
.5

.8
.5
1.4
.0
.0
1.3
n.a.

6.6
5.2
9.8
10.7

11.3 
10.8 

1.6
2.7

10.5

9.7
9.1
10.1
12.1
9.8

11.1
7.5
15.2
9.1
12.4
11.1
n.a.

1. Excludes  pass-through  securities with  senior/subordinated structures.
r--revised  p--preliminary  n.a.--not available.

III-2Z

III-20

CONSUMER  CREDIT
(Seasonally adjusted)

Percent  change 
(at annual rate) 

1990 

1990 

Memo:
Net  change 
Outstandings
(billions of  (billions of

dollars) 
1990 

dollars)
1990

1988  19891 

Q1 

Q2P   Mayr 

June p  Mayr 

Junep  

Junep

Total  installment 

8.9 

5.5 

2.1 

2.5 

6.1 

.8 

3.65 

.46 

724.9

Installment,

excluding auto 

10.3 

8.6 

3.4 

7.5  10.2 

5.6 

3.65 

2.05 

437.6

Selected types

Auto 
Revolving 
All other 

Memorandum:
Total 

7.0 
13.7 
7.6 

1.3 

.2  -4.9 

14.2  10.5  12.2  18.8 
2.5 

4.2  -2.6 

3.2 

-.0  -6.5 
7.6 
3.9 

-.00  -1.58 
1.30 
3.19 
.74 
.47 

287.3
208.5
229.1

7.3 

5.0 

2.4 

2.4 

4.0 

5.6 

2.60 

3.53 

787.4

1. Growth  rates  are adjusted  for  discontinuity in data  between December 1988  and

January 1989.

2. Installment plus noninstallment.
r--revised.  p--preliminary.
Note:  Details may not  add to  totals  due to  rounding.

CONSUMER INTEREST  RATES
(Annual percentage rate)

1987 

1988 

1989 

Feb. 

Mar. 

Apr.  May 

June

1990

10.46 
14.23 
17.92 

10.86 
14.68 
17.79 

12.07 
15.44 
18.02 

11.80 
15.27 
18.12 

... 
... 
... 

...  11.82  ...
...  15.41  ...
...  18.14  ...

At  commercial banks 1
New  cars  (48 mo.) 
Personal  (24 mo.) 
Credit cards 

At  auto  finance  cos.

2

New cars 
Used cars 

10.73 
14.61 

12.60 
15.11 

12.62 
16.18 

12.67 
15.91 

12.31  12.21  12.23  12.58
15.97  16.02  16.03  16.00

1. Average  of  "most common" rate  charged for  specified type and maturity  during the

first  week of  the mid-month of  each quarter.

2. Average  rate  for  all loans  of  each type made during the month regardless of

maturity.

III-21

declines  in thrift  liabilities  continued last  month,  suggesting that  thrifts

further pared their mortgage assets.

Interest  rates  on  fixed-rate mortgages  have generally trended  lower

relative  to Treasuries  in recent months  (chart),  partly reflecting  a sagging

demand  for  credit  in the  housing sector. 

Issuance  of  fixed-rate mortgage-

backed pass-throughs  (table) has  remained strong,  however,  as  FRMs  have

accounted  for  about  70  percent of  new mortgage  production in  recent months.

ARMs, meanwhile,  accounted for  32  percent  of  all  conventional home

loans closed  in  June,  up a bit  from the May level.  In  contrast with  fixed-

rate mortgage  pricing, spreads between ARM rates  and  short-term Treasuries

widened slightly  over the  intermeeting period.  ARM rates  respond to  short-

term Treasury  yields  with a lag and yields  on short-dated Treasuries  dropped

sharply in  recent weeks,  responding to  the  System easing  in mid-July and the

unsettling movements  in  equity and bond  prices  in early August.  In

addition, initial  rate  discounting of  ARMs  has moderated  in recent months,

probably because  banks are  concerned about  the creditworthiness  of  loan

applicants  and perhaps  because they  feel  less  competitive pressure.

Consumer  Installment  Credit

Consumer  installment credit  grew less  than 1 percent  at  an annual  rate

in June, holding  its  second-quarter growth to a 2-1/2  percent  pace.  This

performance marked little  increase  over the  first  quarter,  so  that  the  first

half  of  1990  was  the weakest  two-quarter period since  1980.

Automobile  credit  accounted  for most  of the drag  on  installment credit

growth, both  in June  and in the  second quarter,  reflecting the modest  pace

of  retail sales  at  auto dealers  over the  same  period.  While  the  sales  and

credit  series often  diverge on a month-to-month basis,  partly because of

111-22

Period

1983 
1984 
1985 
1986 
1987 
1988 
1989 

RETAIL  SALES  OF  AUTO  DEALERS  AND  AUTOMOBILE  CREDIT

Retail  Sales,  Auto Dealers 

Automobile Credit

Billions of DollarslPercentagel  Billions  of Dollars  Percentage
Volume  r  Growth  I  Change  IOutstandingq  Growth  I  Change

230.1 
273.4 
303.3 
326.3 
342.9 
371.6 
378.4 

37.6 
43.4 
29.9 
22.9 
16.6 
28.7 
6.8 

19.5 
18.9 
10.9 
7.6 
5.1 
8.4 
1.8 

143.6 
173.6 
210.3 
247.4 
265.9 
284.3 
290.9 

17.7 
30.0 
36.6 
37.1 
18.5 
18.8 
1
3.7 

13.9
20.9
21.1
17.6
7.5
7.1
1.3

--seasonally  adjusted, at  annual  rates--

1990-Q1 

384.7 
-Q2  (p) 369.8 

54.4 
-59.6 

14.7 
-15.5 

290.9 
287.4 

.6 

-14.3 

0.2
-4.9

1. Adjusted for  break in series  in January,  1989.
p--preliminary.

GROWTH  IN CONSUMER  INSTALLMENT  CREDIT AND  CONSUMPTION

CREDIT  GROWTH

4 $

1\

'Iv

Percent, SAAR
725

--  20

--  5

I 

198 

1983 

198 
1984

I 

198 
1985 

I

198 
1986 

198 
1987 

198 
1988

I 

I 
I 
198 
1989 

I 

I  1  II
19
1990

III-23

lags  between the  recording of an  auto  sale  and the  booking of the  related

loan,  they track  fairly closely  over  a longer  period.  Last year,  dealer

sales slid  to  a 1-3/4  percent  rate  of  growth, a pace  at  least two-thirds

slower than  in any of the  previous  six years.  Auto  credit  experienced a

similar  slowdown, expanding only  1-1/4 percent  during the year  (see table).

The  story  in  1990  is much the  same.  Sales have  declined on balance  over  the

first  half  of  the year,  and  auto  credit  at  midyear had contracted about  1

percent  since  year-end.

Revolving  credit  remained the  strongest  component  of consumer  credit,

although  June's  7-1/2  percent  pace  was  less  than half the  rate  recorded in

May  and well  below  that  of recent  years.  Robust  growth recorded in April

and May kept  revolving credit  climbing at  a 12  percent  rate  during the

second quarter,  up  from  10-1/2 percent  in the  first.

The meager advance  in consumer  credit this  year appears  generally

consistent  with the pattern of  consumer spending  (see chart).  In  the early

stages of  an economic  expansion, growth  in  consumer  credit  typically

outstrips the growth  in  spending, then gravitates toward the  spending path

as the expansion matures.  This  pattern of  initial  fast growth  in credit and

subsequent moderation reflects two major  factors.  First,  spending on

durable goods,  the element  of consumption most  closely  related to  consumer

borrowing, is  generally a higher proportion of  total  spending  early  in the

expansion than  it  is  later.  Second, the  stream of  debt  repayments  is

relatively small  at  the outset  of  an expansion, reflecting the  lower  levels

of  borrowing in  the previous  recession.  As the  expansion matures,

repayments  accelerate and  serve as  a larger  offset  to  new borrowing, thereby

slowing the growth  of the debt  stock.

III-24

The  use  of  home equity  lines  of credit  to  finance  consumer  outlays has

also  damped the  growth of  consumer  credit  during the past  few years,

possibly trimming  its  rate  of growth by 1 to 2 percentage points.  At  banks,

borrowing against  home  equity lines  through July  of  1990 has  been growing

about  20  percent at  an annual  rate,  bringing the  total  amount  of home  equity

credit  to  $55  billion at  banks and possibly as much  as  $100  billion at  all

lenders.  Some  banks have been  tightening standards  for granting home  equity

lines  and offering  less  liberal terms,  particularly  in the  Northeast where

real  estate  values  have  weakened and delinquency  rates  have  risen  on home

equity  lines  (see table).  However, the  pinch of  tighter rules  appears to

have  been  relatively modest  and the  stricter  guidelines  are  likely to  exert

little  restraining effect  on already existing  accounts.  Household surveys

taken  last  year  indicated that  one  in  five  line  holders  had  not  drawn

against  their  lines at  the time  of the  survey.  Moreover, those  who  had

tapped their  lines  had used  only 40  percent  of their  lines  on average.  As  a

result, there  appears  to be  ample  scope  for  home  equity credit  to  continue

its  recent  rapid  growth  despite tighter lending standards.

DELINQUENCY RATES  ON HOME  EQUITY LINES  OF  CREDIT AT BANKS
U.S.  Total  and  Selected States
(First quarter  data, nsa)

State 

1988 

1989 

Connecticut 
Maine 
Massachusettes 
New Hampshire 
New York 
Rhode  Island 

U.S.  Total 

.96 
.94 
.59 
.73 
1.12 
.55 

.67 

1.30 
.97 
.84 
1.91 
1.71 
.76 

.67 

1990

2.25
1.90
1.18
2.59
1.69
1.02

.79

Note:  Figures  represent the  number of  loans delinquent  as  a percent

of the  number of accounts,  as  reported by the American Bankers
Association.

INTERNATIONAL  DEVELOPMENTS

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS

U.S. Merchandise Trade

The deficit  on merchandise  trade  increased slightly  in May to  $7.7

billion  (seasonally adjusted, Census basis),  from the  revised  $7.3  billion

deficit  recorded in April.  Increases  in non-agricultural  exports  in May

were more  than offset  by increases  in  imports  of  oil  and non-oil products.

Trade data  for June  will be  released on August 17  and will be  reported in

the  Greenbook supplement.

Oil  imports  increased slightly  in May, as  a surge  in  quantity was

partly offset by a fall  in prices.  The  increase  in  the  quantity of  imported

oil  resulted  from further additions  to  oil  stocks,  since  consumption was

U.S.  MERCHANDISE TRADE:  MONTHLY DATA
(Billions of  dollars,  seasonally  adjusted, Census  customs  basis)

Exports 

Total 

Ag.  Nonag. 

Total 

1989-Jan 
Feb 
Mar 

Apr 
May 
Jun 

Jul 
Aug 
Sep 

Oct 
Nov 
Dec 

1990-Jan 
Feb 
Mar 

Apr r  
Mayp

28.4 
28.4 
30.8 

30.4 
30.7 
31.6 

29.9 
30.2 
30.1 

31.4 
30.6 
31.3 

31.4 
31.6 
33.3 

32.1 
32.8 

3.2 
3.4 
3.9 

3.7 
3.5 
3.3 

3.3 
3.1 
3.3 

3.2 
3.4 
3.3 

3.6 
3.4 
3.7 

3.3 
3.2 

25.2 
25.0 
26.9 

26.7 
27.2 
28.3 

26.6 
27.1 
26.8 

28.2 
27.2 
28.0 

27.8 
28.2 
29.6 

28.8 
29.6 

37.4 
38.2 
39.9 

38.7 
41.0 
39.5 

39.0 
40.5 
38.9 

41.6 
40.5 
38.1 

41.6 
38.7 
41.6 

39.4 
40.5 

Imports
Oil 
(nsa)
3.5 
3.2 
3.7 

4.0 
4.7 
4.2 

4.3 
4.3 
4.0 

4,4 
4.4 
4.1 

5.9 
4.7 
4.7 

3.8 
4.4 

Non-oil 

Balance

33.9 
35.0 
36.2 

34.7 
36.3 
35.3 

34.7 
36.2 
34.9 

37.2 
36.1 
34.0 

35.7 
34.0 
36.9 

35.6 
36.1 

-9.1
-9.8
-9.0

-8.3
-10.3
-8.0

-9.1
-10.3
-8.8

-10.2
-9.9
-6.8

-10.2
-7.1
-8.4

-7.3
-7.7

p--preliminary
r--revised
Source:  U.S. Department of  Commerce, Bureau of  the  Census.

IV-1

IV-2

about unchanged  from the beginning of  the year.  The decline  in  oil  prices

during May  continued the downward  trend  that began early  in  the  year,

reflecting strength  in OPEC production. 

From May through early July, the

spot  price  of West Texas  Intermediate declined  from $18.24  to  $16.50  per

barrel, with OPEC  showing little  inclination  to  limit  the  flow of oil.

OIL IMPORTS
(BOP basis, value  at  annual  rates, not  seasonally adjusted)

Q1 

1989 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

01 

1990
Apr/May  Apr-r 

Value  (Bil. $)  43.52 
Price  ($/BBL) 
15.44 
Quantity  (mb/d)  7.83 

54.08 
18.32 
8.11 

52.69 
16,75 
8.55 

53.29 
17.67 
8.20 

62.43 
19.47 
8.90 

50.08 
16.29 
8.40 

46.94 
16.86 
7.73 

May-p

53.21
15.81
9.05

p--preliminary.

Oil  prices  reversed  their decline  in the middle  of July, when the

Persian Gulf OPEC  producers  announced an  informal  production agreement  that

became a formal  OPEC  accord in  late July.  The  agreement called for

production restraint of  1 mb/d relative  to  July rates  of crude production

(23.2  mb/d);  this  brought  the  spot price  of West  Texas  Intermediate  close  to

$19  per barrel by July  12th.  The price  increased  a further  $2.50 per barrel

in  response  to  threats  from  Iraq  and movement  of Iraqi  troops  towards  the

border with Kuwait.  Following the  invasion of  Kuwait, oil  prices  peaked at

nearly $30  per barrel  on August 7.  Over the  past week, prices  have  settled

at  roughly  $26.50  per barrel  as  tensions  in  the  Middle East  continue.

The  trade  deficit  continued to narrow in  April/May, improving by

roughly  $9 billion  on a balance  of payments  basis  from  the  first-quarter

deficit.  The  improvement  in  the April/May balance relative  to  the  first

quarter was  due  entirely to  the  significant decline  in  the value  of oil

imports  that more  than offset lower  agricultural  exports.  Declines  in

shipments  of wheat,  corn, soybeans,  and cotton were  responsible  for  the drop

IV-3

in  agricultural exports  during April/May.  A  small  decline  in exports  of

nonagricultural  products  was  about offset by  a  decline  in  imports  of non-oil

goods.

While  there  were  essentially no  changes  in  the  composition  of non-oil

imports  from  the  first  quarter  to  April/May,  there were  some  shifts  across

the  categories  of nonagricultural  exports.  Automotive exports  increased

U.S.  MERCHANDISE  TRADE:  QUARTERLY DATA
(Billions of  dollars,  BOP basis,  SAAR)

Total 

Exports 
Ag. 

Nonag. 

Total 

Oil  Non-oil 

Balance

Imports

Years:
1987 
1988 
1989 

Quarters:
1988-1 
2 
3 
4 

1989-1 
2 
3 
4 

1990-1 

A/M-e 

250.3 
320.3 
360.5 

29.5 
38.2 
41.5 

220.7 
282.1 
319.0 

409.8 
447.3 
475.3 

42.9 
39.6 
50.9 

366.8 
407.7 
424.4 

-159.5
-127.0
-114.9

306.0 
317.6 
322.0 
335.7 

353.1 
364.4 
357.4 
367.0 

35.7 
37.4 
40.5 
39.4 

42.6 
42.7 
39.7 
40.9 

270.2 
280.2 
281.6 
296.4 

310.5 
321.7 
317.7 
326.1 

440.0 
442.0 
445.2 
462.2 

465.4 
477.3 
476.6 
481.9 

39.9 
41.1 
39.5 
37.9 

43.5 
54.1 
52.7 
53.3 

400.0 
400.8 
405.6 
424.3 

421.9 
423.3 
423.9 
428.6 

-134.0
-124.4
-123.1
-126.5

-112.4
-112.9
-119.2
-115.0

384.2 
380 

43.8 
40 

340.4 
340 

489.7 
477 

62.4 
50 

427.2 
427 

-105.5
-97

Source:  U.S.  Department  of  Commerce,  Bureau of  Economic  Analysis.
e  -- FR staff estimate.

almost  10  percent,  reflecting a  rise  in shipments  not  only to  Canada but  to

other  countries  as  well.

Offsetting  this  were  declines  in exports  of

industrial  supplies  and capital  goods,  particularly  computers  and  other

machinery.

Import  and Export Prices

As  reported by  the  Bureau  of Labor  Statistics,  prices  of non-oil

imports  fell  2.1  percent  in  the  second quarter,  reflecting  continued

IV-4

MAJOR TRADE CATEGORIES
(Billions of dollars,  BOP  basis,  SAAR)

Year 
1989 

02 

1989 
Q3 

1990

Q4 

01 

A/M-e

Agricultural Exports 

41.5 

42.7 

39.7 

40.9 

43.8 

40

Nonagricultural  Exports 

319.0 

321.7 

317.7 

326.1 

340.4 

340

Industrial  Supplies 

Gold 
Fuels 
Other  Ind.  Supp. 

Capital Goods 

Aircraft  & Parts 
Computers  & Parts 
Other Machinery 

Automotive Products 

Canada 
Other 

Consumer  Goods 
Other Nonagric. 

90.6 
2.5 
12.1 
76.0 

138.0 
26.5 
24.2 
87.3 

34.7 
22.5 
12.2 

35.4 
20.3 

94.0 
3.0 
12.8 
78.2 

90.5 
2.6 
11.0 
76.9 

89.0 
2.1 
12.2 
74.7 

94.0 
2.4 
12.8 
78.8 

138.4 
27.3 
24.1 
87.0 

141.1 
29.7 
24.6 
86.8 

140.8 
25.6 
24.7 
90.5 

152.9 
32.3 
26.5 
94.1 

34.3 
22.0 
12.2 

35.0 
20.1 

33.0 
21.5 
11.5 

35.0 
18.1 

35.6 
22.8 
12.9 

38.0 
22.7 

34.6 
20.8 
13.8 

40.7 
18.3 

93
3
11
79

150
32
25
93

38
23
15

42
17

Oil  Imports 

50.9 

54.1' 

52.7 

53.3 

62.4 

50

Non-Oil  Imports 

424.4 

423.3 

423.9 

428.6 

427.2 

427

Industrial  Supplies 

Gold 
Other  Fuels 
Other  Ind.  Supp. 

Capital Goods 

Aircraft & Parts 
Computers  & Parts 
Other Machinery 

Automotive Products 

Canada 
Other 

Consumer  Goods 
Foods 
Other Non-oil 

84.1 
3.6 
3.2 
77.3 

113.1 
9.5 
21.5 
82.1 

86.0 
22.5 
56.5 

102.8 
25.1 
13.4 

85.1 
3.7 
3.2 
78.2 

82.5 
3.4 
3.1 
76.0 

83.2 
4.3 
3.7 
75.2 

80.1 
1.8 
2.9 
75.4 

114.0 
10.2 
20.9 
82.9 

113.1 
9.2 
22.5 
81.4 

116.5 
9.0 
23.4 
84.1 

115.5 
9.3 
23.0 
83.2 

84.5 
29.1 
55.4 

85.4 
29.1 
56.3 

83.0 
29.6 
53.4 

84.0 
27.7 
56.3 

101.3 
25.2 
13.1 

104.9 
24.7 
13.3 

106.4 
25.0 
14.5 

103.3 
27.7 
16.7 

81
1
3
77

115
10
23
82

84
30
54

104
27
16

e--FR staff  estimate.
Source:  U.S. Department of  Commerce,  Bureau of  Economic  Analysis.

IV-5

IMPORT AND  EXPORT  PRICE MEASURES
(percentage change  from previous period,  annual  rate)

Year

1990-02
1989-02

Imports.  Total

Foods,  Feeds,  Bev.
Industrial  Supplies
Ind Supp  Ex  Oil

Capital Goods
Automotive Products
Consumer Goods

Memo:

Oil
Non-oil

Exports.  Total

Foods,  Feeds,  Bev.
Industrial  Supplies
Capital Goods
Automotive Products
Consumer Goods

Memo:

Agricultural
Nonagricultural

Fixed-Weight

Imports,  Total

Oil
Non-oil

Exports,  Total

Deflators

Imports,

Ag.
Nonag.

Total
Oil
Non-oil

Exports,  Total

Ag.
Nonag.

*Not for publication.

-0.7
0.8
-6.3
-3.9
2.4
0.0
3.1

-11.7
0.4

0.1

-7.2
-2.2
2.9
2.8
3.5

-4.0
0.6

-1.7
-12.5
0.0

0.0
-4.0
0.8

-3.8
-12.6
-2.8

-1.3
-4.0
-0.9

1989 
4 

Quarters

1990

l0 
(annual rates)

0n9

-

BLS  Prices  -
-6.4
2.2
-18.1
-3.8
-0.9
-5.4

3.7
11.5
-0.4
-2.2
9.1
-0.3
6.9

0.3

3.3 
3.8 

-42.8
-2.1

1.8
-3.3
0.0
4.1
1.8
6.3

1.4
5.7
-1.7
2.2
1.4
2.4

5.2
7.3
8.6

-2.2
2.8
5.7
4.1

35.8 
2.9 

0.0

-7.4
-2.7
2.2
4.8
2.1

Months
1990

May 

June

(monthly rates)

-0.5
-1.1
-1.1
-0.1*
0.0
-1.1
0.4

-3.3 
-0.3 

0.3
2.7
-0.3
0.0
0.1
0.6

-0.4
2.3
-2.0
-1.1*
0.2
0.6
-0.8

-4.2
-0.1

-0.2
-2.9
-0.1
0.4
0.2
0.0

-4.9 
0.4 

-1.1
2.1

7.1
0.4

2.1 
-0.1 

-1.9
0.1

- Prices  in  the  GNP Accounts  -

-9.9
-54.3
0.0

1.5
7.4
0.4

-8.0
-54.4
-1.0

3.2
20.9
0.7

-2.2
-15.2
0.6

0.4
20.9
-3.7

-2.7
-15.2
-1.1

10.1
48.2
4.9

3.8
2.7
4.1

5.4
48.2
2.8

-0.6
2.7
-1.2

IV-6

declines  in  the  prices  of  non-oil  industrial  supplies  and automotive

products.  Prices  of  imported capital  goods  also  dropped  slightly.  The

small  decline  in non-oil  import prices  in  the  second quarter  resulted partly

in response  to  an  appreciation  of  the  dollar  against  the  Japanese yen  that

was  largely  offset by  depreciation against  other currencies.

Prices  for U.S.  exports  increased 1.4 percent  in  the  second quarter,

led by  increases  in  agricultural prices.  Prices  of exported  corn and

soybean rose  significantly,  and  cotton prices  edged up  slightly.  For  non-

agricultural  exports,  increasing prices  for  capital  goods,  automotive

products,  and consumer  goods were  largely  offset by  a  decline  in prices  of

industrial  supplies.

U.S.  International  Financial  Transactions

Available  data  for  the  second  quarter  indicate  that  net private

capital  outflows  exceeded net  official  inflows  by  almost $4  billion.  While

these  data  do  not  include direct  investment flows  and  are  subject  to

revision,  it  is  likely  that  recorded capital  inflows  for  the  quarter  will be

quite modest  in  relation to  the  current account deficit,  resulting  in a

large  positive  statistical  discrepancy.  The  statistical  discrepancy  in the

first  quarter was  also very large  and positive.

One  partial  explanation  for  the  large  positive  statistical  discrepancy

this  year  is  the  rapid  increase  in  currency held by foreigners.  Reports

from several  large  U.S.  currency shippers  indicate net currency  shipments

abroad totaled  $3-3/4  billion  in 1989,  about  one-half  of which  occurred  in

December.  In  the  first half  of  1990,  these banks  report  net  shipments  of

$6-3/4 billion.  Since  the  Department  of Commerce  makes  no attempt  to

estimate  currency  flows  in  the  international  transactions  accounts,  these

outflows  necessarily  contribute  to  a positive  statistical  discrepancy.

IV-7

Private net  purchases  of  foreign  securities  by U.S.  residents

accelerated  in May  and June, bringing  the  total net purchases  for  the

quarter  to  $11-1/2  billion  (line 2c  of  the  Summary  of U.S.  International

Transactions  table).  The pick-up  from April  was  primarily  in  net purchases

of  foreign stocks.  In May, stock purchases were concentrated  in Japan, as

U.S.  residents  rebuilt  their portfolios after  reducing  them  in March and

April,  coincident with the break  in the  Japanese  stock market.  In June, net

purchases  of  foreign  stocks  were  concentrated in  the United Kingdom,

although net  purchases  of Spanish  stocks  were  almost  $1/2  billion.  U.S.

residents  on net  sold German stocks  in May and June,  reversing the  sizable

purchases  in  the  first  quarter.

Foreign net  purchases of U.S.  corporate bonds  picked up  in May  and

accelerated further  in June  (line  2a).  This  increase  accompanied an

increase  in new  issues  in the  domestic market and a  surge  in Euromarket

offerings by U.S.  firms.  Private  foreigners  continued to  sell  U.S.  stocks

in May  and June,  bringing  the net  sales  for  the  second  quarter  to  $3-1/4

billion.

Foreign  purchases  of Treasury obligations  rebounded  in  May  and rose

further  in June.  Italian  residents purchased more  than $2 billion in

Treasuries  in May.  Japanese  residents  also  registered large  purchases  of

Treasuries  in May  ($3-1/2 billion),  but  sold Treasuries in April  and June;

this  pattern coincides  with Treasury's  refunding  schedule  for  long-term

bonds.  For the  second quarter  as  a whole,  Japanese  residents  sold $3-1/4

billion  in Treasuries,  accelerating  the  trend  of net  sales  evident  since  the

fourth quarter of  1989.  Net  purchases  in June  were concentrated  in Mexico

and the  United Kingdom.

Official  inflows  (line 4)  resumed  in June  as  G-10 countries  increased

their  assets  in the United States  by $2 billion.  Other European  countries

IV-8

SUMMARY  OF  U.S. INTERNATIONAL  TRANSACTIONS
(Billions  of  dollars)

1988 

Year 

1989 

Year 

1989 

1990 

1990

23 

04 

01 

02 

Apr. 

May  June

Private Capital

Banks
1.  Change  in  net foreign

positions  of banking  offices

in  the  U.S.  (+ = inflow)

Securities

2.  Private  securities
transactions,  net

1

a)  foreign net purchases 

2

22.2 

27.2 

15.1 

10.7 

16.2 

-4.6 

0.5 

7.3 

-12.4

17.8 

16.1 

0.6 

6.2 

-6.8 

-7.8 

-2.9 

-4.6 

-0.4

(+) of U.S.  corporate bonds

26.8 

32.8 

5.6 

12.5 

5.9 

6.9 

.8 

1.8 

4.3

b)  foreign net purchases

(+) of U.S.  corporate  stocks

c)  U.S. net purchases  (-) of

foreign  securities

3. 

Foreign net purchases  (+) of  U.S.

0.4 

7.6 

5.1 

-1.5 

-3.2 

-3.3 

-1.0 

-2.2 

-0.1

-9.4 

-24.3 

-10.2 

-4.8 

-9.5 

-11.5 

-2.7 

-4.3 

-4.5

Treasury obligations

20.6 

30.4 

12.7 

5.3 

-0.7 

3.0 

-3.3 

2.7 

3.5

Official  Capital

4. 

Changes in  foreign  official
reserves  assets  in  U.S.

(+ =  increase)

a)  By  area

40.2 

8.5 

13.4 

-7.4 

-7.8 

5.1

3.3 

-0.1 

1.9

G-10  countries  (incl.  Switz.)
OPEC

All other  countries

15.5 

-3.4 

28.1 

-5.0 

10.1 

3.4 

6.1

4.6

2.7

-0.7 

0.4 

3.6 

-1.3 

-0.5 

1.7 

2.0

0.1.

-0.2

b) 

By  type

U.S.  Treasury  securities
Other

3

41.7 
-1.6 

0.3 
8.2 

12.8 
0.6 

-7.3 
-0.1 

-5.9 

-1.9 

3.1 

2.0 

2.0 

1.3 

* 

-0.1 

1.1
0.8

5.  Changes  in U.S.  official  reserve

assets  (+  =  decrease)

-3.9 

-25.3 

-6.0 

-3.2 

-3.2 

0.4

0.1 

-0.4

Other  transactions  (Quarterly data)

4

6.  U.S. direct  investment  (-) abroad
7.  Foreign  direct investment  (+) in U.S

5

8.  Other  capital  flows  (+ - inflow)

9.  U.S.  current  account balance

10.  Statistical discrepancy

-16.2

58.4

-1.8

-128.9

-8.4

-31.7

72.2

-9.8
-110.0

22.4

-8.8

-7.6

21.5

-3.7

-26.7

6.1

7.6

4.3

-22.9

20.9

MEMO:

U.S. merchandise trade balance -- part

of line  9 (Balance of payments  basis,

seasonally  adjusted) 

-127.2  -114.9 

-28.2  -29.8 

-28.7 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a.

1. These  data have not been  adjusted to  exclude  commissions  on  securities  transactions  and,  therefore, do  not match

exactly the  data  on  U.S. international transactions  as  published by the  Department of  Connerce.

2. Includes  all U.S. bonds  other than  Treasury obligations.

3. Includes  deposits  in banks,  commercial paper,  acceptances,  borrowing under  repurchase  agreements,  and  other

securities.

4, Seasonally adjusted.
5. Includes  U.S. government assets  other  than  official reserves,  transactions by nonbanking concerns,  and  other bankirD
and official  transactions not shown elsewhere.  In addition,  it  includes amounts  resulting  from adjustments  to the  d:
made by the  Department of Commerce  and revisions  to the  data  in  lines  1 through  5 since  publication  of the  quarterly
data in  the Survey  of Current Business.
*--Less  than $50  million.
NOTE:  Details  may not add to  total because  of rounding.

INTERNATIONAL BANKING DATA
(Billions of  dollars)

1988 

Dec. 

1989 

1990

Mar. 

June 

Sept. 

Dec. 

Mar. 

Apr. 

May 

June 

July

1.  Net Claims  of U.S.  Banking

Offices  (excluding IBFS)  on  Own
Foreign  Offices  and  IBFS

(a)  U.S.-chartered banks
(b)  Foreign-chartered banks

2.  Credit  Extended to  U.S.

Nonbank  Residents  by Foreign
Branches  of U.S.  Banks

3.  Eurodollar Holdings  of

U.S.  Nonbank Residents I/

-4.9
21.6
-26.5

-2.9
20.4
-23.3

-3.9
19.2
-23.1

-6.4
14.9
-21.3

-5.5
19,2
-24.7

-11.7
12.2
-23.9

-9.9
11.3
-21.2

-22.0
2.3
-24.3

-11.0
7.2
-18.3

-10.2
7.5
-17.7

21.2

24.0 

26.0 

21.6

20.7

21.8 

22.2 

22.4 

22.2 

22.3 

H

,

145.3 

144.8 

131.5 

130.3 

123.5 

110,7 

107.5

111.6 

108.4  106.6

1.  Includes  term  and overnight  Eurodollars held
timing from  the  overall  banking data  incorporated
daily data  reported  to  the  Federal  Reserve by U.S.  banking offices.  Line  2 is an average  of  daily data.
average  of  daily  data  for  the  overnight component  and an  average of Wednesday  data  for  the  term  component.

by  money market mutual  funds.
in  the  international  transactions  accounts

Note:  These  data  differ  in
Line  1 is  an

coverage  and
average  of
ine  3 is  an

IV-10

also  registered  inflows,  bringing the  total  net  inflow from  Europe  to  $5-1/2

billion.  Offsetting  this  was  a $4-1/2 billion decrease  in  official holdings

by Taiwan

Banks  reported net outflows  of  $12-1/2 billion in June,  reversing  the

inflow recorded  in May  and bringing  the  net  reported outflow for  the  second

quarter  to  $4-1/2  billion  (line 1).  Most  of  the  outflow  in June was

associated with an  increase  in net  claims  on  foreign affiliates.  While

these  end-of-quarter  data are  quite volatile  and can be  reversed  in  the

first  days  of  a new quarter,  monthly  average data  for July  (line  1 of  the

International Banking Data  table)  indicate  that  the  level  of  net  claims  on

own foreign offices  rose  further  in July.

Foreign Exchange  Markets

The weighted-average  exchange value  of  the  dollar,  in terms  of  the

other G-10  currencies,  has  declined nearly  5 percent since  the  July  3 FOMC

meeting,  as  shown in  the  accompanying chart.  The  dollar  declined 5-1/2

percent  against  the mark and 2-1/2  percent against  the  yen.  Signs  of

weakness  in  the  U.S.  economy,  the  slight easing  of U.S.  monetary policy, and

some  tightening of conditions  on  foreign money markets  combined to  weaken

the  dollar.  Late  in  the  intermeeting period, the  dollar  received some

temporary support  from uncertainty generated by  the  Iraqi  invasion of

Kuwait.  However,  flight  to  the  dollar  as  a safe haven does not  seem  to  have

been extensive.

Three-month  interest  rates  rose  1/4 percentage  point during  the

intermeeting period in both Germany  and Japan, while  declining by  an

equivalent amount  in  the United States.  The  Bank of  Japan nudged up  short-

term market  interest  rates  in  response  to  perceived inflationary pressures

stemming  from strong Japanese  economic  activity and  a tight Japanese  labor

IV-11

WEIGHTED  AVERAGE  EXCHANGE  VALUE  OF THE  DOLLAR

Daily  series

FOMC
J u l y  3  

March  1973=  100

-

94

-

93

92

91

90

89

88

87

l  lf  l llt  lllllII l Cllll  Illl l llll It lll ll l l  llH~llII  l~ a86
IlIII  tII II  III 

IV-12

market.  In Germany,  the  call  money  rate  remained near  the  8  percent  Lombard

rate, where  it has  been  since German monetary union  in early July,  as market

participants  speculated  that  the  Bundesbank would decide  to  tighten  at  its

next meeting on August  23.

As  shown  in  the  accompanying  table,  stock  and bond prices  declined

sharply  in  most major  countries  following  the  Iraqi  invasion of Kuwait and

the  subsequent  $5  per barrel  increase  in  spot prices  of oil  (for  a  total

increase  of $10  per barrel  since early July).  Japanese  stock prices

declined  about  4-1/2  percent before  the  invasion and another 6-1/2  percent,

on balance,  after  the  invasion.  The  yield on  the Japanese  bellwether

government bond rose  about  60  basis  points  over  the  period, to  almost

8 percent.  German  stock prices  declined 9  percent, all  since  the  invasion,

while  the  German bond yield  rose  25  basis  points.  The  price  of gold rose

nearly  $40,  with  three-quarters  of that  coming after  the  Iraqi  invasion.

The  U.S.  Treasury purchased  over  $400 million in  the  market

Those  dollar  purchases enabled  the  Exchange

Stabilization  Fund to  repurchase marks  that had been warehoused with  the

System,  leaving $7 billion equivalent  of marks  outstanding.

The  currency grid  of  the  European Monetary System became  fully

extended during  the  intermeeting period, with the  Spanish  peseta nearly

6 percent  above  its  central  rate,  and the  Italian lira  2-1/4  percent above

its  central  rate,  against  the  bottom-most  EMS  currencies  (variously the

mark,  the  French franc,  and  the  Dutch guilder).

IV-13

Selected  Financial Markets  Indicators

July 3 

August  1 

August 15

Oil  (WTI) 

Gold 

Stock Indices  (7/3/90=100)
Germany 
Japan 
United States 

Bond Yields
Germany 
Japan 
United  States 

16.83 

361.25 

100.0 
100.0 
100.0 

8.65 
7.27 
8.40 

21.54 

373.30 

100.3 
95.6 
98.9 

8.57 
7.48 
8.29 

26.67

400.50

91.1
89.4
95.2

8.82
7.91
8.74

Stock market  indices  used:

Germany:  Frankfurter Allgemeine  Zeitung  index;
Japan:  New Tokyo  Stock Exchange  index,  first  section;
United States:  New York  Stock  Exchange  composite  index.

Bond yields  are  for  10-year bellwether bonds  in  Germany  and Japan,  and  the
10-year Treasury  note  in  the United States.

IV-14

Sterling rose  nearly 2 percent against  the  mark over  the  intermeeting

period, benefiting  from speculation that  it may join  the  Exchange Rate

Mechanism of  the  EMS  in  the  near future  and  from official  indications  that

U.K. monetary policy will  remain  tight until  there  is  evidence of declining

U.K.  inflation.

Developments in  Foreign  Industrial Countries

Although  indicators  from the  second quarter  in Japan and Germany

suggest a continued robust underlying rate  of  growth, real  economic  activity

in  the  rest of  the  industrial  countries has  apparently  slowed from the  first

quarter,  with Canada particularly weak.  Domestic  demand, particularly

consumer  spending, has  slackened somewhat with drops  in  retail  sales  in

Canada and  the United Kingdom.

Sluggish growth  is  reflected in  a smaller trade  deficits  in  France,

Italy,  and the United Kingdom.  Compared with the  first half of  last year,

the Canadian and German external  trade positions were  about  the  same, while

the Japanese surpluses  have narrowed.

Except  in  the United Kingdom, measures  of  inflation have  slowed,

although pressures  from tight  capacity utilization in France  and Japan,

relatively large wage  increases  in  Canada and Italy,  and  issues  related to

credit and  fiscal policy and currency unification in Germany may push

inflation rates  higher.  Real  exchange rate  appreciation in Japan and France

has  tempered some  of  the  upward pressure  implied by increases  in costs.

Individual  Country Notes.  In Japan,  recent data suggest that  the pace

of  real  activity remained  strong.  Industrial production  (s.a.)  in the

second quarter was  1.9 percent higher  than in  the  first quarter,  although

growth  in June declined from the  2.5  percent increase  recorded  in May.  The

capacity utilization rate  (s.a.)  rose  2.8  percent  in May to  its  highest

level  in  16  years.  Retail  sales  (s.a.)  posted a 12-month  increase  of

REAL GNP  AND INDUSTRIAL  PRODUCTION  IN  MAJOR  INDUSTRIAL  COUNTRIES
(Percentage change  from  previous  period,  seasonally  adjusted)  1

Q4/Q4  Q4/Q4
1988  1989

--

1989 
--------- 
Q4 
Q3 

1990

---------- 

Q1 

Q2 

1990

-------- 
Feb.  Mar.  Apr.  May 

----------------- 

June 

Latest  3  months
from  year  ago  2

3.1 
2.7 

2.9

.4

.8 
-. 2 

.6 

n.a,
-. 4  -1.2  n.a.

.5 

X 
-. 2 

X 
.3 

X 
-.4 

x 
.2  n.a.

X

3,5 
4.6 

3.4
2.8

.5 
-. 1 

.7 
-. 1 

.7  n.a.
-. 3  n.a.

X 
-1.7 

X 
.7 

X 
1.4 

X 
.3  n.a.

X

Germany

GNP
IP

3.0 
4.0 

3.7
4.6

-. 1 
2.2 

1.0 
.4 

3.3
2.9

n.a.
-. 9

x 
-. 9 

X 

x 

1.1  -3.5 

X
3.2 

.3

3.5 
7.5 

3.0
3.3

.8 
2.7 

.5 

.9  n.a.
2.1  -2.3  n.a.

K 
3.8 

X 
-.9 

X K
-.8  -2.5  n.a.

5.1 
7.6 

4.8
4.2

2.9 
-. 0 

.8 
.7 

2.5  n.a.
1.9

,9 

.3 

1.7  -1.0 

2.5 

-. 2

United  Kingdom

GDP
IP

United  States

GNP
IP

3.7 
2.5 

1.7
.4

.9 
1.0 

.4 
.1 

,7  n.a.
2.1

-. 1 

X 
-.6 

x 
2.0 

X 
.4 

x 
-. 1 

X
2.1

3.5 
4.5 

1.8
1.1

.4 
-. 3 

.1 
.0 

.4 
.2 

.3
.9

.9 

.4 

-.2 

.6 

.4

1.  Asterisk  indicates that  monthly  data  are  not  available.
2.  For  quarterly  data,  latest  quarter  from  year ago.

2.2
-1.6

2.6
1.4

4.4
4.7

3.1
2.3

TRADE AND  CURRENT  ACCOUNT BALANCES  OF  MAJOR INDUSTRIAL  COUNTRIES  1
(Billions of  U.S.  dollars,  seasonally  adjusted  except  where  otherwise noted)

1988 

1989

1989

1990
-------------

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2

1990

Mar. 
Mar. 

Apr. 
Apr. 

May 
May 

June
June

8.0 
-8.4 

3.9
-14.1

2.0
-2.6

.9

-4.0

.9
-3.5

.2 
-4.0 

1.1 
-4.3 

n.a.
n.a.

.3 

.1 

.8 

n.a.

-5.4 
-3.4 

-6.9
-4.0

-. 8 
1.4 

-2.1 
-1.2 

-2.0 
-1.2 

-2.1
-3.0

-. 4 
.9 

-2.0
n.a.

-.2 
X 

-. 8 
X 

-1.0 
X 

-. 2
X

Canada

Trade
Current  account

France

Trade
Current  account

Germany

Trade  (NSA)
Current  account

(NSA)

72.9 
50.5 

71.6
55.5

19.4 
16.8 

17.7 
14.0 

17.8 
11.1 

16.6 
13.5 

22.4 
17.0 

16.7
11.4

8.5 
6.1 

4.5 
3.4 

7.3 
5.2 

4.9
2.7

Italy

Trade
Current  account

(NSA)

-9,9  -12.3
-10.6
-6.3 

-4.3 
-8.2 

-3,4 
-1.1 

-2.7 
.1 

-1.9 
-1.5 

-4.0 
n.a. 

-2.0
n.a.

-1.4 
W 

-. 5 
W 

-1.9
X

Japan

Trade
Current  account

United Kingdom

Trade
Current  account

United States

Trade  2
Current  account

77.4 
79.6 

64.8
57.2

21.9 
21.5 

15.4 
12.6 

15.0 
13.2 

12,6 
9.7 

15.5 
15.4 

13.5
8.3

5.9 
7.2 

3.2 
2.4 

3.4 
2.1 

6.9
3.8

-37.0  -37.9
-31.2
-26.0 

-10.5  -10.3  -10.2 
-9.6 
-7.5 

-7.4 

-6.9 
-6.6 

-9.0 
-7.8 

-8.2
-7.2

-3.4 
-3.0 

-3.0 
-2.6 

-2.6 
-2.2 

-2.7
-2.3

-127.0  -114.9
-128.9  -110.0

-28.1  -28.2  -29.8  -28.7  -26.4 
-22.9 
-27.6 
-27.1 

-28.6 

-26.7 

n.a.
n.a.

t 

x 

x 

x

1. The  current  account  includes  goods,  services,  and  private  and  official  transfers.  Asterisk  indicates
that  monthly  data  are  not  available.
2.  Annual  data  are  subject  to  revisions  and  therefore  may not  be  consistent  with  quarterly  and/or  monthly  data.

CONSUMER AND  WHOLESALE  PRICES  IN  MAJOR  INDUSTRIAL COUNTRIES
(Percentage change  from  previous  period)  1

Q4/Q4  Q4/Q4
1988 

1989

----- 
Q1 

1989

---------------- 

Q2 

Q3 

1990

------------ 
01 

04 

-------------------------- 

1990

Q2 

Apr. 

May 

June 

July 

Latest  3  months
from  year  ago

Canada

CPI
WPI

Germany

CPI
WPI

Japan

CPI
WPI

United Kingdom

CPI
WPI

United  States

CPI  (SA)
WPI  (SA)

4.1 
3.7 

5.2
.7

1.2 
1.0 

1.7 
.3 

1.4
-.2

3.0 
7.2 

3.6
1.2

.8

-1.0

.9
n.a.

.9
n.a.

.5 
.4 
,3  n.a. 

n.a.
n.a.

.4 

.2 

.2 

n.a.

1.6 
2.2 

3.1
4.3

1.5
3.0

.6 
.3 

1.1
-. 3

5.2 
n.a. 

6.6
n.a.

2.0 
n.a. 

1.7 
1.7 

1.0 
.0 

1.8 
2.5 

1.6 
2.1 

1.2
n.a.

.2 
.3 

.4 
.2 

.2 
.3 

.1 
-. 3 

.0
n.a.

.3
-. 4

.4
n.a.

.4
n.a.

1.5 
-1.4 

2.9
3.7

-. 2 
.5 

2.2
2.7

.1 
.8 

.9
-. 3

.6 
-. 3 

-. 6
-. 1

6.5 
4.9 

7.6
5.2

1.6 
1.4 

2.9 
1.2 

.9 
1.2 

2.0 
1.2 

1.8 
1.6 

4.7
2.1

3.0
1.0

.9 
.6 

.4  n.a.
.2 
,3

4.3 
3.4 

4.6
4.9

1.3 
2.0 

1.5
1.6

.7 
.0 

1.0 
1.2 

2.0
2.3

.2 
.3 

.5 
.2 

n.a.
-. 1

4.6
.3

3.1

-1.6

2.5
1 .1

9,7
6.3

4.6
3.2

1. Asterisk

indicates  that  monthly  data  are  not  available.

IV-18

11.9  percent,  rising 2.9  percent  in June.  Housing starts  (s.a.)  jumped  8.4

percent  in May, the  largest  monthly increase  since  1983.  The  unemployment

rate  (s.a.)  remained close  to  its  10-year  low of  2 percent,  edging up  only

to  2.2  percent  in June.  The  ratio  of job  offers  to  applicants  (s.a.)  rose

to  a  12-year  peak of  1.41  in May.

Despite  the  growing  evidence  of  strains  on production capacity  and  in

the  labor market,  recorded  inflation rates have  remained stable.  Consumer

prices  in  Tokyo  (n.s.a.)  increased 0.1  percent  in July, while  the  12-month

change was  only  2.6  percent.  Wholesale prices  (n.s.a.)  declined by  0.1

percent  in July  and were up  only  0.8  percent on a  12-month basis.

Reflecting  a  stronger yen  and lower  oil  prices,  the  wholesale price  of

imported  goods  declined by  6.1  percent over  the  May-July period, almost

entirely reversing  the  6.2  percent  increase  in  import prices  in March-April

when the  yen  weakened.

Both  the  trade  and  the  current  account  surpluses  (s.a.)  increased  in

June.  Over  the  first half  of  the  year,  the  cumulative  current  account

surplus  was  $47.4 billion  (s.a.a.r.),  little  changed  from the  second half  of

last year, but  substantially  lower  than  in  the  first half  of 1989.

Economic  developments  in West Germany have been dominated by the

process  of unification with  East  Germany.  The  Treaty  implementing an

economic and monetary union between the  two  Germanys  went  into  effect on

July  1 with the  initial  adjustment  progressing relatively  smoothly.

Withdrawals  of  DM currency by East  Germans  were  significantly below

expectations,  suggesting that  the  introduction of  the  DM  in  the  GDR will not

generate immediate  inflationary pressures  because  of  increased  spending.

However,  the  demand for  short-term credit  from  state-owned enterprises  in

the  GDR exceeded expectations with  requests  in August  for  credit  guarantees

more  than double  the  DM  10  billion provided under the  trust  fund  set up  to

IV-19

manage  state-owned property.  Fiscal  deficits  in the  GDR will  also be

somewhat higher than had previously been expected,  in part because  the

number  of  East Germans  that  are  either  unemployed  or working part-time has

expanded to  more  than 10  percent  of  the  labor  force.

Political  developments  generated considerable uncertainty  in  the  first

two  weeks  of  August.  It  now  appears  likely thatall-German elections will

be  held on December  2, but  the  timing  of  formal  political unification

remains  under negotiation.

The  growth  of  industrial  production  (s.a.)  in West  Germany moderated

in  the  second quarter,  increasing  1.6  percent  (adjusting for  a weather-

related  correction in construction)  to  a level  4.7 percent  above where  it

was  one  year earlier;  including  construction,  industrial production declined

0.9  percent.  The June  increase was  only 0.3  percent  after  an  increase of

3.2  percent in May.  The unemployment rate  remained  at  7.3  in  July,

unchanged since  February.

Inflation remains  low.  Consumer prices  (n.s.a) were  unchanged in

July, and on a  12-month basis,  consumer  price  inflation held at  2.4  percent

in July after  being  2.3  percent  in April, May  and  June.  Wholesale prices

fell  in June  to  a  level  below where they  were  one  year  ago.  Producer  prices

fell  in July  and  remained just  1.4 percent  above  year-earlier  levels.

Import prices  fell  0.6  percent  in April  after  falling  0.9  percent  in May.

June  import prices were  5.4  percent below their  year-earlier  level.

M3  growth  for  1990  (s.a.a.r.)  was 4.3  percent  through  June,  at  the  low

end  of  the  Bundesbank's  1990  target  range  of 4-6  percent, although when

Euro-DM deposits  are  included, M3  growth has  been more  than  6  percent.  An

announcement  of how the  target  for M3  growth  in  1990 will be  adjusted  in

light  of monetary  union  is  expected  on August  23.  Bundesbank officials  have

IV-20

indicated that  the  level  of M3  will  probably play  a less  important role  in

short-run monetary policy  decisions.

West  Germany's  external  surpluses  (excluding transactions  with East

Germany)  fell  sharply in  the  second quarter  as  exports  fell by about  5

percent.  However,  comparing  the  first half of  1990  to  the  same  period in

the previous year,  West Germany's  external  surpluses  are  little  changed.

Economic  activity has  slowed  in France  in comparison to  the  quick pace

of 1989.  Industrial  production (measured on a 12-month basis)  was 1.5

percent higher in May, compared with a 5.1 percent  increase  a year earlier.

French  inflation has been moderate  despite tight  capacity utilization

in part because  the  strength of  the  franc  has  intensified  import

competition.  Consumer prices  (n.s.a.)  rose  0.2  percent  in June  although

inflation has  fallen from  3.6  percent  on a twelve-month basis  at  the  end of

last  year  to  3.0  percent  in June.  The  franc measured on a weighted-average

basis  appreciated 9.9  percent  in  the year  to  June.  Despite the  appreciation,

the merchandise  trade deficit has  remained relatively stable.

Real economic  activity  in the United Kingdom has been sluggish.

Retail  sales  in June  fell  2.4  percent while  manufacturing output  declined

0.6  percent  to  a level  2.5  percent above  its  level  a year  ago.  Although

industrial production rose  2.1  percent  in June, the  increase was  due

entirely  to  deferred maintenance of  North  Sea  oil platforms  raising energy

output  above  its  normal seasonal  level.  Unemployment rose  for  the  third

month running, although  the  unemployment rate  remained at  5.7  percent  in

June.

Consumer  prices  continued to  rise  rapidly.  The  overall  12-month  rate

of  retail price  inflation was  9.8  percent  in June.  Excluding mortgage

interest  payments and the  poll tax,  the  "underlying" rate  of  inflation was

6.9 percent  in May.  Output prices  for manufactured goods  (n.s.a.)  rose

IV-21

0.3 percent  in July  to  a level  6.1  percent above  year-earlier levels.  In

May,  the  underlying annual  rate of  increase  in  average  earnings  remained  at

9-3/4  percent.

Sluggish economic  activity has narrowed the  cumulative  trade  deficit

for  the  first half of  the  year  to  $17.2  billion compared with a $20.8

billion deficit  for  the  same  period last year.  The  cumulative  current

account deficit remained  about  the  same  as  last year  ($14.9 billion) as  the

invisibles  surplus  continued to  erode.  In  recent weeks,  the pound has

strengthened as  a result  of  rising oil  prices  and rumors  that entry  of

sterling  into  the exchange  rate  mechanism of  the EMS  is  imminent.

Recent  data suggest  some  slowing  of  economic  activity  in Italy  after

somewhat  stronger  than expected  first-quarter  growth  of GDP of  3.6  percent

(s.a.a.r.).  Industrial production  (s.a.)  declined 2.5  percent  in May  to  a

level  only  0.7  percent above  its  level of  a year earlier.  For  the  first

five  months  of  the  year,  industrial production was up  only 1.9  percent from

the  corresponding period of  1989.

The  Italian consumer  price  index in July was  5.7  percent above  its

level  a year earlier,  little  changed from  the  increase  in June.  Wholesale

price  and producer price  increases  in May of  3.9  and 3.6  percent,

respectively, from  their  levels  a year  earlier were  smaller than the  April

increases.  However,  in May the  overall  index  of wages  and salaries  (n.s.a)

increased  sharply to  a level  almost  8 percent above  its  level  a year

earlier,  reflecting  the  impact of  recent  public  sector  wage  settlements.

These  are  likely to  contribute  to  inflationary pressures  in  the  coming

months.

Indicators  from Canada  for the  second quarter point  to  a slower  rate

of  growth following  the  first quarter when domestic  demand rose  by 1.8

percent compared with  the  fourth-quarter  figure  of 6.3  percent.  Retail

IV-22

sales  (s.a.)  fell  1.0  percent  in May after dropping  1.4  percent  in April  and

wholesale  trade  (s.a.)  was  off  1.6  percent  in May after  falling 0.9  percent

in April.  Housing remains  a particularly weak sector with  starts  (s.a.)

falling 7.3  percent  in June  to  stand 5.8  percent below a  year  earlier.  The

number of  consumer and  corporate bankruptcies was  more  than  30  percent

higher  in  the  first half of  1990  than  last  year,  and was  even higher  than in

the  1982  recession year.  The  unemployment  rate  (s.a) rose  in July  to  7.8

percent  from  7.5  percent  in June.

First-quarter  growth  in  real  GDP  (s.a.a.r) of  2.2  percent was

sustained by  a  positive  contribution  of  real  net exports.  Although Canada's

current  account  deficit  increased from  $4.0  billion  in the  fourth  quarter  to

$4.3 billion  in  the  first  quarter,  this  increase was more  than  accounted for

by  the  forgiveness  of  developing country  debt by  the  government of  Canada.

Canada's  merchandise  trade  surplus  increased almost  $500  million  in May  to

$808  million, as  imports  fell  and exports  rose  modestly.

Inflation  as  measured by  the  consumer price  index  (n.s.a) continued  to

come  down,  in  part as  the  impact of  last  summer's  increase  in  excise  taxes

on  the  index wore  off.  In June,  the  year-over-year  increase  was  4.3

percent.  More  disturbing, however, was  news  that  major wage  settlements

(s.a.)  contained  increases  of 6.2  percent  in  the  first  quarter,  up  from  the

5.3  percent  rate  over  1989  as  a whole.  Finance  Minister Wilson recent

warned that poor  performance  in holding unit  labor  costs  down was harming

Canada's  international competitiveness.

Developments  in  East  European Economies

Hungary, which has  never rescheduled  its  $21  billion of international

debt,  emerged  from  its  recent  bout  of  illiquidity in  the  international

markets  with  substantial additional  credits  available  -- a  $280  million

bridge  loan from  the  industrial  countries arranged by  the  Bank for

IV-23

International  Settlements  and  the  United  States,  a  West German  government

guarantee  of  a  DM  800  million  12-month revolving credit  line  from a

consortium of banks  led by Deutsche  Bank, and  a  World Bank  guarantee  of  the

principal  at  maturity of  a  $200  million  Eurobond private  placement by

Hungary's  State Development  Institute.

Progress  under  the  economic  reform program  is  mixed.  New  cuts  in

subsidies  moved  relative prices  towards  market-clearing  levels  and restored

the  fiscal budget  to  its  target  range, but  they  caused  inflation to  surge

well beyond the  objective  of  20  percent  for  the  year as  a  whole.  Efforts  to

remove  enterprises  from state  control  received a  boost with  the  reopening  of

the  Bourse  and  the  successful  floating  of  stock  in  the  travel  agency  IBUSZ.

In July,  the  government  of  Poland moved from  focussing on  fighting

inflation to  revitalizing and  restructuring the  economy.  Wage  indexation

will be  eased  (although not  eliminated) and an emergency welfare  program

will  aid  the  nearly one-third of  Polish families  worst hit by  the  lay-offs

and price  increases  associated with  the  shock program.  Recent data  indicate

that  industrial  sales  by  state  firms  (representing almost  all  of  industrial

sales)  continued to  decline  in June,  although  the  rate of  decline has

moderated.  Based on 90-day  notifications, unemployment  is  expected to  rise

substantially  over  the  coming months  from the  rate  of  5.2  percent  registered

in July.  The  government budget has  been increasingly  in  surplus  over  the

first half  of  1990,  but  expenditures  on  revitalizing the  economy and

providing  a  social  safety  net  are  likely  to  take  the  budget  into  deficit  for

the  second half year;  a  zero  balance  for  the  year  as  a  whole  is  the  aim.

Private  sector  development  is  proceeding apace  with both a  "small

privatization program"  -- that  is  sales  or  leasing  of retail  and  small

commercial  facilities  directly  to  individuals  (8 percent of  state  retail

shops  have been so privatized  this  year)  -- and a  two-step privatization

IV-24

process  for handling larger  state-owned enterprises;  the  first  step

transforms  enterprises  into  joint-stock companies  and the  second step  allows

citizens  to  purchase  shares  with  "privatization vouchers".

Economic  Situation in Major  Developing Countries

At  the end  of July, Mexico  prepaid the  $674  million balance  of  the

bridge  loan  received in March from  the  Federal Reserve  System and the  U.S.

Treasury.  Increased public confidence  in Mexico's  economic prospects has

been reflected  in rising  international  reserve  levels  and in  a decline  in

interest  rates  and  the  short-term forward premium on  the  dollar.  At the

same  time,  however, the  trade  balance has  deteriorated.  In  Brazil,  economic

activity  and interest  rates  appear  to  have  stabilized.  Fiscal  and monetary

policy  remain relatively  tight, but the prospects  for  the additional  reforms

needed to  sustain progress on  the  fiscal  deficit remain uncertain.  Argen-

tina has  continued  to  run fiscal  surpluses  and has  registered progress  in

its  privatization program.  However,  inflation has  not declined as  rapidly

as  anticipated, despite  weak aggregate  demand.  Venezuela's  fiscal position

and  the  outlook  for economic  growth improved  in August due  to  higher oil

export  revenues.  Alberto  Fujimori,  inaugurated as  Peru's  new president  on

July  28,  has  announced severe  economic  adjustment measures  in response  to  a

rapidly deepening economic  crisis.

Individual  country notes.  Mexico  took advantage of  rising  inter-

national reserves  to  prepay,  on July 31,  the  $674 million balance  of  the

bridge loan received  in late March  from  the Federal Reserve  System and  the

U.S. Treasury.  The reserve  gain  from  the  end of March  to  the  end of July  is

estimated to have been roughly $3 billion.  It  reflects  a strengthening of

public  confidence brought  about by the  implementation of  the bank  financing

agreement  in late  March, by an announcement in May that  the  nationalized

commercial banks  are  to  be  privatized, by the  speedy passage  of a

IV-25

constitutional  amendment that paves  the  way  for bank privatization, by

favorable  first-quarter  fiscal results,  by a  decision not  to  increase

minimum  wages  when the  anti-inflation pact was  extended at  the  end  of  May,

and by  the  general  improvement  in prospects  for  private  investment

associated with the  structural  adjustments  carried out  in recent years.

In  addition, the  assurance  that  the  exchange  rate  will  not undergo  a  sharp

depreciation for  at  least  several more  months,  coupled with  the  high  rates

of  return  from investment  in  financial  instruments  in Mexico,  is  providing a

strong incentive  to  move  funds  to  Mexico.

The  strengthening of  public confidence  is  evident  also  in  the

reduction of  the  forward premium on  the  dollar  to  6.3  percent  on August  8

from  10.5  percent  in March  for  180-day  contracts  and  in  the  narrowing of  the

spread between the  free  market  and  controlled exchange  rates  to  0.57  percent

on August  8  from 1.4  percent  on April  2.

Inflows  of  private capital have  been accompanied by  a  fall  in  interest

rates.  At  the August  7 Treasury  auction, the  rate  for  28-day bills was

about  30  percent,  17  percentage points  lower  than  at  the  mid-March peak.

This  decline  is  likely  to  stimulate economic  activity  in  the  second half  of

1990.  The  CPI  rose by  1.8  percent  in July, when it was  27  percent higher

than a year  earlier.  This  is  the  highest  12-month increase  since  February

1989.  However, price  inflation this  year  is  largely  the  result  of  attempts

to  correct  relative  price  distortions  and restore  price  flexibility

gradually  in  order  to  facilitate  the  elimination of  price  controls  at  a

later  date.

Mexico's  trade  balance  deteriorated during  the  first half  of  1990.  In

January-May, total  exports  were  only  about  3 percent higher  than  in  the  same

period  of  1989, but  imports were  nearly  16  percent higher,  and  in May Mexico

recorded its  first monthly  trade  deficit  since  September  1988.  The  rate  of

IV-26

growth  of non-oil  exports  has  fallen steadily  for  over  two  years,  reflecting

a  slowing  of real  GDP  growth in  the  industrial  countries  since  1988  and  some

deterioration  in Mexico's  international  competitiveness.  Moreover,  the  fall

in  world oil  prices  during the  first  half of  1990  depressed oil  export

earnings.  Recent  increases  in  these prices will provide  some  relief, but  a

further  slowing  of  economic  activity  in  the  industrial  countries would hurt

the  outlook  for  non-oil  exports.

In  Brazil,  limited weekly  employment  data  indicate  that  the  economy

appears  to  have  stabilized  in June  and July after  industrial  production

declined by  about  4 percent between March and May.  However, consumer  prices

rose  13  percent  in July,  compared with  10  percent  in June.  The  government

continues  to  run  budget  surpluses,  and monetary policy has  been  relatively

tight  since  June.  In  late  July,  President Collor vetoed  a  congressional

proposal  to  index wages monthly  and issued  a provisional measure,  which is

subject  to  congressional approval, calling  for  wage  adjustments  to  be  made

every  six months.  Brazil's  trade  surplus was  $1.17  billion in June.  The

accumulated  surplus  for  the  first half of 1990 was  $6.3  billion,  compared

with  $9.2  billion over  the  same  period in  1989.

Financial  markets have been relatively  calm in  recent weeks.  Domestic

short-term  interest  rates  have  remained  stable  at  about  11  percent  per

month.  The  spread between  the  dollar  exchange  rate  in  the  parallel and

official  markets  has  narrowed to  about 16  percent,  as  the  government has

reportedly  sold reserves  to  support  the  cruzeiro  in  the  parallel market.

Consultations  are  underway to  prepare a  possible  IMF  stand-by  arrangement,

and the  Brazilian government  is  arranging  to meet  individually with  its

commercial  bank creditors  in  late August  and early September.

Argentina  is  continuing to  run budget  surpluses  on  a  cash basis, but

the  inflation rate has not  declined as  rapidly  as  anticipated when its

IV-27

stabilization program was  launched five months  ago.  After  rising from  13.6

percent  in May  to  13.9  percent  in  June,  consumer  price  inflation  registered

10.8  percent  in July.  These price increases  in part reflect  continued

adjustments  in public  sector  prices  and  "catch-up"  increases  in wage  rates;

they have  occurred  in  spite of  continued weakness  in  aggregate demand.

Industrial  production  in June  is  estimated to  have  been  roughly 12  percent

below average  monthly production  in  1989  and  20 percent below the  average  in

1988.  This  weakness  is  attributable not only  to  reduced domestic  demand,

but  also  to  depressed  industrial  exports  stemming  from  the  overvaluation of

the  free-floating Austral  since March,  a  result  of  strong agricultural

export revenues  and  short-term capital  inflows.

Argentina has  made progress  in  its privatization  program  in recent

months.  In  late  June,  60  percent  of  the  shares  in ENTEL, the  state

telephone company, were  awarded to  two  foreign consortia  for  a  total  of

$5 billion  in  debt paper  (at  face value)  and  $214 million  in  cash;  Bell

Atlantic,  in  association with Manufacturers  Hanover,  will  operate  ENTEL's

northern operations,  while Telefonica  de  Espana, with  Citibank, will  run

operations  in  the  southern part  of  the  country.  In mid-July,  an  85-percent

share  in Aerolineas  Argentinas,  the  state  airline, was  awarded  to  an

investment  group  led by  Spain's  Iberia  Airlines  in exchange  for  $2 billion

(at face value)  in  debt paper,  $130  million  in cash,  and $130  million

financed  over  the  next  five  years.  It  is  expected that both  companies  will

be  handed over  to  their new  owners within the  next  few months.

On August  9,  the World Bank's  Executive Board approved  the  release  of

the  second $150  million tranche  of  the  Bank's  $300  million  Second Trade

Policy Loan to  Argentina.  This  loan was  approved initially  in October  1988,

but  following disbursement  of the  first tranche,  it was  suspended in March

1989  due  to  Argentina's  failure  to  implement macroeconomic  reforms.

IV-28

Venezuela's  fiscal  position improved this  month.  Until the  recent  oil

crisis,  Venezuela appeared unlikely to  achieve  its  original  goal  of  a zero

fiscal  deficit  for  1990.  Weak economic  activity  and lower  oil  export  prices

had depressed  revenues, while  outlays  were  boosted by  a delayed realization

of  losses  due  to  foreign exchange  guarantees  provided for  private  sector

debts by  the previous  government.  With  the  1990  fiscal  deficit  threatening

to  reach 4 percent of  GDP,  the  government has  prepared  (but has  not yet

implemented) measures  to  trim  the  deficit to  about  2-1/2 percent  of  GDP.

The  recent rise  in  oil  export prices,  coupled with  an expected temporary

increase  of  crude  oil  production and exports  of  up  to  500,000 barrels per

day,  could boost 1990  revenues  by  up  to  3 percent of  GDP, potentially

restoring budget balance.

The Venezuelan authorities  implemented long-delayed  increases  in the

domestic  prices  of  petroleum products  in July.  However, prices  remain well

below world market levels.  The  government's program to  reform public

enterprises has been moving forward very slowly.  Last  month, a bank

controlling one  percent of banking  system assets became  the  second public

enterprise  to  be put up  for  sale  to  private  investors.  A July shake-up  of

the Venezuelan cabinet  reinforced the  position of the  members  of the

government who  have argued for  accelerated privatization.

Alberto  Fujimori,  Peru's  new president, was  inaugurated  on July 28  in

the midst  of  a rapidly deepening  economic  crisis.  Fujimori  inherited a

record  level  of hyperinflation  (running at  a daily  rate  of 6 percent when he

assumed office),  a shortage  of  food  (following a sharp  dropoff in  imports

and  the continuing  impact of a severe  drought),  and declining  international

reserves.  The new government has  announced several  elements  of a

stabilization program, including a 3,000  percent  increase  in  domestic

gasoline  prices, and has  asked foreign donors  to  support a "social  emergency

program" designed to  buffer  the  most exposed  strata of  society from the

shock of  long overdue macroeconomic adjustment.

IV-29




==== GREENBOOK | 1990-08-21_fomc19900821gbsup19900817.txt ====

Prefatory Note 

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 

available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain. 

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 

gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.    

1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
CONFIDENTIAL  (FR)
CLASS  III  - FOMC

August  17,  1990

SUPPLEMENT

CURRENT ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL CONDITIONS

Prepared for the
Federal Open Market  Committee

By the Staff
Board of  Governors
of  the  Federal Reserve  System

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS

THE DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL ECONOMY

2
2
1
2
2

4

4

5

Consumer prices. .
.
.
.
Housing  starts  .
.
Estimated revisions  to  second-quarter GNP.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.

. . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . .

Table

Private  housing activity  .

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

Chart

Private housing  starts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

THE FINANCIAL ECONOMY

The August  1990  senior  loan  officer opinion  survey  on bank
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

lending practices  .

Tables

Percent  of  domestic respondent  banks  reporting tightening
lending  standards/terms on nonmerger-related business
lending in the May-August period  . . . . . . . . . . . .

Outstanding loans  sold or  participated to  others by

domestic LPS respondents as  of  June  30,  1990  . . . . . .

Senior  loan officer opinion  survey  on bank lending

practices  at  selected  large banks  in the United States

Senior  loan officer  opinion survey  on bank lending
practices at  selected branches  and agencies  of
foreign banks  in  the United States  . . . . . . . . . . .
Monetary aggregates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Commercial bank  credit  and short-  and

intermediate-term business credit  . . . . . . . . . . .
Selected financial market  quotations  . . . . . . . . . . .

THE  INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY

U.S.  merchandise trade  .

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

..

.

28

Table

Merchandise trade:  Census-based data.  .

ERRATA  .

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

3 0

SUPPLEMENTAL NOTES

THE DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL ECONOMY

Consumer  Prices

The consumer  price index rose  0.4  percent  in  July, as  an acceleration

in prices  of  items  other than food and energy was only  partly offset  by a

0.7 percent  decline  in  energy prices.

July's  0.6  percent increase  in the  CPI  excluding food and energy was

about  0.1  percentage point more  than the  average monthly pace in the  first

half  of  the year.  The pickup  was  attributable to the  0.7 percent  rise  in

prices  of  services  other  than  energy, which were boosted by  a 0.7  percent

increase  in  owners' equivalent  rent  and a 5.1  percent  increase  in  the cost

of  lodging  while out  of  town.  Other than energy  and shelter,  prices of

services  increased  0.5  percent  in  July, about  the  average monthly pace  in

the  first  half  of  the  year;  the cost  of  medical  services  continued to move

up  sharply, and auto registration  fees  jumped 10-1/2  percent.  Prices  of

commodities  other than food and energy  increased 0.3  percent  in  July;

further  slight  discounting of  car  and apparel prices partly offset  another

sharp  increase in prices  of tobacco  products.

Food  prices increased 0.4  percent  in  July:  Prices  of a few fresh

fruits  and vegetables were  up  sharply, but  there  was  a slight  decline  in

prices of  pork  and a sizable  drop  in the  price  of  eggs.  Among energy  items,

prices of  natural  gas  and  heating oil  each  fell  a bit more  than

1-1/4  percent  in  July,  and the price  of  electricity moved  down 3/4  percent.

Gasoline  prices edged down  0.3  percent last  month.  Retail gasoline margins

-2-

had remained relatively high through  June  as  stocks  of  gasoline  were  tight,

but in  July the  retail margin appears to have  narrowed a bit.

Housing  Starts

Total private housing starts  declined an  additional  3 percent  in  July

to 1.15  million units  at  a seasonally adjusted annual  rate.  Starts  have

fallen in  each of  the past  six months  and,  since April, have  been at  their

lowest  levels  since  1982.  Most  of  the decline in  starts  recorded in July

was in the multifamily  segment  of  the market.  Between  1985:Q4  and May-July

of  1990,  multifamily  starts  fell  about  60  percent.  In the  single-family

segment  of  the market,  starts  edged down in  July to  873,000  units  at  an

annual  rate.  Construction of these  units  has  fallen proportionately less

than  in the multifamily  sector;  nonetheless,  single-family homebuilding  is

at  the  lowest  level  of the  current  expansion.  Sales  of  new homes  have  been

trending down since  late  last year,  despite ample  inventories,  suggesting

that  most  of the decline  in  homebuilding has  resulted from reduced demand

rather than  from  credit market  constraints  on  supply.

Estimated Revisions  to Second-Quarter GNP

Since  the Commerce  Department  (BEA) published its  advance estimate  of

second-quarter  GNP  on July  27,  we  have  received  several pieces  of  new

information on  spending  in the  second quarter.  As discussed in the

Greenbook, retail  sales  for May and June  were revised up,  construction put

in place for  nonresidential  structures  in  June  was  stronger than BEA had

been  assuming, and  investment  in  nonfarm inventories  (excluding autos)

during June  was much smaller,  on a current-cost  basis,  than  assumed by

BEA. 

Moreover, the June merchandise trade  data  released  today  (discussed

later  in this  supplement)  were  considerably stronger than  BEA had assumed.

Our translation of  the available  information suggests  that,  if  all

other spending  categories  were  left  unchanged, the new  data would add about

$5 billion to the  level  of  real  GNP  in the  second quarter, or  roughly  1/2

percentage point  to the annualized growth  rate.  However, when the revised

GNP  data are published on August 24,  the  figures  could be  significantly

different from the  estimates implied by  our translation exercise.  In

particular, BEA also  could revise many of  the  categories  for which we  have

not  received new  or revised  information such  as the  inventory valuation

adjustment,  oil  inventories  held  in pipelines  and tank  farms,  and  components

of  expenditures  on consumer  services,  among others.

1. In  addition, construction put  in  place by  state  and local  governments

was  slightly  lower  than  BEA had assumed.

PRIVATE  HOUSING ACTIVITY
(Seasonally adjusted  annual  rates;  millions  of  units)

-4-

1989 

1989 

1990 

1990

Annual 

Q4 

Q1 

P  

Q2

May r   June r   July p

1.34 
1.38 

1.38 
1.35 

1.42 
1.45 

1.09 
1.20 

1.07 
1.21 

1.11 
1.18 

1.08
1.15

.93 
1.00 

.98 
.99 

.96 
1.08 

.80 
.89 

.80 
.90 

.80 
.89 

.78
.87

All  units

Permits 
Starts 

Single-family units

Permits 
Starts 

Sales

New homes 
.65 
Existing  homes  3.44 

.65 
3.54 

.59 
3.44 

.55 
3.32 

.54 
3.30 

.58 
3.34 

n.a.
n.a.

Multifamily units

Permits 
Starts 

Vacancy rate

.41 
.37 

.41 
.36 

.47 
.37 

.29 
.31 

.26 
.31 

.31 
.29 

.30
.28

Rental  units 
Owned  units 

9.3 
7.1 

8.8 
6.8 

9.4 
7.6 

8.5 
7.9 

n.a. 
n.a. 

n.a. 
n.a. 

n.a.
n.a.

1.  Percent.  Owned units  consist  mainly of  condominiums.  All  vacancy

rate  data  are  revised.

p  Preliminary. 

r

Revised estimates.

n.a.  Not  available.

PRIVATE  HOUSING  STARTS
(Seasonally  adjusted  annual  rate)

Millions of units

1981 

1982 

1983 

1984 

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990

THE  FINANCIAL ECONOMY

The August  1990  Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on  Bank Lending Practices

The August  Senior Loan Officer Opinion  Survey on Bank Lending Practices

(LPS) examined changes in  bank business  lending policies  since May.  The

results,  along with  those from the May 1990  LPS,  suggest  that  the weakness

in  growth of  commercial and  industrial  (C&I) loans  this year  owes  in  some

part  to a reduced  willingness on  the part  of banks  to lend.  The August

survey also addressed recent  developments  in the market  for  business  loan

sales,  the  fifth  annual  survey  of  this market.  The  responses  indicate that

earlier very rapid growth  in this market  has moderated and that  some  loan

quality problems have  emerged.  Commencing with this  survey, 18  U.S.

branches  and agencies  of  foreign banks  have  joined  60  domestically chartered

banks  as  LPS  respondents.

Changes  in Banks' Lending Practices  Since May

Business  lending.  Domestic  respondent banks  indicated that  since May

they have  further tightened lending  standards  and terms  with respect  to

nonmerger-related business  loans. 1  The  tighter stance  was particularly

noticeable  for lending  to middle market  firms but  was  significant  for  larger

and smaller  firms  as  well.  With respect  to approving  loan applications  for

nonmerger-related purposes,  43  percent  of  respondents  indicated that  they

had established more  stringent  standards  for  their middle market  customers

and over  a third reported tighter  standards  for both  large  and small

customer  firms.  As  for terms  on  loans  respondents  actually are making, the

1. Changes  in banks'  willingness to make merger-related loans  were

addressed in  the  January 1990  Senior Loan Officer Opinion  Survey.  At  that
time  over 70  percent  of  respondents  indicated that  they had tightened their
credit  standards  for  approving loan applications related to mergers  and
acquisitions  compared to  six months  earlier.

most  noticeable area of  tightening was with respect  to  loan  covenants:  53

percent  of domestic LPS banks  reported  tightening covenants  for  their middle

market  customers and well  over a third did  so  for their  large borrowers.  A

significant  number  of  domestic respondents tightened in  other  ways  as  well,

including  reducing the maximum size  of  credit  lines and  increasing their

cost,  raising spreads of loan  rates  over base  rates, and increasing

collateral  requirements.  These actions applied to  borrowers of  all  sizes,

but again were  somewhat more commonly  reported  for  banks' middle market

customers.  As  shown in  table  1, for middle market  and small  firms,  the

tightening of  lending standards  and terms  over the  last  three months

followed a similar reported tightening over the  early months of  the  year.

Branches  and agencies  of  foreign banks  reported that, on balance, they

too have moved to restrict  the  availability of  business credit.  Sixty

percent of  these  institutions  reported that  they had raised their  standards

for  approving nonmerger-related credit  applications  in the  six months  ending

with August.  These  banks  also reported that they had tightened terms  on

nonmerger-related C&I  loans  in the last  six months.  Over  a quarter

restricted the maximum size  of  credit  lines  and between 40  and 50  percent

acted to  increase  the cost  of  credit  lines, to  raise  loan rates  relative  to

base  rates,  to tighten covenants, and to  increase  collateral  requirements

(table 1).

By  far  the most  important  reasons  domestic  respondents  gave  for

tightening their credit  standards  in  the last  three  months  were  a less

1. See  the May  1990  Senior Loan Officer Opinion  Survey;  this  survey  did
not  address changes  in bank  lending practices with  respect  to respondents'
large  customers.  However, the January  Senior Loan Officer  Opinion Survey
revealed that very  few banks  at  that  time  had moved to  restrict  nonmerger-
related credit  to  their investment-grade  customers.

favorable  economic  outlook and  industry specific  problems.  Also  important

were  current pressures  on banks'  capital positions and  capital pressures

anticipated to  result  from a deterioration  in  the quality of  their  loan

portfolios.  Many banks also  mentioned regulatory  pressures.  (Domestic

respondents provided similar motivations for the  tightening that  occurred

earlier  in the  year.)  As  for the  tightening of  lending standards  at

branches and agencies  of  foreign banks,  the reasons given were  similar to

those  provided by  domestic reporters,  although only one  branch  and agency

cited regulatory pressures.

Commercial real  estate  lending.  As  in  the May  survey, a large majority

of domestic respondents  indicated that  they had tightened their credit

standards  for  commercial  real estate  lending.  About  three-quarters  of

respondents reported that they  had imposed tighter  credit  standards  for

applications to  finance commercial  office  buildings  in the  last  three

months,  compared to  80  percent  of  banks  that  reported  tightening in  this

area  in the May LPS.  In both  surveys,  a large  number  of  respondents  reported

tightening  "considerably."  Almost two-thirds of  respondents to the  August

LPS  indicated tighter standards  for  loans  secured by  industrial  structures

and for  other  commercial  mortgages,  and three-quarters  reported tightening

standards  for approving applications  for  construction and  land development

loans. 

A large majority of branches  and agency  respondents also reported

a reduced willingness to make commercial  real  estate  loans.  Compared to  six

months  ago, three-quarters of  these  banks  had tightened standards  with

1. By contrast,  there  is  only a little  evidence  of  reduced willingness to

make residential mortgages.  Six LPS  respondents  indicated they had
tightened somewhat  standards  for  approving applications  from individuals  for
residential mortgages  over the last  three  months, while  one  respondent
indicated it  had eased its  standards.

respect  to  construction and  land development loans  and  60  percent  for

mortgages  secured by office buildings.

The Loan Sales Market

After about  half  a decade  of  rapid expansion, growth of the loan  sales

market appears to  have moderated  in the  last year.  As  shown  in table  2,

domestic  respondents  reported an aggregate  of  $80  billion in  outstanding C&I

loans  sold or  participated to others as  of  June  30,  1990,  an increase  of  $8

billion from a year earlier.  This  increase  was  about  evenly split  between

nine money center banks  and other  domestic  respondents.  By contrast,

outstandings rose  about  $20  billion in the year  ending in June  1989.

Perhaps  reflecting purchasers' concerns  about  credit  quality, the  share  of

outstanding loans  sold that  represented obligations  of  investment-grade

borrowers  rose  to  44  percent,  up  from about  35  percent  a year earlier.

Merger-related loans  continued to constitute  an  important  source  of  loans

sold, but with merger  activity off since  late  last  year,  their  share of

outstanding loans  sold  in June  was about  37  percent,  down  from around  45

percent  a year  earlier. 1  Although their holdings were  down noticeably

from  last year,  branches  and agencies  of  foreign banks  continued to be  the

largest purchasers  of these  loans.  Smaller domestic  banks  significantly

increased their holdings  in the year ending June  30.

The  share  of outstanding loans  sold that  were  nonperforming rose  to 3-

1/2  percent  as  of June  30,  1990,  up  from 1 percent  a year  earlier.  This

mainly  reflected a deterioration in  loans  sold by  LPS  respondents other  than

the nine  money center banks.  A smaller percentage  of  the loans  sold by

1. Merger-related loans  represented approximately  16-3/4  percent of  the

C&I  loans  on domestic  LPS respondents' books  as  of  June  30,  1990.

-9-

these banks represents the  obligations of  investment-grade  borrowers  than is

the case  for the money  center banks.

U.S. branches  and agencies  of  foreign banks  are  active  as  both buyers

and sellers  of  C&I  loans.  As of  June  30,  the  18  branch and  agency

respondents  reported  just  over $7 billion of  loans  sold outstanding and an

almost equal  amount  of  loans  purchased on their  books.  Of their  loans  sold,

only about  23  percent  represented obligations of  investment-grade  borrowers,

well  below the  share  at  domestically chartered banks.  The share  accounted

for  by merger-related loans  was similar,  however, at  36 percent.  Of  the C&I

loans  purchased by branch and agency respondents,  about  one-third were

obligations of  investment-grade  borrowers  and 30  percent were merger-

related.1

Lending to Households

As  in  recent  surveys,  several more banks  reported that they had become

more  willing to  extend consumer  installment  credit  than had become  less

willing, although most  respondent  banks  indicated no  change  in their

willingness to  extend consumer  credit  in  the three  months ending with  the

survey  date. 2  Respondents also  continued to indicate  that  they  had become

more  willing on balance to  extend consumer  credit  defined more broadly to

include  home equity loans.  In  this case,  however, the margin by which banks

indicating greater willingness  to lend exceeded the  number  indicating a

1. Merger-related loans  represented approximately  22 percent  of  C&I  loans

on the  books of  branches  and agency  respondents  as  of  June  30,  1990.

2. For  some banks,  willingness to  extend consumer  credit  has  probably been

increased by their ability to  securitize  consumer  receivables.  The  16  LPS
respondents that  have  used their  credit  card receivables  as  collateral  for
securities  indicated, however, that  they had  not  changed their approval
standards  for  credit  cards  in order  to make the  associated receivables more
suitable  as  collateral.

-10-

reduced willingness was smaller than  for  consumer credit more  narrowly

defined.  The three  preceding surveys  also  had suggested that  banks'

preference  for  lending to consumers  has  shifted away from home  equity  loans.

A different  picture  had been  found  in the  results from most  of  the  surveys

taken in the  1987  to mid-1989 period, when  enthusiasm for making consumer

loans  defined to  include home  equity  lines  exceeded that  for the narrower

class  of loans.  This apparent  relative  de-emphasis of  home  equity lending,

which is  consistent  with the  cessation of  promotional  programs  associated

with  this market, may be  attributable to  a number  of  factors,  including some

recent  slowing  in  the appreciation  of  home  prices and  increases  in

delinquency rates  on  home  equity  lines  of  credit.

-11-

Table  1

Percent of Domestic Respondent Banks Reporting
Tightening Lending Standards/Terms on Nonmerger-Related Business Lending
in the May-August Period

Size of  customer

1

Memo:

Criterion 

Large  Middle market 
firms 

firms 

Small 
businesses 

Branches  & agencies
of  foreign banks

Standards  for 

36 

43  (58) 

34  (54) 

3

approving loan
applications

Maximum  size  of 
credit  lines

Cost  of  credit 

lines

Spreads  of  loan 

over base  rates

Covenants 

Collateral 

requirements

25 

27  (29) 

9  (5) 

22 

25 

37 

25 

30 

18 

35  (31) 

21  (19) 

53  (57) 

43  (43) 

45  (53) 

40  (52) 

61

28

39

39

39

50

1. The middle market is  often  categorized as  consisting of  firms with annual
sales  between $50  and $250  million.  "Large" firms  are those  larger  than middle
market  firms and  "small" businesses are those  that  are  smaller.  Not  all
respondents  used the  same  criteria  to distinguish among size  of  customers.
2. For U. S. branches and agencies  of  foreign banks,  responses refer  to

tightening over the  six-month period February to August.

3. Numbers  in  parentheses refer  to the percent  of  respondents  that  tightened
in the period  from late  1989  to early May, as  reported  in the May 1990  Senior
Loan Officer Opinion Survey.

-12-

Table  2

Outstanding  Loans  Sold  or  Participated
to  Others  by  Domestic  LPS  Respondents  as  of  June  30,  1990
(Billions of  dollars)

By  Purchaser

All  LPS
respondents

By  Seller

Nine money  I
center banks

Other banks

1.  All  purchasers

80.1  (72.2)

55.4  (51.5)

24.7  (20.7)

2. 

Large  domestic banks

3. 

Other domestic banks

3

4. 

Branches and  agencies  of

foreign banks

5. 

Foreign offices of  foreign

banks

20.3  (22.2)

6.4  (13.0)

13.9 

(9.2)

9.5 

(2.4)

7.8 

(1.4)

1.7 

(1.0)

25.9  (30.1)

19.4  (23.8)

6.5 

(6.3)

4.8 

(2.5)

4.2 

(1.5)

.6 

(1.0)

6. 

Nonfinancial corporations

6.6 

(4.8)

5.9 

(3.8)

.7 

(1.0)

All  other

Memoranda

Percent of  outstanding loans
sold that:
a) were obligations  of  investment-

grade  borrowers

b) represented financings  for
mergers  and acquisitions

c) were  nonperforming

13.0 

(9.9)

11.6 

(8.0)

1.4 

(1.9)

44.1  (34.8)

52.9  (36.8)

24.5  (29.7)

36.5  (44.5) 

33.4  (47.4)

40.7  (37.2)

3.5 

(1.0)

2.4 

(1.1)

5.5 

( 

.7)

Note:  Data in  parentheses refer  to outstandings  on June  30,  1989,  and  are taken  from the
August  1989  LPS.  A few banks reporting  outstanding loans  sold  were  unable to provide
information on the purchasers of  these  loans.  For purposes of  this table,  loans  sold  by
these banks were assigned to purchasers  according to the average  sales  distribution
reported by  all  other  respondents.

1. Citibank, Bank of America,  Chase Manhattan, Morgan Guaranty, Manufacturers Hanover,
Chemical  Bank, Bankers Trust,  Security Pacific, and First  National  Bank of  Chicago.  This
somewhat  arbitrary grouping of  banks  has  been used  in  other  LPS  and other Federal  Reserve
publications.  Not all  of  these  banks  were  among the  most  active  participants  in the  loan
sales market.  The Federal  Reserve  System regards  individual  bank reports  as  confidential.
2. Because  of  some minor panel  changes,  outstandings at  other  banks  as  of  June  30,  1990,

are not  strictly  comparable  to  outstandings  at  this  group  of  banks  as  of  June  30,  1989.
3. For purposes  of  this  survey, large banks  were  defined as  those  with  $2 billion or

more in total assets.

-13-

Table  3

SENIOR  LOAN  OFFICER  OPINION  SURVEY  ON  BANK  LENDING  PRACTICES
AT  SELECTED  LARGE  BANKS  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

(Status  of  policy  as  of  August  1990)
(Number  of  banks  and  percent  of  banks  answering  question)

(By volume  of  total  domestic  assets,  in  $  billions,  as  of June  27,  1990)1

(By type of  bank)2

1. 

Approximately  what  was  the  dollar  volume  of  commercial  and  industrial  loans  outstanding  on  June  30,  1990  that  your  bank  had
originated  and  then  sold  to  others  through  participations  or  assignments? 
loans  that  for  purposes  of  the  Call  Report  were  retained  on  your  books  because,  for  example, 

(Exclude  sales  and  participations  of  any  C&I

they  were  sold  with  recourse.)

$101-250 
mil. 

$251-500 
mil 

$501  mil.-
$1  bil.

$0-100  mil. 
-----------  -----------  ----------- -----------
Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pct  Banks  Pct

Over  $1
bil.
-----------
Banks  Pct

All Respondents 
Nine  money  center
I
banks 
Other 

14  25.0 

10  17.9 

12  21.4 

4 

7.1

16 

28.6

0 
0 
14  29.8 

0 

0 
0 
10  21.3 

0 
12  25.5 

0 

4 

00 
8.5 

9  100.0 
7  14.9 

9 
47 

Total
Amount
($  bil.)

80.1

55.4
24.7

2. 

Of  the  outstanding  C&I  loans  that  were  sold  or  participated  to  others  as  reported  in  question  1.

a.  please  indicate  the  approximate  percentage  distribution  of  these  loans  by  purchasers. 

(Percentages  should  add  to  100.)

Domestic Commercial
Banks with Assets
less  than  $2 billion

Domestic  Commercial
Banks  with  Assets
greater  than  $2  billion

Foreign Banks

Agencies and Branches 

Foreign Offices

3  Amount

4

Mean
pet 

Banks 

($ bil.)

Banks 

Mean 
pet 

Amount
($  bil.)

Banks 

Mean
pct

Amount
($  bil.)

Banks 

Mean
pet

4

Amount
($  bil.)

All  Respondents

44 

11.8 

Smoney  center
s
-r

6 
38 

14.1 
7.3 

8.6

6.9
1.8

48 

7 
41 

25.4 

18.6

11.6 
52.6 

5.6 
12.9 

36 

8 
28 

32.4

23.7

35.1 
27.2 

17.1 
6.7 

17 

7 
10 

6.0

7.6 
2.8 

4.4

3.7
0.7

Nonfinancial  Corp.

Other

Banks 

Mean
pet

Amount 4
($  bil.)  Banks

3 

Mean 
pct 

4

Amount
($ bil.)

All  Respondents
Nine  money  center
banks
Other

2 

1 
1 

8.2

10.7
3.1

6.0 

5.2 
0.8 

24

16.2 

11.8

7 
17 

20.9 
7.0 

10.2
1.7

8 
45 

Amount
($  bil.)

73.1

48.6
24.5

1  As  of  June  27,  1990,  30  respondents  had  domestic  assets  of  $10  billion  or  more;  combined  assets  of  these  banks

totaled  $765  billion,  compared  to  $964  billion  for  the  entire  panel  of  60  banks,  and  $2.94  trillion 
domestically  chartered  federally  insured  commercial  banks.

for  all

2  Money  center  banks  are  Citibank,  Bank  of  America,  Chase  Manhattan,  Morgan  Guaranty,  Manufactures  Hanover,

Chemical  Bank,  Bankers  Trust,  Security  Pacific,  and  First  National  Bank  of  Chicago.  This  is  a  somewhat  arbitrary
grouping  which  has  been  used  in  other  Federal  Reserve  publications. 
active  sellers.  The  Federal  Reserve  System  regards  individual  bank  responses  to  this  survey  as  confidential.

Not  all  of  these  banks  were  among  the  most

'ghted  by  amount  reported  in  question  1.

als  reported  percentage  times  the  amount  reported  in  question  1.  Components  may  not  add  due  to  rounding.

b.  About  what  percent  of  these  loans  were  nonperforming?

0% 

.01-2.5% 

2.5-5%

6-10% 

Over  10%

-14-

----------- 
----------- 
Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet 

---------------------- 

----------- 

Mean  Total
pet  Banks

All  Respondents
Nine  money  center
banks
Other

24  45.3 

6  11.3 

8 

15.1 

10  18.9 

5 

9.4 

3.5 

2  25.0 
22  48.9 

3 
3 

37.5 
6.7 

2  25.0 
13.3 
6 

12.5 
1 
9  20.0 

0 
5 

0 

11.1 

2.4 
5.5 

53

8
45

c.  About  what  percent  of  these  loans  represented  lending  to  publicly  rated,  investment-grade  borrowers?

0-20% 

21-40% 

41-60% 

61-80% 

80-100%

--------- 

---------- 
Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet 

----------- 

---------- 

-------- 

5

Mean
pet

------------------

All  Respondents 
Nine  money  center
banks 
Other 

30  61.2 

10  20.4 

5 

10.2 

3 

6.1 

1 

2.0  44.1

1  14.3 
29  69.0 

2  28.6 
19.0 
8 

1  14.3 
9.5 
4 

2  28.6 
2.4 
1 

1  14.3 
0 
0 

52.9
24.5

Total

Amount
(S  bil.)

26.6

22.0
4.6

7 

42 

d.  Around  what  percent  of  these  loans  represented  financings  for  mergers  and  acquisitions?  (Note:  Merger-related  loans  include
those  made  to  finance  leveraged  buyouts,  other  mergers  and  acquisitions,  and  defensive  restructurings--such  as  equity  or
debt  buybacks--related  to  mergers  and  acquisitions.)

0-20% 

21-40% 

41-60% 

61-80% 

80-100%

Total

------ 

-------  ------ 

----- 

-------- 

Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet 

Mean
pet

Total  Amount
($  bil.)
Banks 

--- --- -- -- --- ---
All  Respondents
Nine  money  center
banks
Other

23  45.1 

12  23.5 

12  23.5 

2 

3.9 

2  28.6 
21  47.7 

2  28.6 
10  22.7 

3  42.9
9  20.5

0 
2 

0 
4.5 

2 

0 
2 

3.9 

36.5

51 

20.8

0  33.4 
4.5  40.7 

7 
44 

11.0
9.7

the  total  C&I  loans  on  your  books  as  of  June  30,  1990,  roughly  what  percent  was  merger  related?  (Merger-related  loans

re  defined  in  question  2.d.)

0-5%
------- 

6-10% 

11-15% 

16-20% 

------ 

------ 

------- 

Over 20%
------- 

Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet 

6

Mean
pet

All  Respondents
$10.0 and Over
Under $10.0

12  21.4 
3  10.7 
9  32.1 

18  32.1 
10  35.7 
8  28.6 

9  16.1 
3  10.7 
6  21.4 

9  16.1 
6  21.4 
3  10.7 

8  14.3  16.8
6  21.4  18.8
7.1  10.1
2 

4. 

In  the  last  three  months,  how  have  your  bank's  credit  standards  for  approving  applications  for  C&I  loans  or  credit
lines--other  than  those  to  be  used  to  finance  mergers  and  acquisitions--from  large  corporate,  middle  market  and
small  business  customers  changed:  (Please  report  changes  in  enforcement  of  existing  standards  as
changes  in  standards.  The  middle  market  been  categorized  as  consisting  of  firms  with  annual  sales  of
between  $50  and  $250  million;  in  answering  this  question,  refer  either  to  this  definition  or  to  any
is  other  than  the
other  that  may  be  employed  at  your  bank;  please  indicate  the  definition  used  if 
"Large"  borrowers  would  then  be  those  larger  than  middle  market  customers  and  "small"
one  suggested. 
borrowers  those  that  are  smaller.)

it 

a.  for  large  firms

Tightened
considerab-
ly
-----------
Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet

Tightened 
somewhat 

Basically
unchanged

-----------  -----------

All Respondents 
$10.0  and Over 
Under $10.0 

3 
2 
1 

5.1 
6.9 
3.3 

18  30.5
8  27.6
10  33.3

Eased
considerab-
ly

Eased
somewhat
-----------  -----------  Total
Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks

0 
0 
0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0 
0 
0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

59
29
30

4

ghted  by  amount  reported  in  question  1.
ghted  by  volume  of  comercial  and  industrial  loans  to  domestic  addressees  as  of  June  27,  1990.

b. for  middle  market  firms

Tightened

considerab-  Tightened  Basically 
unchanged 
somewhat 

ly 

Eased
somewhat

Eased
considerab-
ly

Banks  Pct  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks 

Pct

All  Respondents
$10.0  and  Over
Under  $10.0

5 
8.3 
3  10.0 
2 
6.7 

21  35.0 
10  33.3 
11  36.7 

34  56.7 
17  56.7 
17  56.7 

0 
0 
0 

0.0
0.0
0.0

c. for  small  businesses

Tightened

considerab-  Tightened  Basically 
unchanged 
somewhat 

ly 

Eased
somewhat

Eased
considerab-
ly

Banks  Pet  Banks  Pct  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet

All Respondents
$10.0  and  Over
Under $10.0

15  25.4 
7  24.1 
8  26.7 

39
20
19

5.a.  If  your  bank's  credit  standards  for  approving  applications  for  C&I  loans  or  credit  lines  from  large

corporate  firms--other  than  those  to  be  used  to  finance  mergers  and  acquisitions--have  been  tightened  in
the  last  three  months  (answers  i.  or  ii. 

to  question  4.a)  what  were  the  main  reasons? 

(Please  rank.)

Pressures
on bank's
capital
position
------- ----
Banks  Mean

Deteriora-
tion  in
quality of
loan
portfolio
-----------
Banks  Mean

Less
favorable
economic
outlook

Industry
specific
problems

Banks  Mean

Banks  Mean

Increased
attractive-
ness  of
other
assets

Regulatory 
pressures 
----------- 
----------
Banks Mean  Banks

All Respondents
$10.0  and Over
Under  $10.0

5  1.5
3  1.8
2  1.0

4 
1 
3 

1.8
1.0
2.0

19 
9 
10 

1.7
1.8
1.5

2.6 
2.5 
2.8 

2
2
0

Other

---------- 
Total
Banks  Mean  Banks

5 
3 
2 

1.4 
1.7 
1.0 

22
10
12

5.b.  If your bank's  credit
than those to  be used
to question  4.b)  what

standards  for  approving  applications  for  C&I loans  or  credit  lines  from  middle  market  firms--other
to  finance  mergers  and  acquisitions-have  been  tightened  in  the  last  three  months  (answers  i.  or  ii.
were  the  main  reasons? 

(Please  rank.)

Pressures
on bank's
capital
position
-----------
Banks  Mean

Deteriora-
tion  in 
quality  of 
loan 
portfolio 
--  --------  ------ -
Banks  Mean  Banks  Mean

Less
favorable
economic
outlook

_

Industry
specific  Regulatory
problems 
pressures
----------- -----------
Banks  Mean  Banks  Mean

Increased
attractive-
ness  of
other
assets

Banks  Mean

All  Respondents
$10.0  and Over
Under  $10.0

6  1.4
3  1.8
3  1.0

6 
2 
4 

2.2 
2.0 
2.3 

25 
13 
12 

1.5
1.6
1.5

2.4 
14 
2.7 
8 
6  2.0 

11 
6 
5 

2.3
1.9
2.8

Other

---------- 
Total
Banks  Mean  Banks

3  2.0 
3.0 
1 
1.5 
2 

27
13
14

5.c.  If  your  bank's  credit  standards  for  approving  applications  for  C&I  loans  and  credit  lines  from  small  businesses  have  been

tightened  in  the  last  three  months  (answers 

i.  or  ii. 

to  question  4.c)  what  were  the  main  reasons? 

(Please  rank.)

Pressures
on  bank's
capital
position

Deteriora-
tion  in 
quality  of 
loan 
portfolio 

Less
favorable
economic
outlook

Industry
specific
problems

Regulatory
pressures

Increased
attractive-
ness  of
other
assets

Other

Banks  Mean

Banks  Mean  Banks  Mean

Banks  Mean

Banks  Mean

Banks  Mean

Banks  Mean

All Respondents
$10.0  and Over
Under $10.0

4 
2 
2 

1.3
1.5
1.0

5 
1 
4 

2.2 
1.0 
2.5 

20 
10 
10 

1.6
1.7
1.5

9 
5 
4 

2.4
2.8
2.0

9 
5 
4 

2.0
1.8
2.3

1 
1 
0 

6.0
6.0

0

1.0
1 
0
0 
1  1.0

-16-

6.  With  respect  to  applications  for  C&I  loans  or  credit  lines--other  than  those  to  be  used  to  finance  mergers  and

acquisitions--from  large  corporate  firms  that  your  bank  currently  is  willing  to  approve,  please  indicate  how  terms
ive  changed  in 

the  last  three  months  with  respect  to:

a. maximum size  of  credit  lines

Decreased
considerab-
ly

Decreased 
somewhat 

Basically 
unchanged 

Increased
somewhat

Increased
considerab-
ly

Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks
---- -. -. --- .- -. -. --- . - .- -- -. -- --- .- - --

Pet

All  Respondents
$10.0 and Over
Under $10.0

8.3 
5 
1  3.3 
4  13.3 

10  16.7
16.7
16.7

5 
5 

6.7
4 
3  10.0
3.3
1 

b.  costs  of credit  lines

All Respondents
$10.0  and Over
Under $10.0

Increased 

Decreased

considerab-  Increased 

ly 

somewhat 

Basically  Decreased  considerab-
somewhat 
unchanged 

ly

Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pct  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet

1 
0 
1 

1.7 
0.0 
3.3 

12  20.0 
7  23.3 
5  16.7 

44  73.3 
21  70.0 
23  76.7 

3 
2 
1 

5.0 
6.7 
3.3 

0 
0 
0 

0.0
0.0
0.0

-- -- -. -. ---. --. -. - - - . .- - --. -- - - . .- --- . .- -- .- - . -- .- - .-

c. spreads  of loan  rates  over base rates

Increased
considerab-
ly

Increased  Basically  Decreased
somewhat 

unchanged  somewhat

Decreased
considerab-
ly

All Respondents
$10.0  and Over
Under $10.0

d.  loan  covenants

Tightened
considerab-
ly

Tightened  Basically 
unchanged 
somewhat 

Eased
somewhat

Eased
considerab-
ly

All  Respondents
$10.0  and  Over
Under $10.0

Banks  Pet  Banks

1 
0 
1 

1.7 
0.0 
3.3 

21
12
9

e.  collateralization  requirements

Tightened
considerab-
ly

Tightened  Basically
unchanged
somewhat 

Eased
somewhat

Eased
considerab-
ly

Banks  Pot

Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet

Banks  Pet

Banks 

Pet

All Respondents
$10.0  and Over
Under  $10.0

1 
0 
1 

1.7
0.0
3.3

14  23.3 
8  26.7 
6  20.0 

75.0
45 
22  73.3
23  76.7

0 
0 
0 

0.0
0.0
0.0

0 
0 
0 

0.0
0.0
0.0

7.  With  respect  to  applications  for  C&I  loans  or  credit  lines--other  than  those  to  be  used  to  finance

-ergers  and  acquisitions--from  middle  market  firms  that  your  bank  currently  is  willing  to  approve,  please

dicate  how  terms  have  changed  in 

the  last  three  months  with  respect  to:

a.  maximum  size  of  credit  lines

-17-

Decreased

considerab-  Decreased  Basically 
unchanged 
somewhat 

ly 

Increased
somewhat

Increased
considerab-
ly

Banks  Pct  Banks

Banks  Pot  Banks

All Respondents
$10.0  and  Over
Under $10.0

5.0 
3 
0 
0.0 
3  10.0 

13
4
9

b. costs of  credit  lines

Increased  Basically  Decreased
unchanged 
somewhat 

somewhat

Decreased
considerab-
ly

Increased
considerab-
ly

Banks  Pet

2 
1 
1 

3.3
3.3
3.3

All  Respondents
$10.0  and Over
Under  $10.0

c. spreads  of  loan  rates  over base  rates

Increased
considerab- 
ly 

Increased
somewhat

Basically  Decreased  considerab-
unchanged  somewhat 

ly

Decreased

Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet

All Respondents
$10.0  and Over
Under  $10.0

2 
1 
1 

3.3 
3.3 
3.3 

19 
10 
9 

31.7
33.3
30.0

d. 

loan  covenants

Increased
considerab-
ly

Increased  Basically  Decreased
unchanged 
somewhat 

somewhat

Decreased
considerab-
ly

Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet

Pet  Banks  Pet

All  Respondents
$10.0  and  Over
Under  $10.0

2 
1 
1 

3.3
3.3
3.3

30 
15 
15 

50.0
50.0
50.0

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0 
0 
0 

0.0
0.0
0.0

e. collateralization  requirements

Tightened

considerab-  Tightened  Basically 
unchanged 
somewhat 

ly 

Eased
somewhat

Eased
considerab-
ly

Banks  Pet  Banks

Pet  Banks

Pet  Banks  Pet

Banks  Pet

All  Respondents
$10.0 and Over
Under  $10.0

2 
1 
1 

3.3 
3.3 
3.3 

25
13
12

41.7 
43.3 
40.0 

33
16
17

0 
0 
0 

0.0
0.0
0.0

-18-

8  with  respect  to  applications  for  C&I  loans  or  credit  lines  from  small  businesses  that  your  bank  currently  is  willing  to

rove,  please  indicate  how  terms  have  changed  in  the  last  three  months  with  respect  to:

a.  maximum  size  of  credit  lines

Decreased

considerab-  Decreased  Basically 
somewhat 
unchanged 

ly 

Increased
Increased  considerab-
somewhat 

ly

Banks  Pet

0 
0 
0 

0.0
0.0
0.0

All  Respondents
$10.0  and  Over
Under $10.0

b.  costs  of  credit  lines

Banks  Pet

1 
0 
1 

1.7
0.0
3.3

Increased 
considerab- 
ly 

Decreased
Increased  Basically  Decreased  considerab-
somewhat 
--------------------- 

unchanged 

somewhat 

ly

------  Total
Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks

------- 

All Respondents
$10.0  and Over
Under $10.0

2 
1 
1 

3.4 
3.6 
3.3 

13.8 
8 
3  10.7 
5  16.7 

47  81.0 
24  85.7 
23  76.7 

1 
0 
1 

1.7 
0.0 
3.3 

0 
0 
0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

58
28
30

c.  spreads  of  loan  rates  over  base  rates

Increased
considerab-
ly

Increased  Basically  Decreased
somewhat 
unchanged 
----------- ----------- -----------
Banks  Pet

somewhat

Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet

All  Respondents
$10.0  and  Over
Under $10.0

2 
1 
1 

3.4 
3.6 
3.3 

10 
17.2
6  21.4
4  13.3

75.9
44 
20 
71.4
24  80.0

d. 

loan  covenants

Decreased
considerab-
ly

---------- 
Total
Banks  Pet  Banks

0 
0 
0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

58
28
30

Tightened
considerab-
ly

Tightened  Basically 
unchanged 
somewhat 

Eased
somewhat

Eased
considerab-
ly

Banks  Pet  Banks  Pct  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet

All  Respondents
$10.0  and  Over
Under  $10.0

e.  collateralization  requirements

Tightened
considerab-
ly

Tightened  Basically 
unchanged 
somewhat 
----------- -----------  -----------

Eased
somewhat

Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet

All  Respondents
$10.0  and  Over
Under  $10.0

2 
1 
1 

3.4 
3.6 
3.3 

21 
36.2
10  35.7
36.7
11 

Eased
considerab-
ly

----------  Total
Banks  Pet  Banks

0 
0 
0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

58
28
30

9 

In  the  last  three  months,  how  have  your  bank's  credit  standards  changed  for  approving  applications  for  construction  and  land
(Please  report  changes  in  enforcement  of  existing  standards  as  changes  in  standards.)

velopment  loans? 

-19-

Tightened 

considerab-  Tightened  Essentially 
somewhat 
unchanged 
-----------  ----------- 

ly 
--------------- 
-----------  Total
Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pct  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks

Eased 
somewhat 

----------- 

Eased
considerab-
ly

All  Respondents 
$10.0  and  Over 
Under  $10.0 

20  33.9 
6  20.7 
46.7 

14 

24  40.7 
17  58.6 
7  23.3 

15  25.4 
6  20.7 
9  30.0 

0 
0 
0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0 
0 
0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

59
29
30

10.  Apart  from  construction  and  land  development  loans, 

in 

the  last  three  months,  how  have  your  bank's  credit  standards  changed

for  approving  applications  for  nonfarm  nonresidential  real  estate  loans  used  to  finance: 
enforcement  of  existing  standards  as  changes  in  standards.)

(Please  report  changes  in

a.  commercial  office  buildings

Tightened 

considerab-  Tightened  Basically 
unchanged 
somewhat 
-------  ----------------- 

ly 

Eased 
somewhat 

--------- 
--  -----------  Total
Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks

-------- 

Eased
considerab-
ly

All  Respondents 
$10.0  and  Over 
Under  $10.0 

18  31.0 
8  27.6 
10  34.5 

25  43.1 
15  51.7 
10  34.5 

15  25.9 
6  20.7 
9  31.0 

0 
0 
0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0 
0 
0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

58
29
29

b. 

industrial  structures

Tightened 

considerab-  Tightened 

ly 

somewhat 

Basically 
unchanged 

Eased 
somewhat 

Eased
considerab-
ly
----------- 

----------- 
Total
Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks

----------- 

----------- 

---------- 

All  Respondents 
$10.0  and  Over 
Under  $10.0 

11  18.6 
5  17.2 
6  20.0 

26  44.1 
16  55.2 
10  33.3 

22  37.3 
8  27.6 
14  46.7 

0 
0 
0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0 
0 
0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

59
29
30

c. other nonfarm nonresidential purposes

Tightened 

considerab-  Tightened  Basically 
unchanged 
somewhat 

ly 

Eased 
somewhat 

--------- 
Total
Banks  Pet  Banks  Pot  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pot  Banks

-------  ----------- 

------ 

-

Eased
considerab-
ly
--------- 

All  Respondents 
$10.0  and  Over 
Under  $10.0 

12  20.3 
6  20.7 
6  20.0 

27  45.8 
15  51.7 
12  40.0 

20  33.9 
8  27.6 
12  40.0 

0 
0 
0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0 
0 
0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

59
29
30

11. 

In  the  last  three  months,  how  have  your  bank's  credit  standards  changed  for  approving  mortgage  applications  from
individuals  to  purchase  homes? 

in  enforcement  of  existing  standards  as  changes  in  standards.)

(Please  report  changes 

Tightened 

considerab-  Tightened  Basically 
unchanged 
somewhat 

ly 
---------- 
-----------  Total
Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks

----------------------- 

------------ 

Eased 
somewhat 

Eased
considerab-
ly

All  Respondents 
$10.0  and  Over 
Under  $10.0 

0 
0 
0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

6  10.5 
4  14.3 
6.9 
2 

50  87.7 
23  82.1 
27  93.1 

1 
1 
0 

1.8 
3.6 
0.0 

0 
0 
0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

57
28
29

-20-

12.a.  Please  indicate  your  bank's  willingness  to  make  general  purpose 

loans  to  individuals  now  as  opposed  to  three  months  ago.

"Loans  to  individuals"  here  include  standard  consumer  installment  loans  plus  loans  taken  down  under  home  equity  lines
of  credit.

Much  More 
--------- 
Total
Banks  Pct  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pct  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks

Much  Less

---------- 

--------- 

About 
Unchanged 
----------- 

Somewhat
Less 
----------- 

Somewhat 
More 

All Respondents
$10.0  and Over
Under $10.0

0 
0 
0 

59
29
30
---- -. -. --- . --. -. - --. - .- ---. --- -- .- - --. -. - -- .- .- -. -- -. - .- -- .

50  84.7 
24  82.8 
26  86.7 

3 
5.1 
3  10.3 
0.0 
0 

6  10.2 
2 
6.9 
4  13.3 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0 
0 
0 

12.b.  Please  indicate  your  bank's  willingness  to  make  consumer  installment  loans  now  as  opposed  to  three  months  ago?

Much  More 
---- 
-- 

Somewhat 
More 

--------- 

About 
Unchanged 
----------- 

Somewhat
Less 
----------- 

-----------  Total
Banks  Pct  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pct  Banks  Pet  Banks

Much  Less

All  Respondents
$10.0  and Over
Under $10.0

1 
1 
0 

1.7 
3.4 
0.0

7  11.9 
2 
6.9 

49  83.1 
24  82.8 
83.3 

2 
2 
0 

3.4 
6.9 
0.0

0 
0.0 
0 
0.0 
0  0.0 

59
29
30

13. 

If  your  bank  has  used  its  credit  card  receivables  as  collateral  for  credit  card  backed  securities,  has  this  caused  you  to
change  your  approval  standards  for  credit  cards  in  order  to  make  them  more  suitable  as  collateral? 
indicate  what  these  changes  have  been.

If  so,  please

No
---------- 
Total
Banks  Pet  Banks

All Respondents
$10.0  and Over
Under $10.0

18  100.0 
10  100.0 
8 100.0 

18
10
8

-21-

Table  4

SENIOR  LOAN  OFFICER  OPINION  SURVEY  ON  BANK  LENDING  PRACTICES
AT  SELECTED  BRANCHES  AND  AGENCIES  OF  FOREIGN  BANKS  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

(Status of  policy as  of  August  1990)
(Number of banks  and percent  of  banks  answering question)
(By volume  of  total assets,  in  $  billions,  as  of  June 27,  1990)1

1.  Approximately  what  was  the dollar  volume  of  commercial  and  industrial  loans  outstanding  on  June  30,  1990  that  your  bank  had

originated  and  then  sold  to  others  through  participations  or  assignments? 
loans  that  for  purposes  of  the  Call  Report  were  retained  on  your  books  because,  for  example,  they were sold with recourse.)

(Exclude sales  and participations  of  any C&I

$0-100  mil. 
-----------  ----------- 
Banks  Pet  Banks  Pct  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pct  Banks  ($ bil.)

Total
Total  Amount

bil. 
--------- 

------- 

$101-250 
mil. 

$251-500 
mil 
---------- 

$501  mil.- 
$1 bil. 

Over  $1

All  Respondents 

6  33.3 

5  27.8 

1 

5.6 

4  22.2 

2  11.1 

18 

7.3

2. 

Of  the  outstanding  C&I  loans  that  were  sold  or  participated  to  others  as  reported  in  question  1:

a.  About  what  percent  of  these  loans  represented  lending  to  publicly  rated,  investment-grade  borrowers?

0-20% 

41-60% 

61-80% 

80-100% 

Total

---------- 
Banks  Pot  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet 

----------- 

--------- 

--------- 

2 
2 

Mean

Total  Amount

3

pot  Banks 

($  bil.)

All  Respondents 

12  75.0 

1 

6.3 

2  12.5 

1 

6.3  23.1 

16 

1.7

b.  Around  what  percent  of  these  loans  represented  financings  for  mergers  and  acquisitions?  (Note:  Merger-related  loans  include
those  made  to  finance  leveraged  buyouts,  other  mergers  and  acquisitions,  and  defensive  restructurings--such  as  equity  or
debt  buybacks--  related  to  mergers  and  acquisitions.)

0-20% 

21-40% 

41-60% 

61-80% 

80-100%

----------- 
Banks  Pot  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet 

---------- 

---------- 

------------- 

pet

2
-----------  Mean2

Total

Amount
($ bil.)

All Respondents 

7  43.8 

3  18.8 

2  12.5 

1 

6.3 

3  18.8 

36.0

2.6

3. 

Approximately  what  was  the  dollar  volume  of  commercial  and  industrial  loans  on  the  books  of  your  bank  as  of  June  30,  1990
that  your  bank  had  not  originated  but  had  purchased  from  other  banks  through  participations  or  assignments?

$0-100  mil. 

------  --- 

mil. 

--- 

mil 

--- 

$1  bil. 

------ 

Total
Total  Amount

--- 

Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  ($  bil.)

All  Respondents 

2  11.1 

4  22.2 

6  33.3 

6  33.3 

18 

7.1

4. 

Of  your  bank's  outstanding  C&I  loans  that  it  had  purchased  from  other  banks  through  participations  or  assignments  as  of
June  30,  as  reported  in  question  3:

a.  About  what  percent  of  these  loans  represented  lending  to  publicly  rated,  investment-grade  borrowers?

0-20% 

21-40% 

41-60% 

61-80%

Total

------- 
----------- 
Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet

-----------

-- 

-----------  Mean
pct
Banks  Pet 

4

Total
Banks

Amount
($  bil.)

All  Respondents 

8  44.4 

5  27.8 

2 

11.1

3  16.7 

32.0

18 

2.3

l  As  of  June  27,  1990,  respondents  had  combined  assets  of  $86  billion,  compared  to  $358  billion

for  all 

foreign  related  banking  institutions  in  the  United  States.

ghted by amount  reported  in  question  1.
als  reported  percentage  times  the  amount  reported  in  question  1.  Components  may  not  add  due  to  rounding.

.eighted  by  amount  reported  in  question  3.

4 
5  Equals  reported  percentage  times  the  amount  reported  in  question  3.  Components  may  not  add  due  to  rounding.

-22-

b.  Around  what  percent  of  these  loans  represented  financings  for  mergers  and  acquisitions?  (Merger-related  loans  are  defined

in  question  2.b.)

0-20% 

21-40% 

41-60% 

61-80% 

80-100%

Total

--- 

-----------  ----------- 

-

--------------- 

Banks  Pot  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet 

Mean 4  Total
pet  Banks

Amount
(S  bil.)

All  Respondents

7  38.9 

4  22.2 

1 

5.6 

3  16.7 

3  16.7  29.8 

18

2.1

5. 

Of  the  total  of  C&I  loans  on  your  books  as  of  June  30,  1990,  roughly  what  percent  was  merger  related?  (Merger-related  loans
are defined  in question 2.b.)

0-5% 

6-10% 

11-15% 

16-20% 

Over  20%

----------  -----------  ----------- 
Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet 

--------- 

-------- 

Mean  Total
pot  Banks

All  Respondents 

4  22.2 

2  11.1 

1 

5.6 

2  11.1 

9  50.0  21.7 

18

6.  In  the  last  six  months,  how have  your  bank's  credit  standards  for  approving applications  for C&I  loans  or  credit

lines--other than  those  to  be  used  to  finance  mergers  and  aquisitions--changed?  (Merger-related loans  are defined in
question  2.b;  please  report  changes  in  enforcement  of  existing  standards  as  changes  in  standards.)

Tightened 

considerab-  Tightened  Basically 
unchanged 
somewhat 

ly 

Eased 
somewhat 

Eased
considerab-
ly

Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet

Banks  Pet  Banks  Pot  Banks  Pet

7  38.9
All Respondents 
------------------  -----  -----  -----  -----  -----  -----

5.6 

55.6

10 

1 

0 

0.0 

0 

0.0 

18

7.  If  your  bank's  credit  standards  for  approving  applications  for  C&I  loans  or  credit  lines--other  than  those  to  be  used  to
to  question  6) what  were

finance  mergers  and  acquisitions--have been  tightened  in  the  last  six  months  (answers  i.  or  ii. 
the main reasons?  (Please rank.)

Deteriorat-
ion  in
quality  of
loan
portfol

Pressures
on  bank's
capital
position
-----------  -----------
Banks  Mean  Banks  Mean

Less

favorable
economic 
outlook 

Industry
specific 
problems 

Regulatory 
pressures 

Increased
attractive-
ness  of
oti

ass
----------- -----------  ----------- -----
Banks  Mean  Banks Mean  Banks  Mean  Banks

ets 
Other
------ ----------  Total
Mean  Banks  Mean  Banks

All  Respondents 

5 

2.4 

2 

3.5

8  1.3 

6  1.5 

1 

3.0 

1

5.0 

2 

2.5 

11

8.  With  respect  to  applications  for  C&I  loans  or  credit  lines--other  than  those  to  be  used  to  finance  mergers  and

acquisitions--that  your  bank  currently  is  willing  to  approve,  please  indicate  how  terms  have  changed  in 
with  respect  to:

the  last  six  months

a.  maximum  size  of  credit  lines

Decreased
considerab-  Decreased  Basically 
unchanged 
somewhat 

ly 

Increased
somewhat

-----------  -----------  -----------  -----------
Banks  Pet

Banks  Pet

Banks  Pet

Increased
considerab-
ly

---------- 
Total
Banks  Pet  Banks

All  Respondents

1 

5.6

13 

72.2

0 

0.0

0 

0.0 

18

b. costs of  credit  lines

Increased
considerab-
ly
-----------
Banks  Pet

Increased  Basically  Decreased
unchanged 
somewhat 
-----------  -----------  -----------

somewhat

Banks  Pet

Banks  Pet

Decreased
considerab-
ly

---------- 
Total
Banks  Pet  Banks

All  Respondents

1 

5.6

6 

33.3

11 

61.1

0 

0.0 

18

6  Weighted  by  volume  of  commercial  and  industrial  loans  to  domestic  addressees  as  of  June  27,  1990.

c. spreads  of loan rates  over base rates

Increased 

Decreased

-23-

ly 

considerab-  Increased  Basically  Decreased  considerab-
unchanged 
------ -----  -----------  -----------  -----------  -----------
Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet

somewhat 

somewhat 

ly

All  Respondents 

1 

5.6 

6  33.3 

11  61.1 

0 

0.0 

0 

0.0

d. loan  covenants

Tightened 

considerab-  Tightened  Basically 
unchanged 
somewhat 
---------- 

ly 
-----------  ----------
---------- 
Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet

Eased 
somewhat 

---------- 

Eased
considerab-
ly

All  Respondents 

0 

0.0 

7  38.9 

11  61.1 

0 

0.0 

0 

0.0

Total
Banks

18

Total
Banks

18

e. collateralization requirements

Tightened

considerab-  Tightened

ly 

somewhat

-----------  -----------
Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet

Eased 
Basically 
somewhat 
unchanged 
-----------  -----------  -----------
Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet

Eased
considerab-
ly

Total
Banks

All  Respondents 

0 

0.0 

9  50.0

9  50.0 

0  0.0 

0  0.0

18

9.  In the last  six months,  how have your bank's credit  standards changed for  approving applications for

construction  and land development  loans?  (Please report changes  in enforcement  of existing  standards
as  changes in  standards.)

Tightened
considerab-
ly
-----------
Banks  Pet

Tightened  Essentially 
somewhat 
unchanged 
----------- -----------  ----------- -----------
Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet

Eased 
somewhat 

Eased
considerab-
ly

Total
Banks

All  Respondents 

5  27.8

9  50.0 

4  22.2 

0 

0.0 

0 

0.0

18

10.  Apart  from  construction  and  land  development  loans,  in  the  last  six  months,  how  have  your  bank's  credit  standards  changed

for  approving  applications  for  nonfarm  nonresidential  real  estate  loans  used  to  finance:  (Please  report  changes  in
enforcement  of  existing  standards  as  changes  in  standards.)

a.  commercial  office  buildings

Tightened 

considerab-  Tightened  Basically 
unchanged 
somewhat 
-
-
----- 

ly 
S------ 

Eased 
somewhat 
---------- 

Total
Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks

Eased
considerab-
ly
---------- 

All  Respondents 

3  16.7 

8  44.4 

7  38.9 

0 

0.0 

0 

0.0 

18

b.  industrial  structures

Tightened 

considerab-  Tightened  Basically 
ly 
unchanged 
somewhat 
----------- 
-----------  -----------  -----------  -----------  Total
Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks  Pet  Banks

Eased 
somewhat 

Eased
considerab-
ly

All  Respondents 

1 

6.7 

4  26.7 

10  66.7 

0 

0.0 

0 

0.0 

15

c.  other  nonfarm  nonresidential  purposes

Tightened
considerab-
ly

Tightened
somewhat

Basically
unchanged

Eased
somewhat

Eased
considerab-
ly

Banks  Pct

Banks  Pct

Banks  Pct

Banks  Pet

Banks  Pct

All  Respondents

3 

16.7

8 

44.4

7 

38.9

0 

0.0

0 

0.0

MONETARY  AGGREGATES
(based  on  seasonally  adjusted  data  unless  otherwise  noted)

-25-

19891 

1990 
91 

1990 
Q2 

1990 
May 

1990 
Jun 

Growth
04  89-
Jul  p  Jul  90p

1990 

------------ Percent  change  at  annual  rates---------------------

----------- Percent change  at  annual

rates---------- 

Levels
bil.  $
Jul  90p

0.4 

4.2

1.6 

-3.7

5.6 

518.0

4.8 
-2.8 

1.0 

5.9 

10.3
-0.9

5.9 

6.8 

9.3 
0.0 

10.3 
1.3 

235.4
274.8

7.1 

-1.2

9.5 

-10.6 

291.2

2.6 

-2.1

1.5 

1.7 

2471.6

-8.6 

33.1 

-2.9 

58.6 

-24.4

0.0 

82.0

Selected  components

4. 

Ml-A 

5. 
6. 

Currency
Demand deposits

7.  Other  checkable  deposits

8.  M2  minus  M12

Overnight  RPs  and  Eurodollars,  NSA
9. 
10.  General  purpose  and  broker/dealer  money

market  mutual  fund  shares

11.  Commercial  banks
12. 
13. 
14.  Thrift  institutions

Savings deposits  plus MMDAs 3
Small time  deposits

Savings deposits  plus MMDAs 3
Small  time  deposits

5. 
1. 

17.  M3  minus  M24

-1.2 

-10.6 

-7.6 

-2.9 

-6.7 

-2.1 

787.6

18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 

Large  time  deposits

At  commercial  banks,  net 5
At  thrift  institutions

Institution-only  money  market

mutual  fund  shares

22.  Term RPs,  NSA
23. 

Term  Eurodollars,  NSA

MEMORANDA:

6

24. Managed  liabilities at  commercial

banks  (25+26)

25.  Large  time deposits, gross
26.  Nondeposit  funds
27. 

Net  due  to  related  foreign

institutions

Other 7

28. 
29.  U.S.  government  deposits  at commercial

banks 8

4.2 
9.9 
-7.8 

-8.3
-1.6
-24.7

5.6 
10.1 
31.0 

0.0 
35.1 
-56.8 

17.9
-18.3
-26.1

----- Average  monthly  change  in  billions  of  dollars----

6.1 
2.6 
3.5 

0.2 
3.3 

2.5 
-2.3 
4.8 

3.3 
1.5 

-0.1 
-1.5 
1.4 

-0.9

2.3

2.6 
-0.4 
3.0 

7.8 
-4.9 

1.6 
-2.0 
3.6 

-9.8
13.3

13.8 
1.3 
12.5 

2.0 
10.5 

742.6
454.0
288.6

16.7
271.8

-0.3 

-0.6

0.4 

-2.6

1.8 

-5.5 

14.9

1.  Amounts  shown are  from  fourth  quarter  to  fourth  quarter.
2. Nontransactions M2  is  seasonally adjusted  as a whole.
3. Commercial bank savings  deposits excluding MMDAs  grew during  June and  July at rates  of  9.3

percent and 3.7 percent,  respectively.  At thrift  institutions, savings  deposits excluding MMDAs grew
during June and July at  rates of  -3.8  percent and -1.1  percent, respectively.

4. The non-M2  component  of  M3  is  seasonally adjusted as  a whole.
5. Net of  large denomination  time deposits  held by  money market  mutual  funds and  thrift  institutions.
6. Dollar  amounts shown  under memoranda are calculated  on an  end-month-of-quarter basis.
7. Consists  of  borrowing  from other than  commercial banks  in  the  form of  federal  funds purchased,  securities

sold under agreements  to  repurchase,  and other  liabilities  for  borrowed money  (including borrowing  from the
Federal  Reserve and unaffiliated  foreign banks,  loan RPs  and other  minor  items).  Data are partially estimated.

8. Consists of  Treasury demand deposits  and note balances  at commercial  banks.
p  - preliminary

-26-

COMMERCIAL  BANK  CREDIT  AND  SHORT-  AND  INTERMEDIATE-TERM  BUSINESS  CREDIT

(Percentage  changes  at  annual  rates,  based  on  seasonally  adjusted  data)

7. 

Real  estate  loans

1.

2.9 

10.1 

10.0 

12.5 

1.  Total  loans  and  securities

----

at  banks

Securities

U.S.  government  securities

Other  securities

Total  loans

Business  loans

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7.2 

3.9 

9.7 

6.9 

8.1 

6.8 

8. 

9. 

.0. 

Consumer  loans

Security  loans

Other  loans

11. 

Business  loans  net of bankers

acceptances

S  Loans  at  foreign branches

Sum of lines 11  & 12

14. 

Conmmercial paper issued by

nonfinancial  firms

15. 

Sum of lines  13 & 14

1988:Q4
to
1989:Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

May 

June

1990

Levels
bil.$
July  p

July  p 

r

-------------------  Commercial Bank Credit  -

--------------------

6.8 

5.2 

3.3 

7.1

16.8 

9.3 

3.4 

24.6 

15.1 

9.4 

15.7

24.5

5.9 

4.7 

7.5 

-.2 

-3.8 

-10.6 

-4.7

-2.0 

2670.9

615.5

437.4

178.2

3.9 

4.0 

3.2 

.6 

5.2 

-.6 

6.3 

2055.4

4.5

6.1

9.4

-2.4 

11.3 

649.9

801.2

376.3

40.0

6.3 

3.8 

3.7 

-1.4 

4.4 

-4.1

-5.1 

-18.2 

-23.0 

-42.2 

13.4

129.6 

.6 

-5.0 

-9.0 

-5.1 

-15.8

14.2 

188.0

------  hort-  and Intermediate-Term Business

Credit----------

24.5 

4.4 

9.3

5.9

16. 

Bankers  acceptances:  U.S. trade

related  '

6.1 

-19.8 

-9.8 

-15.1

17. 

Line 15 plus bankers  acceptances:

U.S. trade  related

18. 

Finance  company loans  to  business'

19. 

Total short-  and intermediate-

term business  credit  (sum of
lines  17  & 18)

5.2 

-6.3

15.4 

11.9

9.9 

3.7 

7.6 

-1.8

n.a. 

1112.65

1. Average  of Wednesdays.
2.  Loans  at  foreign  branches  are  loans  made  to  U.S.  firms  by  foreign branches
3. Based on  average  of data  for current and preceding ends  of  month.
4. Consists  of acceptances that  finance U.S.  imports,  U.S.  exports, and  domestic shipment  and storage  of  goods.
5. June data.
p--preliminary.
n.a.--not  available

of  domestically chartered banks.

-27-

SELECTED  FINANCIAL  MARKET  QUOTATIONS
(percent)

1987 

1989 

1990

Change  from:

Oct  16 

2  March 
highs 

Dec 
FOMC
lows  Jul  3 

Aug  16

Mar 89  Dec 89  FOMC
Jul  3
lows 
highs 

9.85 

8.45 

8.28 

8.05 

-1.80 

-.40 

-.23

9.09 
9.11 
9.05 

7.53
7.29
7.11

7.48 
7.43 
7.29 

-1.61
-1.68
-1.76

-.05 
.14 
.18 

-.22
-.16
-.16

7.94 
8.65 

10.05 
10.15 

8.51 
8.22 

8.22 
8.12 

8.03 
7.86 

-2.02  -.48 
-2.29  -.36 

-.19
-.26

8.01 
7.98 
7.97 

-2.06
-2.34
-2.11

8.00 
9.06 

10.19 
10.50 

8.38 
8.25 

8.19 
8.19 

7.94 
7.88 

-2.25  -.44 
-2.62  -.37 

-.25
-.31

Short-term  rates
3

Federal  funds

4

Treasury  bills
3-month
6-month
1-year

Commercial  paper

1-month
3-month

Large  negotiable  CDs

1-month
3-month
6-month

Eurodollar  deposits

5

1-month
3-month

Bank  prime  rate

9.25 

11.50 

10.50 

10.00 

10.00 

-1.50 

-.50 

.00

Intermediate-  and  long-term  rates

U.S.  Treasury  (constant maturity)

3-year 
10-year 
30-year 

9.52
10.23
10.24

9.88 
9.53 
9.31 

7.69
7.77
7.83

8.28 
8.40 
8.40 

8.23 
8.76 
8.91 

-1.65
-.77
-.40

Municipal  revenue

(Bond  Buyer)

Corporate--A  utility

recently  offered

7

Home  mortgage  rates
S&L  fixed-rate
S&L  ARM,  1-yr.

Stock prices

9.59

7.95 

7.28 

7.48 

7.53 

-.42 

.25 

.05

11.50 

10.47 

9.29 

9.92 

10.16 

-.31

.87 

.24

11.58 
8.45 

11.22 
9.31 

9.69 
8.34 

10.15 
8.45 

10.08 
8.39 

-1.14 
-.92 

.39 
.05 

-.07
-.06

1989 

1990 

Percent  change from:

Record 
highs 

Date 

Lows 
FOMC 
Jan 3  Jul  3  Aug 16 

Record  1989 
highs 

FOMC
lows  Jul  3

Dow-Jones  Industrial 2999.75  7/16/90  2144.64  2911.63 2681.44  -10.61  25.03 
-9.15  17.91 
201.13  7/16/90 
NYSE Composite 
397.03  10/10/89  305.24  360.67  336.83  -15.16  10.35 
AMEX Composite 
485.73  10/9/89 
NASDAQ  (OTC) 
Wilshire 

3523.47  10/9/89  2718.59  3441.27  3165.32  -10.16  16.43 

378.56  461.76  402.27  -17.18 

-7.91
-7.06
-6.61
6.26  -12.88
-8.02

154.98  196.61  182.73 

1/  One-day  quotes  except  as  noted.
2/  Last  business  day  prior  to  stock  market  decline  on  Monday

Oct.  19,  1987.

3/  Average  for  two-week  reserve  maintenance  period  closest  to

date  shown.  Last  observation  is  average  for  the
maintenance  period  ending  August  8,  1990.

4/ Secondary market.
5/ Bid rates for  Eurodollar

deposits at  11  a.m. London time.
6/ Based on one-day Thursday  quotes

and futures market  index  changes.

7/ Quotes for week ending

Friday closest  to date  shown.

-28-

THE  INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY

U.S.  Merchandise  Trade

Preliminary data  for  June  indicate  that  the  deficit  for  U.S.

merchandise trade  narrowed to  $5.1  billion  (seasonally adjusted, Census

basis)  from a deficit  in May of  $7.8  billion  (revised).  For the  second

quarter, the  deficit  was substantially  less than  in the  first  quarter, and

was the  lowest  quarterly average  recorded  since  1983.

The value  of  exports rose  nearly 5 percent  in  June  from the May  level,

with most  of  the  increase  in civilian aircraft  and parts, consumer  goods,

and agricultural products.  For the  second quarter as  a whole, exports

increased  3 percent  (not at  an  annual  rate)--the  third consecutive  strong

quarterly gain.  Nearly all  of the  increase  in  the  second quarter  was  in

consumer goods,  capital goods,  and automotive  products;  the value  of

agricultural  exports  declined.  Exports to Western Europe were particularly

strong in the  first  half.  Exports to Mexico also  expanded at  a strong rate.

The value of  imports declined in June,  with about  half  of the decrease

in  oil  (about equally split  between price and quantity) and the  remainder

spread among a broad range  of categories.  For  the second quarter,  imports

declined 2 percent.  Most  of  the drop was  in  oil imports,  as  prices  fell  by

more than $3.75  per barrel  reflecting strong OPEC production in the  face  of

a marginal  increase  in world demand, and the quantity imported  decreased by

5 percent.  Non-oil  imports rose  1 percent  in the  second quarter;  declines

in food,  consumer goods,  computers  and semiconductors,  were more  than offset

by increases in automotive  products  (primarily from Canada),  and industrial

supplies.

-29-

August  17,  1990

Merchandise Trade:  Census-Based Data
(in  billions of  dollars, seasonally adjusted)

-----------

Total 

Exports----------------------Imports--------
Agri.XX  Nonagri. 

Total 

Oil 

Non-Oil 

Balance

1988 
1989 

322.4 
363.8 

37.7 
42.2 

284.7 
321.6 

441.0 
473.2 

38.5 
48.9 

402.5 
424.3 

-118.5
-109.4

Quarters at  annual  rates:

1989  Qtr  1
2
3
4

1990  Qtr  1 
2 

Monthly  Rates:

350.4
370.7
360.9
373.3

384.9
396.5

307.1
327.3
320.4
331.6

-111.5
-106.0
-112.7
-107.4

43.0 
40.8 

341.8 
355.7 

487.5
477.1

61.3 
47.0 

426.2 
430.0 

-102.7
-80.6

1988  Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec

1989  Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec

1990  Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May-R
Jun-P

-10.5
-12.6

-9.3
-9.0
-8.4
-11.0
-8.9

-10.4
-9.0
-8.7
-10.2
-10.7

-9.1
-9.8
-9.0
-8.3

-10.3

-8.0
-9.1
-10.3
-8.8
-10.2
-9.9
-6.8

preliminary 

P/ 
**  Seasonally adjusted  using  BOP-basis seasonal  factors.

R/  revised

Source:

U.S.  Department  of Commerce,  Bureau  of  the Census,  Customs Valuation.

-30-

ERRATA

1.  The  first paragraph on page  I-12  of  the  Greenbook should have  read:

"The current  account deficit in the alternative  scenario  is  about

$10  billion greater  in  the second quarter of  1991  than shown  in  the current

Greenbook  forecast.  However, this difference  diminishes after mid-1991  as

the level  of  GNP  in  the alternative  scenario  continues  to fall  below the

Greenbook path  and reduces demand  for  imports."

2.  The  first  sentence  of  the Domestic  Financial  Developments  section

of  Part  1 should have  read:

"Short-term interest  rates  fell  during July  in  response  to the

announcement of  a possible  System easing and the  subsequent  1/4  percentage

point  drop in the  federal  funds  rate  on  July 13."




