==== GREENBOOK | 1991-07-03_FOMC19910805confcall.txt ====

Federal  Open  Market  Committee

Conference  Call

August  5,  1991

PRESENT:  Mr.  Greenspan,  Chairman

Mr.  Corrigan,  Vice  Chairman
Mr.  Angell
Mr.  Black
Mr.  Forrestal
Mr.  Keehn
Mr.  Kelley
Mr.  Mullins
Mr.  Parry

Messrs.  Guffey, Hoskins,  Melzer,  and  Syron,

Alternate Members  of  the  Federal  Open  Market
Committee

Messrs.  Boehne,  McTeer,  and  Stern,  Presidents  of

the  Federal  Reserve  Banks  of  Philadelphia,
Dallas,  and Minneapolis,  respectively

Mr.  Kohn,  Secretary  and  Economist
Mr.  Coyne,  Assistant  Secretary
Mr.  Gillum, Assistant  Secretary
Mr.  Mattingly, General  Counsel
Mr.  Prell,  Economist
Mr.  Truman,  Economist

Messrs.  Beebe,  R.  Davis,  Promisel,  Siegman,

Simpson,  Slifman,  Associate  Economists

Mr.  Cross,  Manager  for  Foreign  Operations,

System  Open  Market Account

Mr.  Wiles,  Secretary  of  the  Board,  Office  of  the

Secretary,  Board  of  Governors

Mr.  Ettin,  Deputy  Director,  Division  of  Research

and  Statistics,  Board  of  Governors

Mr.  Stockton, Associate  Director,  Division  of

Research  and  Statistics,  Board  of  Governors

Mr.  Madigan,  Assistant  Director,  Division  of
Monetary  Affairs,  Board  of  Governors
Ms.  Low, Open  Market  Secretariat  Assistant,

Division  of  Monetary  Affairs,  Board  of
Governors

Messrs.  Balbach,  J.  Davis,  T.  Davis,  and  Ms.

Lovett,  Senior  Vice  Presidents,  Federal
Reserve  Banks  of  St.  Louis,  Cleveland,
Kansas  City,  and  New York,  respectively

Transcript  of  Conference  Call  of

August  5,  1991

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  I would  ask  Don Kohn  to update  us.

MR.  KOHN.  As  you  know, M2  was  extremely weak  in  July;  we  are

looking  at  about  a 3-3/4  percent  annual  rate  of  decline.  That
compares  to  a 5 percent  increase  that  we  expected  at  the  time  of the
Bluebook.  June,  as  you  know,  also was  weak,  at  only  about  a 1 percent
rate  of  increase.  Quite  frankly,  we're  getting  off  on  such  a  slow
foot  at  the  end  of  July that  we've  marked  down  our  August  growth to
only  about  1 percent,  trying  to  take  account  of  the  fact  that  the  last
few weeks  of July  seemed  so  sluggish.  So,  we  have  several months  here
of  very  slow growth--much  slower,  obviously,  than  we  were  expecting
but  also  than was  projected by  the  models.  We've looked  at  this  in
many  different ways  in  terms  of the  various  components  relative to  our
expectations.  We  do  have  liquid  deposits  still  strong  but  their  rate
of  growth  has  come  down  a bit,  and  I'm  including  in  this  Ml.  Ml  is  up
at  a rate  of  only  1-3/4  percent  in July, down  from  9-1/2  percent  in
June.  But  also  savings  and  money market  deposit  accounts,  while  still
growing  at  double-digit  rates,  are  growing  less  rapidly than  they did
in  June.  Eurodollars  and  overnight RPs  have  fallen  short  of what  we
were  expecting.  And  the  runoff  in  retail  time  deposits,  which  we
thought  might  begin  to  [moderate]  a little  as  balance  sheets  were
restructured,  continues  unabated.  We  have  about  an  11-1/2  percent
decline  in  retail  time  deposits  in  July;  that's  about  what  it  was  in
May  and  June,  so  there's  no  letup  there.  And  as  the  liquid  deposits
grow  less  rapidly  that's  showing  through  into  overall  M2.  We've
looked  at  this  by  region and  we  can  find  nothing  unusual.  We've
looked  at  it  by  size  of bank with  the  same  result.  We've  looked  at  it
by personal  versus  nonpersonal  deposits  where  we  have  some  data.  We
can't  slice  up  M2  into  personal  versus nonpersonal  [components]  but we
do  have  money market  deposits  accounts  and  a few  other  pieces  of  M2
that  we  can  look  at  in  that way.  And  there  doesn't  seem to  be  unusual
behavior  there,  although we're  still  looking  at  all  these  things.

Part  of  the  weakness,  of  course,  could  be  in  the  scale

variables;  that  is,  income  and  growth  are  probably  a little  weaker
than we  had  expected when  we  were  putting  the  Bluebook together.  But
it  doesn't  come  close  to  explaining  an  8 or  9 percentage  point
shortfall  in  July  M2  growth  relative  to  our  expectations.  So,
obviously,  most  of  it  is  in  a portfolio  shift  of  some  sort.
Primarily,  this  looks  like  a portfolio  shift  [that  involves  a move]
out  on  the  yield  curve--out  of  [retail]  time  deposits  into  longer-term
assets  and  particularly  into  bond  and  stock mutual  funds,  especially
bond  mutual  funds.  But  also  we're  seeing  some  pickup  in
noncompetitive tenders  in  Treasury  auctions.  So,  we  think  people  are
investing  directly  in  longer-term  assets  as  well.  Another  aspect  of
the  portfolio  shift  we  are  in  the  process  of  looking  at  is  whether
people  are  re-balancing their  assets  and  liabilities.  That  is,  credit
growth  has  been  very  slow,  and  it  could be  that  to  the  extent  people
are  spending, they're  doing  it  by  holding down  the  growth of,  or  even
drawing down,  M2  assets  rather than  accessing  consumer  credit.  The
Mortgage  and  Consumer  Finance  Section  in  our  R&S  Division has  been
looking  at  models  of  consumer  credit  and  looking  at  those  in  different
ways trying  to  see  whether  consumer  credit  growth has  been  slower  than
one might  have  expected.  So  far,  unfortunately,  the  results  are
ambiguous.

8/5/91

Any  shifts  either  out  on  the  yield  curve  or  away  from M2  in
terms  of  spending  and  away from  credit  would  be  encouraged  by  low  and
declining  [retail]  time  deposit  rates.  These  rates  actually  are  not
that  low relative  to  what  our models  are  predicting,  given  the  decline
in market  rates  we've  had.  But  they have  been  dropping  very  rapidly,
and we  think  there  are  some  aspects  of the  returns  people  get  on
deposits  that  aren't  captured  by  these  rates--that  is,  fees  seem to  be
higher.  Many banks  are  beginning  not  to  pay  interest,  for  example,  on
the  12  percent  of  NOW  account  balances  that  they  say they're  putting
[aside  to  meet]  reserve  requirements.  So,  there  are  ways  that  banks
have  of  reducing the  return to  depositors  that may  not  be  captured
entirely  in  these  rates.  We  don't  know of  anything  that  has  happened
suddenly  in  the  last  two  months  or  three months.  I think these  are
trends  that  have  been  occurring  over  time.  Of  course,  banks  don't
need  the  deposits;  bank  credit  growth  continues  to  be  quite  sluggish.
We  have  preliminary  estimates  for  July,  and  these  estimates  I'm
reading  you  abstract  from  some  distortions  to  the  data  caused  by  the
sale  to  Fleet  Norstar  of  Bank  of New  England,  as  a  result  of which the
FDIC  ended  up  with  an  awful  lot  of  assets.  Abstracting  from  the
FDIC's  [acquisition]  of these  assets,  we're  looking  at  essentially
flat  bank  credit  in  July.  We  have  loans  declining  2-1/2  percent;
business  loans  declining 4  percent;  and  even  a drop  in  real  estate
loans  at  banks,  and  that's  extremely  unusual.  It's  very  rare  that
that  number  goes  down.  So,  bank  credit  remains  quite  weak  and  banks
are  not  looking  for  deposits.  Looking at  deposit  growth by  bank
capital  and  bank loan-to-asset  ratios,  it  does  look  as  if the  weakest
deposit  growth  is  in  the  least  well  capitalized banks  with  the  lowest
loan-to-asset  ratios.  So,  there  is  some  correlation between  not
making  loans  and  declining  retail  deposits.

What  is  the  meaning of  this  portfolio  shift?  It's  somewhat
ambiguous.  This  is  obviously the  difficult  question.  I don't  think
one  can  dismiss  it  out  of  hand.  A  lot  of  weakness  in  M2,  an  aggregate
that  leads  income  developments,  occurs  because  of portfolio  shifts.
For  example,  if  the  Fed  tightens  up,  in  the  first  instance  rising
market  interest  rates  cause  shifts  out  of  M2  into  market  securities
and  then  later  on  that  affects  spending.  So,  just  because  [the
initial  effect]  is  a portfolio  shift  doesn't  necessarily  mean  that  it
can  be  ignored  for  policy  purposes.  On the  other  hand,  if  it's  a
portfolio  shift  in  which preferences  of  asset  holders  have  changed  for
some  reason,  then  it  would be  misleading  to  pay  a lot  of  attention  to
it.  So,  the  meaning  is  ambiguous.  Clearly,  people  are  reaching  for
yield.  One  question would  be:  Are  long  rates  so  high  that  they would
damp  the  expansion?  On the  other  hand,  an  explanation  for  that  is
that  they  got  high  because  the  economy was  expected  to  expand--that
that's  how the  yield  curve  got  so  steep.  If  M2  is  damped  because  time
deposit  rates  are  dropping,  that  might  indicate  continuing  credit
restraint,  which we  couldn't  ignore.

Another  aspect  of  the  staff's  [analytical  effort]  is  some

more work  being done  with  semireduced-form VAR type  models,  lead-lag
models,  trying  to  refit  those  things  to  see,  after  a few years  in
which  we  haven't  paid  much  attention  to  them,  whether Ml  and M2  lead
nominal  income  or  real  income--even  when  you  include  interest  rates
and  other  variables  in  them.  We  do  see  some  power  in  the  non-M1  part
of M2  even  when you  include  interest  rates  in  these  equations,  which
also  suggests  that  one  might  treat  continuing weakness  of M2  with a
little  caution  here  in  that  it  perhaps  may  have  some  effect.  An  issue

8/5/91

that  has  arisen  recently is  the  question  of whether  stronger  Ml  growth
should be  a comfort  to  the  Committee.  As you  all  know, we  dropped  M1
targeting  because  the  aggregate  had  become  so  interest  sensitive  that
its  velocity  swung  over  a very  wide  range  very  rapidly.  So,  Ml  is  not
far  off  of  its  demand curve,  although  it  appears  to  be  coming  in  weak
in  the  third  quarter  relative  to  expectations.  But  it  has  not  proven
to  be  a good  policy  indicator  since  the  early  '80s when  deposit  rates
were  decontrolled.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Thanks  very much, Don.  Questions  for

Don?

MR.  CORRIGAN.  Alan,  is  Mike  Prell  there  [to  comment  on]  how

he's  looking  at  the  real  economy?

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Yes,  he  is.

MR.  PRELL.  Well,  at  this  stage,  we're  just  beginning  to  put
together  a forecast  for  the  next  FOMC  meeting.  The  data  of  late  have
been  mixed.  On  the  whole we  don't  feel  they  have  been  as  robust  as  we
would  have  expected  if we  are  to  get  the  almost  5 percent  GNP  growth
we  had  for the  third  quarter  in  the  last  Greenbook.  Thus,  I would
anticipate  very  tentatively that  we will  be  marking  that  down
significantly to  probably  something more  in  the  neighborhood  of  3
percent.  But we're  having to  sift  through  some  data  that  don't  fit
together  very neatly.  And  there  has  just  been  such  great  volatility
in  the  labor market  data in  particular,  which  are  usually  one  of  our
most  important  guides,  that  it's  very  hard  to  read  at  this  stage.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Any  other  questions  for  Don  or  other

staff?

MR.  HOSKINS.  Don,  this  is  Lee  Hoskins.  Maybe  I missed  it,

but  did  you  give  a third-quarter  projection  and  where  would that  leave
us  year-to-date  in  terms  of the  target  ranges?

MR. KOHN.  For  the  third  quarter we  have M2  on  a quarterly

average  basis  barely  growing;  that  is,  it's  essentially flat.  For  Q4
to July we're  estimating  2-3/4  percent  growth;  Q4  to  August,  given
that  1 percent  growth  projected  for August,  is  at  about  2-1/2  percent,
which  is  the  lower  end  of  the  range.

MR.  MCTEER.  Bob  McTeer  in  Dallas  for  Don.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Go  ahead,  Bob.

MR.  MCTEER.  What  about  bank  reserve  growth?

MR. KOHN.  Well,  bank  reserve  growth has  been  somewhat

stronger because  Ml,  particularly  in  June,  was  stronger.  But  total
reserve  growth  also  has  tailed  off  in  July.  We  have  it  expanding  1
percent  in  July  following  very  rapid  second-quarter  growth.  But  that
follows  Ml,  obviously,  which  is  the  only  aggregate  that  has  any
reserves  against  it  anymore.  So,  it  comes  back to  the  issue  of  how
much  weight  to  give Ml  which,  in  fact,  has  been  strong  partly  because
of currency,  but  partly because  demand  deposits  and  NOW  accounts  have
been  strong.  However, Ml  is  tailing  off  a bit  in  July.

8/5/91

MR.  PARRY.  This  is  Bob  Parry.  You talked  about  bank  credit

growth.  Some  numbers  I've  seen  with  regard  to  insurance  companies
suggest  that  they're providing  credit  at  a weak  rate  as  well.  Do  you
have  any  information  on  other  sectors  and  what  is  happening  in  them?

MR.  KOHN.  Not  really.  Once  again,  that's  something we  would

do  for  the  FOMC  meeting;  we  will  go  through  the whole  credit  picture.
We  haven't  really updated  that  since  the  last  meeting.  You'll
remember  that  credit  growth was  projected  to  be  very  sluggish  in  the
second  quarter.  We  have  very,  very  little  information  even about  the
second  quarter.  So,  we  haven't  seen  a  pickup  there  yet.

MR.  PARRY.  Thank you.

MR ANGELL.  Mike,  do  you  have  a preliminary  view on  how you

see  the  rate  of  inflation  in  the  second  half  of  1991  as  compared  to
before?  Does  this  reassessed  picture  also  give  you  a view  of  some
improvement?

MR.  PRELL.  Again,  it's  a mixed  picture  in  the  recent  data.

In  the  most  recent  figures  on  the  wage  side,  for  example,  we  got  a
nice  figure  on  average  hourly  earnings  in  July  after  a  string  of  very
bad  numbers.  That  was  some  comfort  but  the  employment  cost  indexes
for  the  second  quarter  were  not  favorable.  On  balance,  they were
higher  than  we  anticipated.  So,  the  labor  cost  picture  doesn't  appear
to  be  evolving  in  a more  favorable way.  In  the  other  price  data,  for
food  and  energy  prices  there  are  likely  to  be  some  adjustments.  I
don't  think  we  see  a materially  different  picture  at  this  point  for
the  second  half than we  had  before.  It's  still  a relatively moderate
rate  of  inflation,  something in  the  3 to  4 percent  range,  for  the
second  half.

MR. KOHN.  If  I may  return  for  a second  to  Bob  Parry's

question:  I'm  now  looking  at  a table  on  long-term debt  issuance  and
it  does  look  as  if  that  has  tailed  off;  both  debt  and  equity  issuance
by nonfinancial  corporations  tailed  off  in  July.  Actually,  it  peaked
around  April  or  May  and  has  gone  down  since  then.  It's  down  fairly
robustly,  particularly  on  the  equity  side  relative  to  recent years,
but  it  is  also  off  [on  the  debt  side]. 
bank  credit  the  way  it  was,  say,  in April  or  May.

So,  it's  not  supplementing

MR.  PARRY.  Thank  you.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Other  questions  for Don?  If  not,  I

think  it  would  be  helpful  to  all  of  us  to  exchange  views  specifically
on  insights  into  the  causes  of these  developments.  The  floor  is  open
for  comments  from  anybody  who  wishes  to  add  to  our  state  of  knowledge.

MR.  BOEHNE.  This  is  Ed  Boehne,  Mr.  Chairman.  I don't  think

I can  add  any  more  insight  to  Don's  comments  in  terms  of  technical
aspects  of  what  might  be  going on.  But  I'd  like  to  suggest  that  at
least  part  of what  we're  seeing  in M2  is  a reflection of  the  state  of
the  economy.  Increasingly,  this  recovery  just  doesn't  have  a  good
feel  to  it.  The  reports that  I'm  getting  from the  business  community
across  a broad  front  suggest  that  the  recovery  isn't  going anywhere.
I had  a board  meeting last  Thursday  and  I must  say  that  the  sentiment
there  was  more  apprehensive  than  it  was  some  weeks  ago.  I think we're
seeing  some  of  the  inventory impact  here, where  we're  moving from

8/5/91

inventory  liquidation to  perhaps  a bit  of  accumulation,  and  that's
helping  some  in  manufacturing.  But  when  you  get  beyond manufacturing
into  retailing,  into  construction,  and  you  talk to  bankers  who  deal  a
lot  with the middle  market  where much  of  the  employment  is  in  the
economy,  it  just  isn't  ringing  the  way it  ought  to  as  far  as  having  a
healthy  economy.  If  you  look at  the  labor  numbers  that  we  got  on
Friday,  I think they  are  telling  us  something that  is  contributing to
this  story of  a  recovery that  doesn't  have  a good  feel  to  it.  And  in
the  context  of what  is  going  on  in  the  real  sector,  even  though there
is  ambiguity  and we  can't  reach definitive  conclusions  about  what  is
going  on  in  money,  I think the  money  supply  is  telling  us  something.
I, for  one,  think that  the  cost  of  additional  insurance  in  terms  of  a
modest  easing is  very  low;  and  I think  the  risks  are  growing  on  the
side  of  a much  weaker  economy than  any  of us  anticipated.  We  ought
not  to  overlook  that  in  our technical  analysis  of the money  supply.

MR.  FORRESTAL.  Mr.  Chairman,  this  is  Bob  Forrestal.  I want

to  pick up  on what  Ed  said.  We  certainly don't  see  anything  in  this
part  of the  country  that  can  help  explain  the  causation  of  the
weakness  in  the money  supply.  However,  I would  say  that  over  the  past
three  to  four  weeks  I've  had  many  telephone  calls  from business  people
around  the  District--and  these  are  people  who  for  the  most  part  have
business  not  only  here  in  the  Southeast  but  around  the  country.  And
the  question  they're  asking me  basically  is:  Where  are  these  numbers
coming  from that  they're  seeing?  They  are  reporting  that  they  just
don't  see  any  real  recovery  in  their  own  businesses  and  in  the
businesses  of  their  colleagues.  True,  they  say there  is  not  a
continuing deterioration,  but  things  are  very,  very  flat.  Businesses,
particularly  small  businesses,  are  reporting that  credit  continues  to
be  very  difficult  to  obtain.  Manufacturers  are  saying  that  orders  are
not  really  increasing  at  the  rate  that  they  had  expected.  Really,  I'm
repeating what  Ed's  contacts  have  been telling him:  that  the  recovery
seems  to  be  much  slower  than  expected--or  at  least  than  I expected.
Bankers  are  reporting  that  loan  demand  is  virtually  flat;  and  that,  of
course,  has  some  bearing  on the  performance  of the  money  supply as
well.  So,  I'm  not  sure  that  an  easing  of monetary  policy at  this  time
would  help  very  much  in  terms  of the  money  supply  because  it  seems  to
me  there  is  an  awful  lot  of  liquidity  out  there  anyway.  But  the
psychology,  at  least  from the  people  that  I've  talked to,  is  not  good.

MR.  PARRY.  Mr.  Chairman,  this  is  Bob  Parry.  I'd  like  to

admit  that  what  I've  been  hearing  from business  people  throughout  the
Twelfth  District  has  taken  on  a somewhat  more  gloomy tone.  The  one
thing that  I'm  not  sure  I fully  understand  is  whether this  is  an
unusual  reaction,  if  indeed we  are  at  the  trough  of  the  cycle.  I'm
not  sure  that  in  the  past  business  people  really  have been  very  good
forecasters  of  a turnaround.  The  other  point  I'd  make  is  that  as  far
as  the  banks  in  our  District  are  concerned,  particularly the  large
ones,  the  thing  that  continually is  cited  is  that,  as  I'm sure  you
know, they had  some  very  disappointing  results  as  far  as  their  profits
are  concerned  in  the  last  quarter.  And  many  of  them are talking  about
the  pressures  they've  received  from  the  regulatory  side;  and they
appear  to  be  sitting  on  their  hands  in terms  of  what  they think  is
likely  to  happen with  regard  to  business  over  the  next  three  to  six
months.  I don't  know to  what  extent  that  translates  into their
decreased  appetite  for  attracting  liabilities.  I know Don  indicated
that  there's  no  explanation by  region  or  size  of  banks,  but  I've  not
seen  them  quite  this  pessimistic  throughout  this  entire  cycle.

8/5/91

MR.  SYRON.  Mr.  Chairman,  this  is  Dick  Syron in  Boston.  I

just  want  to  support  what  Bob  Parry  said.  It's  critical  with  respect
to  the  banking  sector.  I think  as  one  might  expect,  at  least  in  this
part  of  the  country--

MR.  KOHN.  Dick,  could  you  speak up,  please?

MR.  SYRON.  I said  that  at  least  in  this  part  of  the  country

among the  bankers  there  is  still  a very  strong  fear  factor,  both  in
terms  of  growing pessimism  about  the  robustness  of  the  recovery  and
also  of concern  about  the  regulatory  side.  We  have  seen in  several
cases  differences  in  how  our  regulators  would  approach  individual
credits  compared  with the  Comptroller,  for  example.  All  of  this  is
contributing to  a sort  of  bunker mentality  on the  part  of  lenders,  who
hope  that  they  can  ride  it  out  with  enough  capital  until  things  return
to  normal.  I would  just  add  that  in  talking  to  a number  of  insurance
companies  in New England,  they  are  also  being very  cautious  on  new
commitments  and  are  taking  steps  to  assure  that  they  have  absolute
liquidity.  Now, that  may be  something that  has  more  [unintelligible]
as  an  explanation  of  what  is  happening  to  [money  growth].

MR.  ANGELL.  Wayne Angell.  I think  most  of you  know that  my

view  of  the  commodity  prices  has  been  that  they've  been  pretty  well
flat.  But  it  seems  to  me  that  that  really  hasn't  changed,  and
particularly  it  hasn't  changed  in  regard  to  our  experimental  index on
commodity prices  ex  food,  fiber,  and  energy.  And  I think taking  out
food,  fiber,  and  energy  helps  if  what  you're  trying  to  do  is  assess
the  impact  of  the  money  growth that  you're  getting on  an  auction  bid
process.  In  recent weeks  this  experimental  index has  really taken  a
nose  dive.  In  fact,  Alan, you  remember  last  week  I said  I didn't
understand  why  the  price  of gold  wasn't  falling  and  I guess  lo  and
behold  gold  prices  did  catch  on.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  They  did.

MR.  ANGELL.  I think that  is  important  for  two  reasons.  One,

as  most  of you  know,  I've  had  the  lowest  real  growth  rate  projection
for  the  economy  in  '91  and  '92  of  any member  among  the  presidents  or
the  Board.  So,  it's  not  that  I thought  we  had  a  strong  recovery
anyway,  because  ordinarily we  get  faster money  growth  and  we  also  get
some  upward movement  in  commodity prices  as  recoveries  take  place.
But  the  problem,  as  I see  it,  is  that  our  conventional  ability to
alter  the  opportunity  cost  of holding M2--that  power--has  slipped  away
from  us  a little  and  the  whole yield  curve  in  some  ways  is  competing.
Then  too,  all  the  legislative  talk and  the  swaying  in  regard  to
regulatory  issues  as  well  as  lender  willingness  to  lend  really  has
placed  us  in  a  position where  simply  lowering the  fed  funds  rate  may
not  be  effective  in  some  circumstances.  But  if  we  get  into  an
environment  in  which the  rate  of  inflation  does  seem  to  come  down--
and,  Mike  Prell,  even though  you  don't  see  it  at  this  point  I guess  I
do  see  very  sharply  lower  commodity  or  PPI  numbers  coming  in  the
future--it  seems  to  me  that  looking  at  it  in  that  context  we  ought  to
be  somewhat  open  to  making  certain  that  we  do  not  let  real  rates
increase  in  this  environment.  So,  I'm  in  a position  of  somewhat  more
openness  for  some  possible  action  in  the  period  ahead.

VICE  CHAIRMAN  CORRIGAN.  This  is  Jerry  Corrigan.  Let  me  just

make  a couple  of comments.  First  of  all,  I don't  think we  have

8/5/91

anything  at  all  to  add  in  terms  of what  Don  Kohn  said  about  the
diagnostics  of money  supply.  But  I do  think  the  point  that  Bob  Parry,
Ed  Boehne,  and  Bob  Forrestal  made  in  terms  of the  real  economy  is
relevant.  We  had  a directors'  discussion last  Thursday  in  which
there,  too,  the  comments  bearing  on  the  recovery  reflected  extremely
sour  attitudes  on  the  part  of  some,  if not  most,  of  our  directors,
although  I don't  think  that  is  likely to  provide  a full  explanation.
I just  wanted to make  a suggestion, which may not  be  very workable,
but  let  me  try  it  anyway.  The  suggestion is  this:  Would  it  be
possible  for  Don,  working  with a handful  of  people  around  the  Reserve
Banks,  to  try  to  design a quick  and  dirty  little  survey  that would  be
directed mainly  at  a sample of mid-size  and  large  banks  and  would be
targeted at  the  chief  financial  officer  of  a cross  section  of  banks
around  the  country  over  the  next  few days?  The  survey  would  press
pretty hard  in  terms  of  questions  like:  What  is  motivating their
pricing  strategy  on deposits?  What  do  they have  to  say  about  loan
demand?  What  do  they  have  to  say  about  credit  standards?  In  other
words,  in  what  would  still  be  anecdotal  rather  than perhaps  a
statistically  perfect  [way  staff would]  try  to  mount  a special  effort,
literally over  the  next  few days,  to  get  some  additional  insights  of
what  is  going  on there.  I don't  know whether  anybody has  anything
that  they--

MR.  KOHN.  President  Corrigan,  we  do  have  outstanding  right

now  [authority  for]  one  of  those  quarterly  loan  [officer]  surveys  that
we had  timed  so  that  we  would  have  the  information  for  the  [next]  FOMC
meeting.  The  survey will  be  asking about  credit  standards  and  loan
demand  and  that  sort  of thing.  What  it  is  not  asking about  is  the
deposits  side.  So,  I think  I could  take your  suggestion and  twist  it
a little  to  say  that  maybe we  ought  to  give  some  serious  thought  to
going  to  some  of  the  same  banks  and  some  different  banks  and  ask them
whether  they're  doing  something special  on  the  deposit  side,  with
their  [retail]  time  deposits  in  particular.  [We  could  ask]  what  is
happening there,  whether  they  have  any insights  into  the  behavior,  and
what  they're  doing  in  terms  of  their  marketing  and  pricing.  That
might  be  helpful.  We  could  put  it  together  with  the  loan  survey
information.

VICE  CHAIRMAN  CORRIGAN.  One  of  the  things  that  I'm not

certain  about--maybe you know the  answer--is  whether  we  really  are
sure  that  that  regular  survey  is  being  responded  to  by  senior  enough
people  in  the  organization that  we're  getting  enough of  the  strategic
view  of  what  is  going  on  as  opposed  to  a  [unintelligible]  view.

MR.  KOHN  Well,  we  can  double  check  that.  It  has  been

reasonably  consistent  with  the  anecdotal  evidence  that  we've  gotten
over  time.  Let  me  look  into  that  a little  further  in  terms  of  who  is
filling it  out  and whom they  check with  and  that  sort  of thing.
That's  a good  point.

VICE  CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.  Well,  it's  a complicated  issue  and
it's  hard  to  do  much  on  short  notice,  but  I have  a suspicion,  [given]
the  way these things  seem to  be  unfolding, that  it's  worth whatever
special  efforts  it  may  take to  get  further  insights  here.

MR. KOHN.  Okay.

MR.  HOSKINS.  Mr.  Chairman?  Lee  Hoskins.

8/5/91

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Yes,  Lee.

MR.  HOSKINS.  I think  concern  over  the  real  economy  is

somewhat misplaced  in  the  sense  that  our  policy  driver  in  terms  of  the
monetary  growth has  been  relatively  slow  and  we'd  expect  a relatively
modest  recovery.  I can't  forecast  next  quarter's  growth  or  even  this
quarter's  very  well.  The  real  concern that  I have  is  that  we  [not]
allow money  growth now to  slip  very  close  to  the  bottom  of  the  range
or  perhaps  outside  of  it.  Coming  off  a four-year  trend  [of  M2  growth]
of  around  4-1/4  percent,  I would  regard  it  as  somewhat  of  a monetary
shock if  it  came  in  at  2-1/2  percent  or  less.  I think  we  ought  to  be
concerned  about  where  the  economy  is  going to  bulge  in  the  future,  and
related  to  that  we  ought  to  be  continuing  to  produce  a monetary growth
rate  in  the  3 to  3-1/2  percent  range  if  we want  to  get  an  adequate
response in  the  real  economy  and  maintain  our  control  over  inflation.
So,  I would  lean  strongly  toward  looking  for  a way  to  get monetary
growth moving  again and  that  obviously would  require  us  to  give  a
little  operating  room to  the  federal  funds  [unintelligible].  We  don't
have  to  do  it  today;  but  certainly  if  these  numbers  look like  this
going  into  the  meeting,  I would  recommend  that  we  consider lowering
the  funds  rate  at  that  time.  My  last  point  is  simply  that  I think  it
would not  be  politically acceptable  to  be  outside  the  target  range,
particularly  in  this  environment.

MR.  BLACK.  Mr.  Chairman,  Bob  Black.  I would  be very  near
where  Lee  is  if it  were  not  that  I think Don's  explanation of  these
portfolio  shifts has  a lot  to  do  with  the  kind of  behavior  we've  had
in  M2.  For  example,  over the  last  six months,  if  you  exclude  small
time  deposits,  M2  has  grown  at  a rate  of  9.8  percent;  in the  last
three months  it  has  grown  at  a rate  of  7.2  percent.  Now, if  it
continues  as  weak as  it  looks  for  July  and August,  then  I think we're
going  to  have  to  do  something  to  try  to  get  it  moving  again.  I do
think  one  could  raise  a  legitimate  question  as  to whether  lowering  the
federal  funds  rate  really  would  do  that,  because  of  the  tendency  to
force  more  funds  from  small  time  deposits  into  the  mutual  bond  funds.
But,  anyway,  I will  be  very  concerned  if  [the  weakness]  continues  much
longer.  I'm  almost  concerned  at  this  point  that  it  has  gone  too  far.

As  far  as  the  real  economy  is  concerned,  I agree with  the

others  that  [the  recovery]  is  sort  of  lagging,  although  it  never  looks
very  good  near  the  bottom  of  a recession.  But  this  one,  it  seems  to
me,  is  showing  a little  more weakness  than  I can  remember  having  seen
in  similar  upturns  in  the  past.

MR. KEEHN.  Mr.  Chairman, this  is  Si  Keehn.  I don't  have

anything to  add  to  the  analysis  that  Don  Kohn  has  given  us  on  M2.  But
I think  conditions  in  the  Midwest  in  general  are  a bit  more  favorable
than  we  see  in  some  of the  national  numbers.  But  I very much  agree
with  Ed  Boehne's  analysis.  Our  [regional]  economy,  at  least  in  tone,
quite  closely  parallels  his.  At  our  June  board meeting  the  economists
were  really  quite  positive;  at  the  July  board meeting there  was  a
decided  shift  in tone;  it  was  much more  modest,  particularly as  it
related  to  some  of  the  middle market  companies  here  in  the  Midwest.
Also  of  concern  is  the  agricultural  situation,  which  started  out  as
being  a marvelous  growing  season  in March, April,  and  May.  It  has
turned  around  on us;  we  now have  quite  a serious  problem  on  our  hands,
given  the  very dry  conditions we  had  in  June  and  in  July  as  well.
That  is  really  having  a negative  impact  on  the  farm  industry.

8/5/91

Having  said  all  that,  we  expected  the  recovery  to  be  much

more modest  than  other  previous  recoveries,  and  we  seem to  be  getting
that.  But  I  do  think  at  this  point  that  the  risks  are  on  the  down
side.  We  ought  to  be  following  developments  very  carefully  and  it  may
be  appropriate  to  make  another  move.

MR.  ANGELL.  Si,  are  there  states  other  than  Iowa  that  are

being hit  [by  dry  conditions]?  Does  that  go  farther  east  and  north  in
your  District?

MR. KEEHN.  No,  in  fact,  Iowa  is  not  as  bad.  Indiana  is  very

serious  and  Illinois  is  serious,  though  not  quite  as  bad  as  Indiana.
I  don't  know,  frankly;  it's  a  bit  mixed;  some  parts  are  dry  and  other
parts  had  pretty  good  rain.  But  to  give  you  a  number:  For  June  and
July we  had  less  rainfall  in  those  two  months  than  in  any year  since
1936.  So,  it's  quite  a  low  level.

MR. KELLEY.  Mr.  Chairman, this  is  Mike Kelley.  I'm  thinking

down  two  tracks  that  are  very  closely  interrelated,  of  course.  First
of  all,  if  we  tried to  make  a  move  that  would  force  the  Ms  to  get
going  again,  it  seems  to  me  that  in  the  light  of  all  that  Don  has
found  so  far  we  might  have  to  make  a  very  large  move  indeed  in  order
to  accomplish that  directly and  overtly--one  that  might  make  us  all
pretty nervous  about  its  long-term  consequences.  If  we're  going to
get  the  Ms  moving,  I  think  it  has  to  happen  in  reverse  at  this  point;
it's  going  to  have  to  come  up  through  the  real  economy,  maybe  largely
through  the  inventory  cycle  and  other  things.  I  have  been  heretofore
fairly  comfortable  with waiting to  see  how the  real  economy  came  along
but  I  have  to  say  that,  in  light  of  the  reports  from the  presidents  on
this  call  this  morning,  I  have  a  lot  more  concern  about  that  than  I
did  before.

MR.  STERN.  This  is  Gary  Stern  in Minneapolis.  I  like  your
suggestion--I  guess  Don was  heading  down  this  path  anyway--to  try  to
put  some  extra  effort  into  understanding  what  is  going  on  with M2
between  now  and  the  meeting because,  as  some  of  the  members  said  very
early on,  I  don't  think  we  can  dismiss  that  altogether.  With  regard
to  the  real  economy,  I  am not  as  gloomy  as  many  of  my  colleagues
mainly  because  it  seems  to  me  we  were  expecting  a  moderate  recovery
and,  as  I  interpret  the  statistics  that  we've  seen,  that's  pretty much
what  is  underway.  Out  here  I  don't  detect  any new  signs  of
apprehension or  nervousness.  I  think the  economy  is  doing  reasonably
well,  all  things  considered,  and  people  seem to  be  fairly  comfortable
with  the  situation--not  that  it  couldn't  be  better.  But  I  sense  that
people  are  reasonably  comfortable  with the  path  we  are  on.

MR.  GUFFEY.  Mr.  Chairman, Roger  Guffey.  If  I  may,  I  will

follow up  on  Gary's  comments.  They  fairly well  characterize  what  we
find  here,  with  the  exception  of  some  drought  conditions  in  eastern
Kansas through  Missouri  that  I  think  is  a  part  of what  Si  Keehn has
already  detailed.  Otherwise,  we  don't  see  any  lack of  optimism here.
The  District  continues  to  go  along  not  at  a  rapid  clip,  but
nonetheless  in  a  positive  growth  pattern.  With  respect  to  the  money
numbers,  I  think  it's  obvious  to  everybody--at  least  it  is  to  me--that
up  until  the  month  of July  we  were  fairly well  on  track.  But  we've
had  one  month's  experience  and  a  projection  that  nobody  knows  how
[accurate]  it  may  or  may  not  be.  I  would  just  like  to  ask  Don  if  the
staff has  done  any  work  on  lending  by  other  than  banks  in  the  sense

8/5/91

-10-

that  banks  have  become  less  important  in  the  credit  extension  process.
Is  there  something  going  on  beyond the numbers  that we  look  at  and
that,  given  the monthly measures,  could  change  the view  a bit?

MR.  KOHN.  Well,  there  isn't  a whole  heck of  a lot.
Commercial  paper  did  pick up  a bit  in  July,  but  commercial  paper  and
bank  loans  combined were  still  pretty weak.  As  I noted,  long-term
debt  market  issuance was  off  and  as  I think  someone mentioned:  Who
knows what  is  going  to  happen with  private  placements  in  life
insurance  companies?  On  business  loans  at  finance  companies,  we  don't
have  anything  for June  or  July  there,  so  it's  not  clear  whether
something  new  is  going  on.  They  have been  on  a slower  growth track
this  year than  they were  in the  previous  couple  of  years.  We've
looked for  other  pieces  of  M2-type  assets  that  might  not  be  there.
One  thing we  looked  at,  for  example,  were  these  quasi-mutual  funds
offered  by  IBM  and  GM  and  AT&T.  And  although  AT&T started  its  fund
within the  last  few months,  it  has  very  little  money in  it  and  those
funds  don't  look  as  if they're  absorbing  a lot  of M2.  So,  I don't
think  I can  identify  some  source  of  credit  or  of  assets  other  than  the
ones  we've talked  about  that  is  filling the  gap  more  than  we  think.

MR. MULLINS.  This  is  David  Mullins.  We've  now had  a pretty
extended period  of  slow  growth  in  M2.  About  a month  ago  I was  still
pretty comfortable with  the story.  It  is  true that  M2  tends  to  jump
around  a bit;  indeed,  February and  March  are  the  only months we've  had
in  the  past  9 or  10  in  which M2  growth  has  been  above  the midpoint  [of
our  target  range]  and  it  was  above  the  upper  [limit  in  both months].
But  as  of  the  last  time  we  met  it  had  averaged  out  to  3.7  percent,
which was  below the midpoint.  I was  pretty  happy then  with the  story
that  the  liquid  components were  growing  so  in  some  sense  there  was  the
raw material of  monetary  growth there.  The  less  liquid  components
were  not  growing  because  loan demand was  weak, and  time  deposits  and
M3  wholesale  liabilities  are  issued  to  support  loan  growth  and  that
would  come  later.  Also,  the  yield  curve  had  steepened  in  the  spring
and  one  would  expect  some  shift  out  along the  yield  curve  for  a while.
After  that  ran  its  course  and  after  the  recovery took off,  we  should
see  M2  growth  fill  out.  What  concerns  me  most  is  the  rapid
deceleration  over  the  past  month  or  so,  and  it  doesn't  seem  to me  that
we  have  a good  story  on  this.  Loan  demand is  still  weak but  it's  not
a lot  weaker than  it  was  over  the  past  couple  of months  to  explain  the
deceleration.  The  yield  curve  hasn't  changed  much.  It  certainly
hasn't  steepened  much  over  the  last  few months,  although  it  is  true
that,  if we  put  deposit  rates--maybe M2's  own  rate--at  the  short  end
of the  yield  curve,  with the  lagged  fall  in  deposit  rates  there  may
have been  some  steepening.  And  it's  clear  that  there has  been  some
acceleration  in  the move  out  of M2  to  bond  funds,  although  it's
difficult  to  suggest  that  that  could  explain  it  all.  So,  I am
concerned  with  allowing M2  [unintelligible];  I was  more  comfortable
with  it  being  1 percent  below  the  midpoint  and  expecting  the  recovery.
But  it's  more  troubling  [now].

On  the  real  economy, when  we  have  a recovery which  is  not

fueled by  final  demand  but  rather by  this  inventory process,  I don't
know how much  growth we  can  expect.  We  are  four  months  into  the
recovery though,  if we  assume that  April was  the  trough,  so  we  should
be  seeing  some  [money  growth].  I would  be  concerned about  ignoring
the  intermediate  targeting  of  money  and moving  to targeting  the  real
economy  and  waiting  until  it  showed  definitive  signs.  We  know with

8/5/91

-11-

the  lags  involved that  if  we  go  back to  trying to  respond  only  to  the
real  economy we  run  a great  risk  of being  late  and  chasing  the  tail  of
the  economy and  creating  instability.  When you  look  around,  [none  of
the  aggregates]  is  growing:  not  money,  not  credit,  not  debt,  not  L.
On the  availability  of  credit  side,  I think we  will  find  the  insurance
company  credit  extension to  be  particularly  weak.  Finance  companies,
because  their  holdings  of  business  loans  grew so  rapidly  last  year,
seem  likely  to  me  to  have  run  out  of  steam  as  has  the  bond  and  stock
issuance  volume  that  we  saw  earlier on.  Much  of  this  deceleration has
coincided with  a flare-up  again  of concerns  within  the  financial
system.  It  seems  to  me  that  it  started  a month  or  so  ago  with  some  of
the  West  Coast  banks'  concerns  about  the  performance  of  the money
center banks  and  even  some  recent  concerns  [raised  by]  some  comments
of chairmen  on  the  Hill  and  the  like  about  [financial]  institutions.
I wonder  what  effect  the  growing  concern  about  insurance companies  is
having  not  only  on  credit  extension but  on  consumer  confidence.  It
seems  to me  that,  as  happened  last  fall,  the  financial  system itself
becomes  a bit  more  sluggish  as  a transmitter  of monetary  impetus;  and
the  relationship  between  interest  rates  and  growth  in  money  and  credit
may  have  changed.  The  other thing  I would  note  is  that  we  made  easing
moves in  every month  from October  through  April  and  that  put  a  pretty
steady  stream  of stimulus  in  the  pipeline,  which  is  pretty well
exhausted  by  now.  So,  I think  it's worth  assessing.  It  really  runs
to the  conceptual  integrity  of what  we're  doing  here:  whether  we're
trying to  keep  a stable  environment  of money  and  credit  growth  or
trying to  do  something  else.  It  is  true  that  if  the  long  end  moved
down  again, as  Bob  Black mentioned, that  might  steepen  the yield
curve.  Although  it  seems  to me  that  the  recent  response  of  rates  at
the  long  end  to  a number  of  events  has  suggested  that  the  long  end
might  be  well  behaved  and we  might  not  see  such  a steepening.

MR.  ANGELL.  Well,  in  fact,  I think  if  we're  going  to  get  the

recovery to  behave the  way  it  needs  to behave,  it's  essential  that
whatever moves  we  make  are  constructive  in  the  sense  of  being
associated  with  declining  long  rates.  And  now that  we  have  the  rates
down  from the  8.48-8.50  percent  level,  I think  our  patience has
contributed to  that.  If  it  is  then  seen  that  what we  are targeting  is
really  price  level  stability  and we  think we  are  somewhat  farther
along in  that,  then  it  seems  to  me  that  with  patience we  have  some
chance  of  getting  long bond  rates  down  below  8 percent, which  would
undoubtedly  prove to  be  very beneficial  in  the  housing  industry  and
provide  a very  desirable  and  steady  underlying  strength  for  a
recovery, which puts  more  units  of  goods  out  there.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Any  further  comments  by  anybody?

MR.  ANGELL.  Well,  it  does  seem to  me,  Mr.  Chairman,  that

sometimes we  might  want  the  moves we  make to  be  somewhat  subtle  but  at
some  stage  in  the  game  it  seems  to  me  we  might  want  to  make  a move
that  has  more  of  an  announcement  effect.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  That  sounds  like  a euphemism  for  the
discount  rate!  If  there  are  no  further  comments,  let's  bring this
meeting  to  a close  and we  will  convene  again  on  August  20th  at  the
FOMC meeting  here.  Good morning,  gentlemen.

END  OF  SESSION




==== GREENBOOK | 1991-07-03_fomc19910703gbpt119910626.txt ====

Prefatory Note 

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 

available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain. 

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 

gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.    

1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Strictly Confidential  (FR)  Class  II  FOMC

June  26,  1991

SUMMARY  AND  OUTLOOK

Prepared  for the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee
By  the  staff  of the  Board of  Governors  of  the Federal  Reserve  System

DOMESTIC  NONFINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS

Overview of  the  Staff Forecast

Evidence has accumulated  in recent  weeks that  the recession has  ended

and that  the  economy is  entering the  recovery phase of the business  cycle.

Real  GNP probably has  been  little changed in  the  second quarter, and we

expect  that  it  will rise  at  about  a 4-1/2 percent annual rate,  on average,

in the  second half  of the year.  The growth of  final  sales  is expected to

remain relatively subdued, but,  as  typically occurs in the early stages of

an expansion, a swing in inventory investment  is projected to provide

considerable  impetus to output  growth.  The  swing in  inventory investment

from substantial  liquidation to modest  accumulation accounts for  half  of the

increase projected  for real  GNP  in the  second half of  1991.

Economic activity is  projected to decelerate appreciably next  year.

The  rate of  increase  in real  final  sales  is  expected to change  little;  but

with  sales  and production having moved into  closer balance, inventory

accumulation will  provide a lessening boost to  output.  On net,  real GNP  is

expected to  increase  a little  less  than 3 percent  over the  course of  1992--

only moderately  above the  staff's estimate  of  the economy's  longer-run

growth potential.

The  reasons to expect  a relatively modest recovery in economic activity

are  numerous and familiar.  Consumers already have  stretched to maintain

their  spending  in the  face  of recent  declines  in real disposable  income;

thus  their  ability to provide impetus to  expansion is  doubtful.

Construction activity will be  held down  by the  overhang of vacant  space  and

by the  reluctance of lenders to  finance  new projects.  Under the limitations

I-2

set by the  new federal budget procedures,  fiscal policy will  remain

restrictive, and budgetary  corrections at  the  state  and local  levels will

impose  an additional drag on aggregate demand.  The  stimulus from monetary

policy probably has been less marked to date  than  in the periods  preceding

other upturns,  and we have  not built  in any  further easing, in contrast to

what has  occurred in the  initial phases of  some other  recoveries.  Moreover,

the dollar has strengthened further, reducing the  scope  for  a significant

lift  to domestic production from the external  sector in the quarters  ahead.

The moderate expansion in activity--and the resultant  sustained slack

in  labor and product markets--should contribute to  a significant  diminution

in the trend rate of  inflation.  Year-over-year  changes in  consumer prices

have  remained around 5 percent to  date;  but month-to-month increases have

been much  slower of  late,  and inflation  expectations appear to have  edged

down.  Increased unemployment evidently is  damping wage gains,  and the

appreciation of the  dollar is  restraining increases  in the prices  of

imported  goods and their domestic  substitutes.  All told, the  staff  expects

that  the  underlying trend of  price increases  will move  significantly below

4 percent  next  year.

Key Assumptions

The  policy assumptions underlying this  forecast are  essentially the

same  as  in the May  Greenbook.  With regard to monetary policy, we  continue

to  assume that the  federal  funds  rate  will  remain near  5-3/4  percent through

1992.  The  recent  rise  in bond yields  seems to  have  reflected in large

measure  an adjustment of market expectations of the  recovery to something

closer to  our forecast  than previously was  the case,  but there  remains a

risk that  strong  economic news will  produce some  further upward pressure  in

I-3

coming months.  However, in light  of the  underlying degree of restraint  on

aggregate demand  from the  sources  described above,  any significant  movement

in that  direction appears  unlikely to be  sustained for  long.  Indeed, we

have  projected that bond yields  in 1992 will be significantly below current

levels  as  the expansion moderates and disinflationary trends are  fully

recognized.  Credit  availability problems are  assumed to ease  gradually as

the  expansion progresses  and asset  quality improves.

As  in the May Greenbook, growth in M2 over  1991  is projected to be

about  in line  with the  growth of nominal GNP,  with the effects  of declines

in short-term interest rates since  the  fourth quarter  of 1990  about

offsetting the effect  of the continuing constriction in depository

intermediation;  this  would place the  aggregate  just in the upper  half  of its

range of 2-1/2 to  6-1/2  percent.  The growth  of M3  in 1991  is  projected at

around the midpoint of  its  1 to  5 percent range,  as  it  continues to be  held

down by modest  growth in bank  credit  and  sizable  RTC activity  for  the  year

as  a whole.  The  staff foresees M2  growing slightly more  rapidly  in  1992

than  in 1991;  with short-term interest rates  flat  and no  longer boosting

money demands, the  pace of M2 growth  is  still  somewhat  below the  faster

growth of nominal  income.  M3 will  likely maintain  its pace of  1991  as the

restructuring of the thrift  industry continues.

On the  fiscal  side, we  continue to assume that the FY1992  budget will

adhere closely to  the budget act  (OBRA) of  1990.  As  a result,  federal

fiscal  policy is  expected to  impose a moderate amount  of restraint  on

aggregate demand over the  next  year and a half--and beyond.  The  staff  has

reduced  its  estimate of the  unified budget  deficit in FY1991 to

$255  billion, largely because Desert Storm contributions  from other

I-4

countries have  come  in  somewhat faster  than we had anticipated and outlays

for  deposit insurance have  been a bit  lower.  The  speedup of Desert Storm

contributions  implies  an upward  revision to the projected deficit  for

FY1992;  but receipts  also have  been raised, and the  staff's FY1992 deficit

projection, at  $304  billion, is  little changed  from the May Greenbook.

Excluding Desert Storm and outlays  for deposit  insurance, the deficit  is

expected to be  $213 billion  in FY1991  and $182  billion in FY1992.

The dollar  has risen, on  net,  in  recent  weeks;  while  some  of the

increase  is  expected to unwind in the  near term, the projected path of the

dollar through  next  year is  now about  5 percent higher, on average, than in

the May forecast.  We have made only minor  changes to the  projections for

economic activity  in the  other G-10  countries:  Output is  expected to

strengthen, on average,  in the  second half of  this  year after its  recent

weakness and to expand at  a fairly brisk pace  in 1992.  Crude oil prices

have fallen  slightly  since the  time of the May Greenbook, resulting in  an

average posted price  in the  second quarter  for West  Texas  Intermediate  (WTI)

of  about  $19.50  per barrel;  we expect  the WTI price to  hold near that  level

through  next year.

The  Current Quarter

The  staff  still estimates that  real  GNP  has  been essentially unchanged

in the  second quarter, even though the incoming data on domestic production

and spending have been stronger than we anticipated in the May Greenbook.

The effects  of that  positive  surprise on GNP  have been  largely offset  in

this  forecast by  a sharp downward revision to the  expected growth of the

services component of net  exports.  This  revision is  the result  of a bulge

in the  profits  earned abroad by U.S oil companies  in the  fourth and  first

I-5

quarters  and the  anticipated return to more  normal profit  levels  in the

second quarter.  Gross domestic  product  (GDP) excludes  such transactions and

is  a measure of the  pace of domestic activity;  our  forecast  shows GDP  rising

about  1-1/2  percent  in  the current quarter--up  from a forecast of  no change

in the May Greenbook.

PROJECTIONS OF  NEAR-TERM OUTPUT
(Percent change  from preceding quarter;  annual  rate)

Real GNP 

(May Greenbook) 

Real GDP 

(May  Greenbook) 

1990 

Q4 

-1.6 
-1.6 

-2.1 
-2.1 

1991

Q2 

.2 
-.2 

1.6 
0 

Q3

4.8
4.1

4.7
4.1

Q1 

-2.8 
-2.8 

-3.0 
-2.9 

*The  first-quarter figures on this  and subsequent text
tables incorporate the  final NIPA estimates  released today.

Recent  labor market  indicators  point to a turnaround in the economy.

In May, aggregate  hours worked rebounded nearly 1 percent,  reflecting both a

small  increase  in private  employment--the  first  in nearly a year--and a

lengthening in  the average workweek.  Moreover, after  smoothing through the

gyrations  in the  latest  monthly figures,  the  unemployment rate  has been

essentially flat  since March.  Data  on unemployment  insurance  and  other

information suggest  a continuation of the  firmer  labor market conditions  in

June.

As  in the May Greenbook, the  pickup in motor vehicle production  from

its  first-quarter low  is  expected to have added about  1 percentage point to

second-quarter real GNP  growth.  In  the terms  of GNP  expenditure categories,

some of the  additional output is  reflected  in increased purchases of  cars

I-6

and  trucks, but  it  shows  up mainly as  a smaller decumulation  of dealer

inventories.  In contrast,  stocks  in  other sectors appear to  have run off

more rapidly  than in the  first  quarter, and the  total nonfarm inventory

liquidation likely was  somewhat greater than  in the  first quarter.

Meanwhile,  domestic  final  purchases  appear to have expanded moderately.

In particular, aggregate consumer  spending has  turned up and  is  expected to

have  risen about  3 percent  in the  second quarter.  Apart from the increase

in  sales  of motor vehicles,  the  reports  on retail  sales in April and May

point to  a firming in outlays  for other goods.  In addition, services  have

probably posted a large  rise this  quarter,  given the sizable gains  in these

outlays  in March and April and the likelihood that  the hot  weather  in May

pushed spending on electricity well above  its  seasonal norm.  Domestic

spending also  is expected to have been buoyed by a small increase in

expenditures on residential  structures,  after an  extended period of  steep

declines;  the  effects  of the  uptrend in  starts  and  sales  of single-family

homes are  anticipated to have  more than offset  the  continued weakness  in the

multifamily area.

Business  fixed investment  is  likely to  have  fallen a bit  further this

quarter.  For  equipment  spending,  nominal shipments  of office  and computing

equipment have  declined, on  net,  in recent months;  nonetheless,  given the

price  cuts  announced by  the major manufacturers, outlays  probably rose  in

real  terms.  Meanwhile,  spending  for industrial  and other equipment  has

remained weak.  In the nonresidential  structures  sector,  construction put-

in-place  reportedly  recorded a big gain  in April;  however,  in light  of the

weak  trends  in contracts  and permits, we  have  built  in  sizable declines over

the balance of the quarter.

I-7

Real  net  exports of  goods and services probably have declined

appreciably in the  second  quarter, reflecting the aforementioned movement  in

the  service  accounts.  Fragmentary data  suggest that  net  exports of goods

are  likely to  have been little  changed.

As  for  inflation, price  increases  in  recent months  have  been small,  and

for the  second quarter  as a whole,  we  expect  that the CPI will  have  risen

only about  2-1/4  percent  at  an annual  rate.  With prices  advancing

considerably  less  rapidly than wages,  real disposable income  is expected to

have turned up--the  first quarterly increase  since the  second quarter of

last year.

The Outlook

Real  GNP  growth is  projected to  approach  5 percent  at  an annual  rate in

the third quarter.  To be  sure, there  is  only  limited evidence at  this  stage

that  so sizable  a step-up  in production  is  in train.  Perhaps most promising

is  the  increase  in durable  goods  orders over April  and May;  this development

is  consistent with our  assessment that  inventory positions are  lean enough

to encourage firms  to begin bringing production into closer alignment  with

sales.  Indeed, we  anticipate that the pace of liquidation will slow

markedly this  summer  and that  firms will  begin to rebuild stocks  before

year-end.

PROJECTIONS  OF  REAL GNP  AND  FINAL SALES
(Percent change  from end of  preceding comparable period;  annual  rate)

Ql 

Q2 

1991 
Q3 

Q4 

1992

HI 

H2

Real  GNP 

-2.8 

.2  4.8 

4.1 

3.0 

2.5

Final  sales 

-2.9 

.9  2.7 

1.7 

2.2 

2.6

In the motor  vehicles  sector, where  stocks of new cars  have  dropped to

their  lowest  levels in many years, automakers  have scheduled a hefty

increase in assemblies  in the third quarter.  Although experience  suggests

that  discounting these plans  somewhat is  prudent, we  still expect output  of

motor vehicles  to  rise  enough to  add 1-1/2 percentage points  to  real GNP

growth  in the  third quarter.  We  have  also built  in a marked slowing in the

run-off  of nonauto inventories,  and this contributes  another  1-1/2  percent-

age  points  to  real  growth in the third quarter.

Real  GNP  growth is  expected remain at  4 percent  in  the  fourth quarter

but  to taper off thereafter, averaging about  2-3/4  percent  for  1992 as  a

whole.  This  upturn would be rather  subdued by historical standards, but  its

dynamics would be  similar in many respects to those  of  other postwar

expansions.  Inventory liquidation ceases  and  is  followed by a resumption of

stock  building;  this  process generates  jobs  and income  that  should support

growth in household  spending.  Lower interest  rates and continued income

gains  stimulate housing demand and homebuilding.  Business  investment

strengthens in  response to improving sales trends.

The  forecast continues to  anticipate an  appreciable  slowing in wage  and

price  inflation over the next year and a half.  Rising productivity should

I-9

account for  a good part  of the increased output  in the near term, and the

unemployment  rate is  likely to  fall  only to the vicinity of  6-1/2  percent by

the end of  1991.  With real output  growing only somewhat  faster  than its

longer-run potential in  1992,  the  jobless  rate  should remain above 6-1/4

percent.  As  a result  of this  slack and further reductions  in inflation

expectations, increases in hourly  compensation are expected to slow

steadily.  Consumer price  inflation is anticipated to  hover around 4 percent

in the second half  of 1991  and to  slow  over the course of  1992, to about

3-1/2  percent  in the  second half.

PROJECTIONS OF INFLATION
(Percent change  from end of preceding comparable  period;  annual rate)

Q1 

Q2 

1991 
Q3 

1992

Q4 

H1 

H2

Consumer price index 

3.6 

2.2 

4.0 

3.8 

3.9 

3.5

CPI  ex.  food and

energy 

6.8 

3.2 

4.1 

4.1 

4.0 

3.5

ECI  hourly  compensation 

4.6 

4.2 

3.9 

3.8 

3.7 

3.6

Civilian unemployment
rate  (percent) 

*Final quarter  of period.

6.5 

6.8 

6.8 

6.6 

6.4*  6.3*

Consumer  spending and income.  Real  consumer expenditures are expected

to  rise  less  than 2-1/2 percent  at  an annual rate  in the  second half of  1991

and to pick  up only a little next year.  The projection of  a mild increase

in consumption largely  reflects our assumption that  growth  in real

disposable income  will be quite moderate.  The  saving rate  has fallen  since

mid-1990,  and,  even if  it  were to be  revised upward at  some  point--as has

happened frequently in the past--it probably would still be low by

I-10

historical  standards.  Barring a sharp  rise  in household wealth--not

anticipated in this  forecast--a  significant  decline  in the  saving rate  seems

unlikely.

Among the components of PCE,  purchases  of  cars  and light  trucks  are

expected to increase  somewhat  further over the next  several quarters.  In

general,  however, we do not expect  the surge  in outlays for  durables that

occurred  in some  of the  previous cyclical upturns;  this expectation seems

reasonable  in light  of our income forecast and of the very high level of

durables  outlays during much of the  1980s, but  it may constitute something

of  an upside  risk  to the  forecast.

Business  fixed investment.  Real BFI  is  expected to rise moderately

over the  the  second half of  1991.  Spending on equipment is  expected to be

paced  by relatively  robust real  outlays  for  computers  and by  increased

business  purchases of motor vehicles.  Also, given the recent  firming in

orders  for  industrial and other equipment,  actual outlays are  expected to

improve  by late  1991.  Construction activity, meanwhile, is anticipated to

stay weak.

In  1992,  we project  real BFI  to increase about  6 percent.  Equipment

outlays are  expected to rise  8-1/2  percent, as  the continued expansion of

aggregate output  and improved cash  flow prompt  a broad advance  in spending.

Meanwhile, the  decline in structures  investment  is  expected to  slow somewhat

over the  course of the year.  Although a number of major industries  are

facing serious excess  capacity,  rising activity and capacity  utilization

likely will  stimulate additional plant  construction in some  sectors.

Furthermore, contracts  for nonoffice  commercial  space have already  shown

signs  of firming,  and absorption in some  locales  may be  sufficient  by next

I-11

year to  stem the  decline  in this  sector.  Construction of  office buildings

and hotels,  however, is  likely to  remain depressed because of  continued high

vacancy rates,  low rents, and  reluctant  lenders  (many of whom have  become

reluctant  owners  recently).

Housing.  The projection for  housing remains relatively lackluster,

with  starts  expected to  increase only to about  1.2 million units  by the end

of  1992--the  same as the  figure  for  1990 as a whole.  Virtually all of the

improvement  is  in the  single-family  sector.  Demand for new homes is

expected to respond gradually to  rising employment  and incomes and, in  1992,

to declining mortgage  interest rates.  In addition, declines  in house prices

over the past  couple of years  have made  homes much more  affordable in  some

locales;  the perception that prices  are weak would, of course,  make houses

an unattractive  investment, but the  staff  is  expecting that the  recent

indications of  a bottoming out  in prices  are presaging a period of moderate

price  increases.  The  outlook for multifamily  construction remains  poor:

The  surplus  of  unoccupied units  should diminish  somewhat  over the projection

period, but vacancy rates  will remain high by historical standards,  in  part

because  of the  relatively slow growth  in the population of young adults.

Also,  lenders are  expected to  remain cautious in funding new projects.

Government  sector.  Federal spending on goods and  services is  expected

to trend downward at  an appreciable pace after the  second quarter.  The  Gulf

war temporarily boosted defense purchases, but  the  cutbacks in

appropriations over the past  few years and the nlanned  force  reductions

point to  a sizable decline  in procurement  and personnel outlays  from here

on.  Nondefense purchases are expected to rise  faster than GNP  because of

increases in  spending on space  exploration, law enforcement,  and health

I-12

research.  Overall, however,  real  purchases  are  projected to  fall  at  a

4 percent  annual  rate between mid-1991  and the end of  1992.

State  and local  governments also  are  taking actions to cope  with

budgetary problems stemming from structural  imbalances  as  well  as temporary

difficulties brought on by the  recession.  In our  forecast,  real  purchases

of  goods and services are  held essentially flat  over the next  couple of

quarters  and post  only a small  increase next  year, despite  continued

strong pressures for increases  in  public  services and for infrastructure

improvements;  this  trajectory for purchases would be unusually weak for a

cyclical upturn.  Also, many governments  are raising taxes, and we  have

built  in some  further increases  in income  and  sales taxes next  year.  These

actions,  in combination with the  recovery in business activity, are expected

to  bring  the  sector's budget--as measured by the NIPA operating and capital

accounts  (excluding social  insurance)--into balance by late 1992.

Net exports.  The  external  sector now  is  expected to impart  a small

damping influence  on the  economic expansion over the  next  six quarters.

Nonagricultural merchandise exports  are expected to be fairly robust over

this  period, given the pickup  in activity abroad.  However, non-oil

merchandise  imports, which probably have  fallen, on net,  over the  first  half

of  1991,  are expected to more than retrace  these declines during the second

half of this  year and to continue to rise  briskly in 1992 as the  U.S.

business  expansion takes  hold and import  price  increases  remain small.  A

more detailed discussion of these projections  is presented in  the

International Developments  section.

Labor  costs and prices.  Hourly compensation  (as measured by the

employment  cost  index) has  decelerated noticeably to a 4-1/4 percent  annual

I-13

rate  in recent  quarters  and is  expected to  edge below  4 percent  in the

second  half of  1991.  In  1992,  with hiring more widespread and unemployment

drifting down, the  downward pressure on wages  from labor market  slack  is

expected to  diminish a bit.  With inflation expectations  declining, the  ECI

is  still  anticipated to  slow appreciably  further--to  just  over  3-1/2  percent

in the  second half.

Consumer price  inflation is  expected to  slow  significantly over the

forecast  period.  Food prices  are projected to  rise  at  about the overall

rate of inflation, barring major  demand or  supply shocks, and retail  energy

prices  are  expected to rise  only about  3 percent per year.  Excluding food

and energy,  CPI  inflation is  forecast to run about  4 percent over the  rest

of  1991  and to move down to  3-1/2  percent  in the  second half  of 1992.  This

improvement  in underlying price performance  reflects the  lingering slack  in

the labor market  and  in  industrial  capacity utilization, as well as

continued intense  competition from foreign producers.  Pressures on prices

are  also expected to be  damped to  some extent  by above-trend growth  in  labor

productivity.  Output  per hour  is  expected to rise  at  more than a 3 percent

rate,  on average,  in the  second half of  1991.  And although productivity

gains are  expected to slow  in  1992,  the trend in unit  labor  costs  should

continue to  improve,  so that  firms  can  raise  their profit margins  with only

moderate  increases  in prices.

A Note  on the Forecast  in  1987 Prices

As  discussed in Part  II of the Greenbook,  the Commerce Department  will

shift  the GNP data  to a 1987 basis when  it  releases the benchmark revisions

to the National  Income  and Product Accounts next  fall.  Current BEA

estimates  indicate a slightly larger drop in real  GNP,  on net,  over the

I-14

fourth quarter of  1990 and the first  quarter of  1991, measured in 1987

prices.  The  implications  for the  seven quarters of  the  forecast,  however,

appear to be  small because growth is  expected to be relatively well-balanced

across  sectors.  Thus,  although  revisions  could complicate  the picture,  the

rebasing of  the data should not  itself  significantly distort  comparisons of

the Committee's  July Humphrey-Hawkins projections with the  actual outcome to

be  discussed next  February.

Details  of the  staff projection are shown on the green sheets,  pages

I-15  to I-21.  The  1991:Q1  figures  shown on these tables do not incorporate

the  revised NIPA data  released today.  To  assist the  Committee's Humphrey-

Hawkins discussions, the  table below shows  four-quarter projections that

incorporate today's NIPA data.  For the most part,  the effects  of the

revisions  are microscopic  and disappear in rounding.

GNP AND  RELATED  ITEMS
(Percent change;  fourth  quarter to fourth quarter)

Nominal GNP 

Real GNP  (1982 dollars) 

Real  GNP  (1987 dollars) 

Implicit deflator  (1982 dollars) 

Fixed weight  GNP price  index 

(1982 dollars)

1991 

5.3 

1.5 

1.6 

3.7 

3.9 

1992

6.1

2.8

2.7

3.2

3.5

CONFIDENTIAL  - FR
CLASS  II  FOMC 

'-----~I---'------- 

~--------~----------- 

-

-

-

-

-

-

I-15

STAFF  GNP  PROJECTIONS

-

-

-

-
-
Percent  changes,  annual  rate

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

June  26,  1991

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Nominal  GNP 

Real  GNP 

GSP  fixed-weight 
price  index 

Consumer 

Price  Index  <1> 

Unemployment
rate
(percent)

-- -- --  - ----- 

5/8/91 
..  ..  . - --  - - - - - -
--- ---- 
. . . . .

6/26/91 

Annual  changes:

1988 
1989 
1990 
1991 
1992 

<2> 
<2> 
<2> 

7.9
6.7
5.1
3.7
6.4

Quarterly changes:

1989 

01  <2> 
02  <2> 
Q3  <2> 
Q4  <2> 

7.5
5.8
5.1
3.9

'90 

1991 

Q1  <2>
02  <2>
Q3  <2>
Q4  <2>

Q1  <2>
Q2
Q3
04

1992 

01
Q2
Q3
Q4

Two-quarter  changes:  <3>

1989 

02 <2> 
Q4 <2> 

6.7 
4.5 

6.7
4.5

1990 

Q2 <2> 
Q4 <2> 

5.9
3.1

1991 

1992 

Q2 
04 

02 
04 

2.8
7.4

6.6
5.3

Four-quarter  changes:  <4>

1988 
1989 
"990 
91 
12 

Q4  <2> 
Q4  <2> 
Q4  <2> 
Q4 
Q4 

7.8
5.6
4.5
5.1
5.9

5/8/91 
.
-.. 

--  - - --  -
. . . . .

6/26/91 

---------  -

---  --  -. 

---  -- - --  ---  -- - --  ---  -- - --- 

5/8/91 
..  . ..  . .

6/26/91 

5/8/91 
.

6/26/91 

5/8/91 
_-- 

--...---...-

6/26/91
. . . .. . .-
---... 

5.3 
5.3 
5.6 
5.9 

6.5 
6.8 
6.8 
6.6 

6.4 
6.3 
6.3 
6.2 

.0 
.0 

.0 
.6 

.9 

-. 2 

-. 3 
-. 1 

5.3
5.3
5.6
5.9

6.5
6,8
6.8
6.6

6.5
6.4
6.4
6.3

.0
.0

.0
.6

.9
-. 2

-. 2
-. 1

4.7 
3.4 

5.3 
4.4 

4.7
3.4

5.3
4.4

5.6 
6.9 

3.1 
3.8 

3.7 
3.1 

5.6
6.9

2.9
3.9

3.8
3.5

1.7
.4
1.4

-1.6

-2.6

.2
4.8
4.1

3.3
2.7
2.6
2.5

1.1
-.1

-1.2
4.4

3.0
2.5

1.7

.4

1.4
-1.6

-2.8
-. 2
4.1
4.0

3.5
3.1
2.8
2.6

1.1 
-. 1 

-1.5
4.0

3.3
2.7

3.5
1.8
.5
1.2
3.0

<1> For all urban  consumers.
<2> Actual.
<3> Percent change from two  quarters  earlier.
<4> Percent  change  from  four  quarters  earlier.

I-16

CONFIDENTIAL  - FR 
CLASS  II  FOMC 

GROSS  NATIONAL  PRODUCT  AND  RELATED  ITEMS

(Seasonally  adjusted;  annual  rate)

June 26,  1991

Projection

Units 

1984 

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992

EXPENDITURES
------------ 
Nominal GNP 
Real GNP 

Real GNP 
Gross  domestic  purchases 

Final sales 
Private dom. final purchases 

Personal  consumption  expend. 

Durables 
Nondurables  .
Services 

Business fixed  investment 

Producers' durable equipment. 
Nonresidential  structures 

Residential structures 

Exports 
Imports 

Government  purchases 

Federal 

Defense 

State  and local 

I

I 
Billions  of  $ 
3772.2  4014.9  4231.6  4515.6  4873.7  5200.8  5465.1  5677.0  6052.4
JBillions of  8256  3501.4  3618.7  3717.9  3845.3  4016.9  4117.7  4157.3  4163.1  4296.0
I 
I
iPercent  change*l 
I 

5.0  .
4.2 

.5.1 
6.4 

3.5 
2.6 

3.6 
4.3 

1.9 
2.1 

.5 
-.5 

1.8 
1.1 

1.6 
1.5 

2.8
3.0

I 

I 

I 

4.7 
5.6 

4.1 
10.8 
2.3 
3.5 

13.8 
14.9 
11.8 
.1 

5.9 
17.4 

7.9 
13.0 
6.5 
4.4 

4.6 
4.6 

4.6 
7.0 
3.3 
5.0 

3.7 
4.6 
1.9 
5.8 

-2.4 
4.5 

8.6 
13.3 
7.1 
4.9 

2.7 
2.9 

3.8 
11.5 
2.9 
2.1 

-5.5 
.4 
-17.7 
11.6 

3.1 
2.5 

2.3 
-1.2 
1.3 
4.1 

6.1 
8.2 
.8 
-2.2 

4.5 
4.0 

4.1 
9.3 
2.4 
3.7 

5.3 
8.2 
-2.7 
-.1 

1.7 
1.2 

1.2 
-1.4 
.6 
2.4 

4.5 
5.4 
1.7 
-7.1 

10.6 
10.0 

19.8 
10.4 

14.0 
5.5 

10.1 
4.5 

3.1 
.5 
6.0 
5.2 

2.0 
1.5 
4.0 
2.3 

1.1 
-1.6 
-1.8 
3.1 

.3 
-2.8 
-2.1 
2.6 

1.6 
-.1 

.1 
-1.8 
-2.4 
2.5 

2.2 
4.6 
-5.4 
-10.2 

5.8 
-.5 

3.8 
5.2 
4.0 
2.7 

.6 
.7 

1.7 
.9 
.2 
2.9 

-3.7 
-2.7 
-7.2 
-.8 

2.7 
1.9 

-.5 
-.7 
-2.8 
-. 3 

2.4
3.5

2.8
4.1
2.0
2.8

5.9
8.6
-4.0
8.8

6.0
7.6

-1.0
-4.5
-7.7
1.6

I 

| 

62.3 
57.8 

22.8 
28.7 
-84.0  -104.3  -129.7  -118.5 

9.1 
13.4 

5.6 
8.0 

23.6 
26.5 
-75.9 

23.8 
18.7 
-54.1 

-3.6 
-5.1 
-33.8 

-12.2 
-14.3 
-1.2 

30.4
28.1
-10.7

8.6 

6.6 

4.6 

8.2 

7.8 

5.6 

4.5 

5.3 

6.1

Housing starts 
Auto  sales 
Domestic 
Foreign 

1
1 

I 
Millions 
Millions 
IMillions 
IMillions  .

1.77 
10.35 
7.92 
2.43 

1.74 
11.03 
8.22 
2.82 

1.81 
11.44 
8.22 
3.22 

1.62 
10.23 
7.06 
3.18 

1.49 
10,65 
7,55 
3.10 

99.5 
7.0 

102.2 
6.2 

105.5 
5.5 

108.4 
5.3 

110.3 
5.5 

109.2 
6.7 

110.9
6.4

94.5 
7.5 

4.7 
80.4 

97.5 
7.2 

1.9 
79.5 

1.4 
79.0 

6.5 
81.4 

4.5 
83.9 

1.1 
83.9 

1.38 
9.89 
7.06 
2.83 

.3 
82.3 

.6 
78.1 

1.19 
9.53 
6.92 
2.61 

1.01 
8.69 
6.31 
2.38 

4.3
79.3

1.15
9.43
6.85
2.58

6.8
2.8
4.0

4.1
5.7

8.4 
4.3. 
6.1 

7.4 
7.1 

6.6 
2.7 
4.4 

9.2 
7.0 

5.8 
3.3 
4.1 

8.1 
2.7 
2.9 

-5.6 
6.7 

17.4 
6.8 

7.6 
4.3 
4.2 

8.2 
6.9 

6.8 
1.7 
4.6 

-16.8 
6.0 

5.6 
-.4 
4.6 

-.7 
5.5 

4.6 
1.2 
3.9 

16.4 
5.4 

-169.6  -196.9  -206.9  -158.2  -141.7  -134.3  -166.0  -144.5  -149.7
70.0
-6.1

41.0 
-31.5 

35.4 
-34.0 

46.5 
-16.4 

46.4 
-19.9 

51.0 
-8.3 

64.6 
19.8 

65.1 
13.8 

62.8 
5.6 

3.4 
3.7 
3.3 
4.2 
5.0 

2.9 
3.3 
3.4 
3.5 
4.3 

2.6 
2.6 
2.5 
1.3 
3.9 

3.0 
3.8 
4.5 
4.5 
4.3 

4.1 
4.6 
4.3 
4.3 
4.5 

3.7 
4.0 
4.3 
4.6 
4.3 

4.0 
4.8 
5.3 
6.3 
5.3 

3.7 
3.9 
3.2 
3.4 
4.6 

3.2
3.5
3.4
3.7
3.7

4.9 

3.9 

3.2 

3.3 

4.8 

4.8 

4.6 

4.1 

3.7

Nominal GNP 

Nonfarm 
Net exports 

Change  in  business  inventories  IBillions  of  82$5 
IBillions of  82$1 
Billions of  82$1 
1
1 
IPercent change*l 
1 
I
I
I
IMillions 
IPercent 

EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION 
--------------------- 
Nonfarm payroll employment 
Unemployment rate 

Industrial  production  index 
Capacity utilization rate-mfg,  |Percent 

Percent change*1 

INCOME AND SAVING
- - - - -
- - - - -
Nominal  personal  income 
Real  disposable  income 
Personal  saving  rate 

iPercent  change*l 
)Percent change*l 
1 
JPercent 
I
I 
Corp. profits  with  IVA & CCAdj  JPercent  change*l 

Profit  share  of  GNP 1Percent 

Federal govt.  surplus/deficit 
State  and local  govt.  surplus 
Exc. social  insurance funds 

PRICES  AND COSTS
---------------
GNP  implicit deflator 
GNP  fixed-weight price  index 

Cons.  4 fixed invest,  prices 

CPI 

Exc. food  and energy 

IBillions  of  $ 
I 

1 

I 
I
1Percent  change*l 
I 
I 
I 

ECI hourly  compensation 

Nonfarm  business  sector

Output  per hour 
Compensation  per  hour 
Unit  labor  costs 

I 

1.5 
4.1 
2.6 

1.6 
4.6 
3.0 

1.3 
4.9 
3.6 

2.3 
3.7 
1.4 

1.8 
4.2 
2.3 

-1.6 
2.2 
3.9 

-.3 
4.4 
4.7 

2.6 
4.2 
1.5 

1.6
3.8
2.2

*  Percent changes  are  from fourth quarter to  fourth  quarter.

CONFIDENTIAL - FR
CLASS  II FOMC

GROSS  NATIONAL  PRODUCT  AND  RELATED  ITEMS
(Seasonally adjusted;  annual  rate)

June 26, 1991

I-17

1 

Units 

I 
( 

-nits 
Q 
01 

1988 

Q2 
Q2 

Q3 
03 

Q4 

-4 Q1 
01 

02 

-2 Q3 
Q3 

04 

1989 

1990

-4 Q1 
01 

-2
02

EXPENDITURES

Nominal GNP 
Real GNP 

Billions of $ 
4735.8  4831.4  4917.9  5009.8  5101.3  5174.0  5238.6  5289.3  5375.4  5443.3
IBillions of  82$1  3970.2  4005.8  4032.1  4059.3  4095.7  4112.2  4129.7  4133.2  4150.6  4155.1

Real GNP 
Gross  domestic purchases 

(Percent Change 

Final sales 
Private dom. final  purchases 

Personal  consumption expend. 

Durables 
Nondurables 
Services 

Business  fixed  investment 

Producers'  durable  equipment 
Nonresidential  structures 

Residential  structures 

Exports 
Imports 

Government  purchases 

Federal 

Defense 

State  and  local 

I' 
I 
I 

I 
I 

i 

5.1 
1.6 

7.1 
6.7 

6.9 
21.8 
2.6 
5.6 

11.4 
20.3 
-10.5 
-6.8 

3.6 
3.0 

5.1 
4.8 

2.7 
3.7 
2.0 
2.9 

15.7 
17.9 
9.9 
6.8 

31.7 
. 5 

4.4 
.3 

2.7 
3.2 

1.1 
3.0 

3.5 
-1.1 
4.1 
4.5 

1.6 
2.2 
-.3 
.4 

5.4 
9.2 

1 

-9,2 
-24.1 
-5.6 
3.9 

3.3 
3.5 

-1.4 
3.2 

-3.8 
-10.4 
-5.0 
1.2 

2.7 
2.4 

4.6 
1.7 

3.5 
14.1 
1.2 
1.9 

-6.3 
-5.5 
-8.7 
-.4 

16.7 
12.4 

15.7 
33.6 
4.9 
4.3 

3.6 
1.2 

2.4 
.8 

-.3 
-6.0 
.6 
.9 

8.9 
9.5 
7.5 
-3.6 

15.8 
-2.3 

-3.3 
-9.1 
-10.9 
1.3 

1.6 
1.8 

1.7 
1.4 

1.3 
5.6 
-1.7 
2.1 

6.9 
12.2 
-8.2 
-11.3 

12.4 
12.8 

4.0 
7.0 
3.2 
1.8 

1.7 
2.8 

.3 
-1.2 

1.8 
4.1 

4.6 
9.6 
3.9 
3.5 

6.3 
6.1 
7.1 
-7.6 

-.5 
6.4 

-2.4 
-7.9 
7.2 
1.8 

.9 
-1.5 

-.8 
-13.0 
-.2 
3.1 

-3.8 
-5.2 

1.3 
-5.5 

13.5 
1.7 

3.0 
-.4 

-7.0 
5.6 

1.7 
.5 

3.8 
2.4 

1.1 
14.4 
-3.2 
.1 

5.0 
5.7 
2.3 
15.1 

11.2 
2.5 

2.9 
.4 
-1.7 
4.8 

.4
1.3

-.7
-1.2

.2
-9.5
-1.9
5.1

-4.7
-3.3
-9.0
-11.2

-5.0
.7

6.2
16.4
3.3
-. 6

Change  in business  inventories  IBillions of  82$1 
31.0 
[Billions of  825$ 
28,8 
(Billions of  82$1  -77.3 

Nonfarm 
Net  exports 

16.9 
19.2 
-72.2 

32.6 
31.0 
-78.5 

14.0 
27.2 
-75.7 

26.1 
16.4 
-51.1 

25.5 
21.5 
-53.3 

24.6 
21.7 
-64.1 

18.9 
15.3 
-47.9 

-2.2 
-8.2 
-35.4 

9.5
11.6
-44.6

Nominal GNP 

IPercent  change 

7.8 

8.3 

7.4 

7.7 

7.5 

5.8 

5.1 

3.9 

6,7 

5.1

EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION
--------- ----------------
Nonfarm payroll  employment 
Unemployment rate 

I
IMillions 
(Percent* 

104.3 
57 

105.1 
5.5 

105.9 
5.5 

106.8 
5.3 

107,6 
5.2 

108.1 
5.3 

108.5 
5.3 

109.0 
5.3 

109.7 
5.3 

110.2
5.3

Industrial  production  index 
Capacity utilization rate-mfg.  (Percent* 

IPercent change  I 
1 

5.0 
83.1 

4.2 
83.6 

5.9 
84.3 

2.8 
84.6 

2.7 
84.7 

2.8 
84.5 

-1.2 
83.7 

.2 
82.9 

.6 
82.7 

Housing  starts 
Auto sales 
Domestic 
Foreign 

INCOME AND SAVING

IMillions 
(Millions 
(Millions 
IMillions 

1.43 
1 
1  10.91 
7.60 
3.30 

1.49 
10.67 
7.50 
3.17 

1.48 
10.15 
7.20 
2.95 

1.55 
10.88 
7.89 
2.99 

1.46 
10.03 
7.08 
2.95 

1.36 
10.26 
7.26 
3.00 

1.35 
10.20 
7.36 
2.84 

1.35 
9.09 
6.56 
2.53 

1.43 
10.01 
7.11 
2.90 

Nominal  personal  income 
Real disposable  income 
Personal  saving  rate 

]Percent  change 
IPercent change 
IPercent* 

Corp. profits with  IVA & CCAdj  IPercent  change 

Profit  share  of GNP 

IPercent* 

6.4 
7.3 
4.0 

9.5 
7.0 

8.6 
2.7 
4.1 

6.6 
7.0 

8.1 
4.9 
4.5 

7.4 
2,3 
4.1 

11.6 
4.2 
5.2 

5.8 
-1.2 
4.6 

3.7 
2.7 
4.1 

6.2 
1.2 
4.6 

-1.7 
6.8 

19.5 
7.0 

-23.2 
6.4 

-7.0 
6.2 

-17.1 
5.9 

-19.1 
5.5 

8.6 
2.5 
4.9 

8.4 
5.5 

4.2
82.8

1.20
9.53
6.78
2.75

5.3
.3
5.0

13.9
5.6

Federal  govt.  surplus/deficit 
State  and local  govt.  surplus 
Exc. social  insurance funds 

(Billions of  $ 
I 
I 

-153.7  -136.9  -120.1  -156.3  -132.6  -122.7  -131.7  -150.1  -168.3  -166.0
38.6
-30.4

38.1 
-30.2 

50.3 
-15.6 

38.5 
-29.1 

48.1 
-18.7 

48.9 
-16.2 

45.2 
-19.0 

46.8 
-17.0 

48.3 
-14.1 

45.5 
-15.6 

PRICES  AND COSTS

GNP  implicit deflator
GNP fixed-weight price  index

Cons.  & fixed invest, prices

CPI

Exc. food and energy

"CI hourly compensation*

3nfarm  business  sector

Output  per hour
Compensation  per hour
Unit  labor  costs

*  Not  at  an annual  rate.
**  Private  industry workers

IPercent  change  1 

2.7 
3.9 
2.9 
3.2 
4.1 

4.4
4.7
4.9
4.5
4.7

4.7 
4.4 
5.0 
4.4 
4.6 

3.9
4.9
5.0
5.1
4.9

3.9 
4.6 
5.3 
6.0 
4.2 

3.2 
3.1 
2.3 
3.3 
3.8 

3.8 
3.8 
4.6 
3.9 
4.7 

4.8 
6.6 
6.8 
7.5 
5.9 

4.7
3.9
2.6
3.8
4.9

5.2 

5.2

5.1 

-

4.2

4.9 

5.3 

4.4 

5.6 

5.1

4.7 
2.4 
-2.2 

-. 5
5.1
5.7

.2 
3.8 
3.6 

-2.7 
3.3 
6.1 

-.3 
1.7 
2.0 

-1.0 
1.6 
2,6 

-2.5 
2.3 
5.0 

-1.3 
3.9 
5.3 

.3
5.0
4.7

CONFIDENTIAL  - FR
CLASS  II  FOMC

GROSS NATIONAL  PRODUCT  AND  RELATED  ITEMS

(Seasonally  adjusted;  annual  rate)

June 26,  1991

I-18

1990 
--  - - - - -
Q4 
03 

----------- 

Projection

--------------- 

1991 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

--------------------------
1992

- - - - - - - - - - - - -

--- 

01 

Q2 

03 

Q4 

01 

02 

03 

04

I nit*s 

EXPENDITURES

Nominal  GOP
Real  On

IBillions of $ 
SIillions  of 82$ 

5514.6 
4170.0  4153.4  4126.5  4128.9  4177.3  4219.7  4254.0  4282.9  4310.4 

5527.3  5561.7  5606.6  5717.2  5822.3  5925.1  6011.9  6095.1  6177.6
4336.9

Real  GNP
Gross  doestic  purchases

Percent Change 

1.4 
1.6 

-1.6 
-5.1 

-2.6 
-4.0 

.2 
1.6 

4.8 
4.1 

Final  sales
Private  dom.  final  purchasea

Personal  consumption  expend.

I 

Durables
Nondurables
Services

Business fixed  investment

Producers' durable  equipment
Nonresidential  structures

Residential  structures

Exports
Imports

Government purchases

Federal

Defense

State  and  local

1.9 
2.3 

2.7 
2.6 
2.3 
3.0 

8.9 
S10.2 
5.1 
-19.8 

1.4 
-3.8 

-2.8 
-4.9 

-3.4 
-12.3 
-6.5 
1.8 

.1 
6.3 
-18.2 
-20.6 

-1.3 
-13.1 
-1.9 
3.0 

-15.9 
-18.2 
-8.0 
-24.1 

6.9 
7.6 

1.2 
.1 
2.7 
2.0 

11.0 
-11.8 

-2.6 
-11.3 

4.7 
4.6 
12.1 
4.9 

-1.5 
-1.3 
1.7 
-1.7 

.9 
2.4 

3.3 
7.8 
.3 
4.1 

-2.8 
-1.8 
-6.1 
3.9 

-. 9 
8.0 

1.5 
4.1 
-1.3 
-. 4 

2.7 
2.6 

2.2 
5.2 
1.2 
2.0 

1.5 
4.6 
-8.3 
12.1 

6.4 
1.9 

-. 4 
-. 8 
-3.7 
-. 1 

4.1 
4.4 

1.7 
2.9 

2.5 
5.1 
1.2 
2.5 

3.5 
6.5 
-6.5 
9.5 

8.3 
10.5 

-1.4 
-4.6 
-7.5 
.9 

3.3 
3.6 

2.1 
3.4 

3.0 
6.5 
1.8 
2.7 

4.4 
7.6 
-6.6 
8.2 

6.4 
8.6 

-1.4 
-4.7 
-7.8 
1.1 

2.7 
3.1 

2.3 
3.5 

2.8 
3.5 
2.2 
2.9 

5.9 
8.8 
-4.7 
9.1 

6.1 
8.2 

-1.1 
-4.6 
-7.7 
1.5 

2.6 
2.6 

2.7 
3.6 

2.7 
3.4 
2.1 
2.9 

6.5 
9.0 
-3.0 
9.5 

5.8 
5.9 

-. 9 
-4.4 
-7.5 
1.7 

2.5
2.8

2.4
3.5

2.7
3.1
2.1
2.9

6.8
9.0
-1.9
8.3

5.9
7.6

-. 7

-4.5
-7.7
2.0

4.7 
Change  in business  inventories  IBllions  of  82s$ 
4,7 
BillionA  of  8251 
IBilliona  of 8261  -46.5 

Nonaaram 

exports 

-26.4 
-28.5 
-8.8 

-23.7 
-26.8 
6.4 

-30.5 
-32.6 
-7.3 

-9.5 
-10.6 
-.3 

14.8 
12.9 
-3.6 

26.9 
24.6 
-7.1 

31.8 
29.5 
-10.6 

31.0 
28.7 
-10.9 

31.7
29.4
-14.1

inal  GNP 

Percent  change 

5.3 

.9 

2.5 

3.3 

8.1 

7.6 

7.3 

6.0 

5.6 

5.5

„- --------------- 

EMPLOYMENT  AND  PRODUCTION 
..-
Nonfarm  payroll employment 
Unemployment  rate 

I
I
Millions 
IPrcent* 

1  110.2 
5.6 

109.8 
5.9 

109.2 
6.5 

108.8 
6.8 

109.1 
6.8 

109.7 
6.6 

110.2 
6.5 

110.7 
6.4 

111.1 
6.4 

111.5
6.3

3.8 
79.4 

1.16 
9.45 
6.86 
2.59 

6.2 
2.4 
4.0 

-1.3 
5.7 

3.7
79.5

1.19
9.50
4.90
2.60

6.5
2.4
4.0

5.8
5.7

6.3 
2.4 
4.0 

.2 
5.8 

Industrial  production  index 
capacity  utilization  rate-mfg.  Ifrcent* 

r 

IPercent  change 

Housing  starts 
Auto sales 
Domea 
Forcin 

INCOME  AND  SAVING 

------------ 

Nominal  personal  income 
Real disposable  income 
Personal  saving rate 

Millions 
Millions 
iMillions 
IMillions 

I

1

3.9 
2.9 

1.13 
9.68 
7.21 
2.47 

-7.0 
80.8 

1.04 
8.93 
6.59 
2.34 

-9.6 
78.0 

.92 
8.25 
6.00 
2.25 

.0 
77.4 

7.2 
78.2 

.99 
8.43 
6.06 
2.37 

1.05 
8.96 
6.55 
2.41 

5.7 
78.7 

1.07 
9.15 
6.65 
2.50 

5.1 
79.0 

1.11 
9.35 
6.80 
2.55 

4.8 
79.3 

1.13 
9.40 
6.83 
2.57 

iPercent  change  f 
Percent  change  1 
Percent 

5.0 
-. 7 
4.2 

3.5 
-3.5 
4.2 

1.6 
-1.8 
4.1 

4.2 
2.2 
3.9 

5.4 
1.3 
3.7 

7.3 
3.2 
3.9 

8.4 
3.9 
4.1 

Corp.  profits with  IVA  & CCAdj 

Profit  share  of  GNIP 

[Percent  change 
I|ercent* 

-7.5 
5.5 

-14.8 

5.2 

-1.2 

5.2 

-5.2 
5.1 

58.7 
5.6 

23.6 
5.8 

12.3 
5.8 

Federal  govt.  surplus/deficit 
State  and  local  oovt.  surplus 
Exc.  social  insurance funds 

IBillions  of  S 
I1 
I 

-145.7  -184.3  -118.0  -150.1  -143.3  -166.4  -164.0  -152.6  -141.1  -140.9
77.6
.2

72.0 
-3.7 

54.3 
-19.5 

67.6 
-8.0 

44.9 
-28.0 

39.3 
I  -30.5 

30.4 
-40.7 

34.3 
-37.7 

25.7 
-44.8 

-12.7 

62.0 

PRICES  AND  COSTS 
----------------
GNP  implicit  deflator
GNP  fixed-weight  price  index

Cons.  & fixed  invest.  prices
CPT

Exc. food  and energy

EC  _hourly  compensation**

m  business  sector
jut  per  hour

.rapesation  per  hour
Unit  labor  costs

*  Not  at  an  annual  rate.
**  Private  industry  workers

I

IPercent  change 

3.7 
S4.2 
5.4 
7.0 
6.1 

2.8 
4.7 
6.4 
6.9 
4.2 

5.2 
5.1 
3.1 
3.6 
6.8 

3.0 
3.1 
2.6 
2. 
3.2 

3.2 
3.6 
3.8 
4.0 
4.1 

3.3 
3.5 
3.5 
3.8- 
4.1 

3.8 
4.1 
3.5 
4.1 
4.3 

3.2 
3.5 
3.4 
3.6 
3.7 

3.0 
3.3 
3.3 
3.5 
3.5 

4.3 

3.8 

4.6 

4.2 

3.9 

3.8 

3.8 

3.7 

3.7 

j 

1 
I 
i

.6 

4.7 
4.1 

-.7 
3.9 
4.7 

.3 
4.0 
3.7 

3.5 
4.5 
1.0 

4.4 
4.2 
-.2 

2.3 
3.9 
1.6 

1.8 
4.3 
2.5 

1.6 
3.7 
2.1 

1.5 
3.6 
2.1 

3.0
3.3
3.3
3.5
3.5

3.6

1.4
3.6
2.2

CONFIDENTIAL  - FR
CLASS 

II  FOMC

GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT AND RELATED  ITEMS
(Net  changes,  billions  of  1982  dollars)

June 26,  1991

1988 

------------------------ 
Q2 

01 

03 
It

------------------------------ 

1989 

04 

01 

02 

03 

04 

1990 

---------- 
01 

02 

I.

I 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990

(fourth quarter  to  fourth  quarter,
net  change)

Real  GNP
Gross  domestic  purchases

I  49.5 
I  15.5 

35.6 
30.5 

26.3 
32.6 

rinal sales
Private  dom.  final  purchases

I  66.9 
51.8 

I 

49.7 
38.3 

10.6 
24.4 

36.4 
11.8 

16.5 
18.7 

17.5 
28.3 

3.5 
-12.7 

17.4 
4.9 

4.5
13.7

24.4  . 17.0 
11.4 

6.5 

18.5 
34.1 

9.3 
-12.9 

38.4 
20.2 

-7.2
-10.3

22.3 
-1.1 
9.1 
14.2 

42.6
19.8
5.7
17.1

12.7 
16.0 
-3.4 
-3.4 

17.3 
3.8 
4.4 
9.1 

17.6
14.9
2.9
3.2

27.2
24.4

45.7
14.2

22.4
13.9
2.7
6.0

-8.0
-5.2
-2.8

-. 2

-2.1 
-6.6 
1.4 
3.0 

10.5 
8.4 
2.2 

-1.8 

8.6 
5.8 
-3.9 
6.7 

8.4 
10.9 
-2.6 
-5.7 

-. 6 
5.1 
-5.7 

-17.4
-26.6
9.1

34.0
34.7
-7

-18.9
-23.2
-3.8
-19.4
4.3

-14.1

-9.6
-4.5

15.7 
11.8 
3.9 

-18.6 
-3.8 
-14.8 

12.1 
-10.8 

22.9 

5.1
5.6
.5

6.3
2.8
-. 9
3.7
3.5

-6.3 
7.0 
13.3 

-7.5
-8.9
-3.3
-5.6
1.3

2.8 
21.0 
18.2 

24.6 
20.8 
-3.7 

-2.2 
17.1 
19.2 

-6.7
-8.1
-7.4
-. 8
1.5

Personal  consunption  expand.

Durables
Nondurables
services

Business fixed investment

Producers'  durable  equipment
Nonresidential  structures

Residential  structures

Change  in  business  inventories

Nonfarm
Farm

Net  exports
Exports
Imports

Government  purchases

Federal

Defense
Nondefense
State  and  local

187.1
163.0

117.9
78.5

56.4
-4.9
11.7
49.6

26.6
25.6
1.0

-4.5

69.2
66.3
3.0

24.1
80.5
56.  4

15.3
5.3
10.2
-4.9
10.0

138.6 
103.0 

172.9 
128.7 

104.6
36,4
21.9
46.4

24.3 
27.7 
-3.4 
-. 2 

-34.4
-28.2

-6.3

35.6
68.3
32.7

8.6
-5.4
-4.9

-. 5
13.9

73.9 
46.1 

69.2 
39.1 

31.1 
-5.9 
5.9 
31.0 

21.8
19.8
2.1
-13.8

4.9
-11.9
16.8

27.8
56.3
28.4

2.3
-9.6
-5.6
-4.0
12.0

20.2
-18,9

65.4
-3.8

3.7
-7.5
-21.8

32.9

11.0
17.7
-6.7
-18.5

-45.3
-43.8

-1.5

39.1
35.6
-3.4

30.1
17.2
10.2
7.0
12.9

30.0 
9.9 
8.8 
11.3 

7.8 
5.7 
2.1 

-3.7 

-. 9 
.2 
-1.1 

-10.8
-. 7
10.1

-4.8
-6.9
4.5
-11.4
2.1

-5.4 
-15.0 
-. 4 
10.0 

-4.9 
-5.2 
.4 

-2.6 

7.4 
14.5 
-7.4 
.4 

1.5
-10.8
-4.4
16.6

I.

6.2 
5.4 
.7 

6.5 

-6.2
-3.3
-2.9
-5.5

11.7
19.8
-8.1

-9.2
-8.0
1.2

12.3
12.9
2.1  [

10.8
-. 7

-5.7 
-6.4 

-21.1
-23.5

.7 

2.4

16.2 
19.1 
2.8 

6.0 
-.3 
-4.7 
4.4 
6.3 

12.5 
16.5 
4.1 

5.7 

.3 

-1.1 
1.4 
5.5 

-

~-~-

CONFIDENTIAL  - FR
CLASS  II  FOMC

GROSS  NATIONAL  PRODUCT  AND  RELATED  ITEMS
of  1982  dollars)

(Net  changes,  billions 

June  26, 1991

Projection 

I 

Projection

1990 

------- 

1991 
---------------  --- 

03 

Q4 

01 

02 

03 

1992 

I  1989 

---- 
04 

--------------- 
Q1 

02 

03 

(fourth 

--- 
04 

I 
I

1990 
quarter to 

1991 

1992

fourth  quarter,

net  change)

Real GNP
Gross  domestic  purchases

14.9 
16.8 

-16.6 
-54.3 

-26.9
-42.1

2.4 
16.1 

48.4 
41.3 

42.4 
45,7 

34.3 
37.9 

28.9 
32.3 

27.5 
27.9 

Final  sales
Private  dom. final  purchases

19.7 
19.1 

14.5 
-32.8 

-29.6
-41.6

9.2 
19.9 

27.4 
21.1 

.18.1 

24.4 

22.2 
28.7 

24.0 
29.6 

28.3 
30.5 

Personal  consurption  expend.

Durables
Nondurables
Services

Business  fixed  investment

Producers'  durable  equipment
Nonresidential  structures

Residential  structures

Change 

in  business  inventories

Nonfarm
Farm

Net  exports
Exports
Imports

Government  purchases

Federal

Defense
Nondefense
state  and  local

--- 

18.0 
2.7 
5.2 
10.0 

-23.2
-13,9
-15.2
5.9

.1 
6.1 
-6.0 
-9.7 

-4.8 
-6.9 
2.1 

-1.9 
20.4 
12.2 

-31.1
-33.2
2.1

37.7
16.7
-21.0

-8.7
-14,3
-4.4
10.0

-22.0
-19.7
-2.4
-10.9

21.9
7.6
.7
13.8

-3.5
-1.7
-1.8
1.5

2.7 
1.7 
1.0 

-6.8 
-5.8 
1.0 

15.2
-4.2
-19.4

-3.2
-1.1
1.1
-2.1
-2.1

-13.7
-1.4
12.3

3,0
3.5
-. 9
4.3
-. 5

14.8 
5.3 
2.7 
6.9 

1.9 
4.3 
-2.4 
4.5 

21.0 
22.0 
-1.0 

7.0 
10.1 
3.1 

-. 8
-. 7

-2.5

1.8
-. 1

16.4 
5.1 
2.7 
8.6 

4.3 
6.1 
-1.8 
3.7 

24.3 
23.5 
.8 

-3.3 
13.1 
16.4 

-3.0
-4.1
-5.1
1.0
1.1

20.1 
6.7 
4.0 
9.3 

5.4 
7.2 
-1.8 
3.2 

12.1 
11.7 
.4 

-3.6 
10.3 
13.9 

-2.9
-4.2
-5.2

1.0
1.3

18.7 
3.7 
4.9 
10.1 

1.3 
8.5 
-1.3 
3.6 

4.9
4.9
.0

18.5 
3,6 
4.7 
10.2 

8.1 
8.9 
-. 8 
3.9 

-. 8 
-. 8 
.0 

-3.4 
10.1 
13.5 

-.3 
9.7 
10.0 

-2.2
-4.0
-5.0

1.0
1.8

-1.8
-3.8
-4.8
1.0
2.0

26.5
29.6

25.8
30.3

18.3
3.3
4.8
20.21

I

8.6
9.1
-. 5
3.5

.7
.7
.0

-3.2
9.9
13.1

-1.4
-3.8
-4.8
1.0
2.4

73.9
46.1

69.2
39.1

31.1
-5.9
5.9

32.0

21.8
19.8
2.1
-13.8

4.9

-11.9
16.8

27.8
56.3
28:4

2.3

-9.6
-5.6
-4.0
12.0

20.2
-18.9

65.4
-3.8

3.7
-7.5

-21.8
32.9

11.0
17.7
S-6.77
-18.5

-45.3
-43.8
-1.5

39.1
35,6
-3.4

30.1
17.2
10.2
7.0
12.9

66.3
61.0

25,1
23.8

44.4 
3.7 
1.6 
39.2 

-19.3
-11.0
-8.4
-1.3

41.2
41.4
-. 2

5.2
17.6
12.4

-4.0
-2.4
-7.4
5.0
-1.6

117.2
127.7

100.3
119.1

75.6
17.3
18.5
39.8

29.4
33.7
-4.4
14.2

16.9
16.5
.4

-10.5
40.1
50.6

-8.3
-15.8
-19.8

4.0
7.5

-- 

-

--

CONFIDENTIAL 

CLASS II

June  26,  1991

FEDERAL  SECTOR ACCOUNTS 1
(Billions of  dollars)

Fiscal  years

1989a 

1990a 

1991 

1992 

Ia 

IIa 

IIIa 

IVa 

Xa 

II 

III 

IV 

I 

II 

III 

IV

1990 

1991 

1992

Not  seasonally adjusted

991 
1144 
-153 
-206 
53 

-131 

140 
3 
10 

1031 
1252 
-220 
-277 
57 

-162 

263 
1 
-44 

1076 
1331 
-255 
-314 
59 

-187 

297 
-11 
-30 

1169 
1473 
-304 
-372 
67 

-197 

291 
12 
2 

229 
310 
-80 
-94 
14 

-74 

90 
8 
-18 

319 
331 
-12 
-41 
29 

254 
312 
-58 
-65 
7 

249 
336 
-86 
-96 
10 

17 

-41 

-72 

41 
-16 
-13 

69 
-6 
-6 

99 
8 
-21 

233 
299 
-66 
-80 
15 

-63 

56 
0 
9 

319 
274 
336  - 361 
-86 
-17 
-42 
-95 
26 

9, 

-261 
379 
-117 
-130 
12 

261 
364 
-104 
-117 
13 

355 
369 
-13 
-46 
33 

292 
362 
-70 
-79 
9 

283
378
-95
-108
13

-2 

-50 

-89 

-76 

15 

-47 

-77

42 
-13 
-12 

99 
-6 
-6 

98 
22 
-2 

91 
10 
3 

30 
-15 
-2 

71 
-5 
4 

87
10
-2

41 

40 

52 

40 

18 

35 

40 

32 

32 

45 

52 

30 

20 

35 

40 

30

Seasonally adjusted annual rates

1038 
1174 
400 
301 
99 
774 
-136 

1092 
1249 
415 
307 
107 
835 
-158 

1154 
1302 
444 
329 
115 
858 
-149 

1258 
1414 
445 
319 
126 
969 
-156 

1081 
1249 
411 
307 
103 
838 
-168 

1106 
1272 
422 
310 
112 
850 
-166 

1126 
1272 
426 
313 
113 
846 
-146 

1127 
1311 
438 
325 
113 
873 
-184 

1139 
1257 
444 
331 
113 
813 
-118 

1159 
1309 
448 
331 
117 
862 
-150 

1190 
1333 
448 
328 
119 
885 
-143 

1218 
1385 
444 
323 
121 
940 
-166 

1252 
1416 
447 
322 
125 
969 
-164 

1271 
1424 
445 
317 
128 
979 
-153 

1289 
1430 
442 
312 
130 
988 
-141 

1311
1452
439
307
132
1013
-141

-149 

-150 

-87 

-98 

-166 

-154 

-127 

-147 

-55 

-73 

-74 

-104 

-105 

-96 

-86 

-87

0 

0 

-1.2 

.2 

.3 

-.2 

-.5 

.4 

-1.6 

.3 

0 

.5 

.

0 

-.2 

-.2 

0

-3.5  * 

-3.3  * 

-2.8 

-5.1  *  -2.3 

1.2 

-.8 

1.8 

-4 

.6 

-.5 

-1.3 

-2.6 

-1 

-1 

-.9

BUDGET 

Budget  receipts 2  
Budget  outlays 2  
Surplus/deficit(-) 2  
(On-budget) 
(Off-budget) 

Surplus excluding

deposit  insurance 3  

Means  of financing:
Borrowing 
Cash  decrease 
other 4  

Cash  operating balance,

end of  period 

NIPA FEDERAL  SECTOR 

Receipts 
Expenditures 
Purchases 
Defense 
Nondefense 
Other  expend. 
Surplus/deficit 
FISCAL INDICATORS 5

High-employment  (HEB)
surplus/deficit(-) 
Change  in HEB, percent
of potential  GNP 
Fiscal  impetus measure
(FI),  percent 

a--actual

*--calendar  year

Note:  Details may not add to  totals  due to  rounding.

1.  Staff projections.  CBO's  March deficit  estimates  are $309 billion  in FY1991  and $294  billion in FY1992.  OMB's February deficit  estimates

are  $318 billion in FY1991  and $281  billion  in FY1992.

2.  Budget  receipts,  outlays,  and  surplus/deficit  include  social  security  (OASDI) 

The OASDI  surplus
is excluded from the  "on-budget" deficit  and shown  separately as  "off-budget",  as  classified under current  law.  The Postal  Service deficit  is
included in off-budget  outlays beginning in FY1990.

receipts,  outlays  and  surplus,  respectively. 

3.  CBO's March deficit  estimates,  excluding  deposit  insurance  spending,  are  $205 billion in FY1991  and $196 billion  in FY1992.  OMB's  February

deficit estimates, excluding deposit  insurance spending,  are  $207 billion  in FY1991  and  $193 billion in FY1992.

4.  Other means of  financing are  checks  issued less  checks paid, accrued  items;  and changes in  other financial assets and  liabilities.
5.  HEB is the  NIPA measure  in  current  dollars  with cyclically-sensitive  receipts  and outlays  adjusted to  a 6 percent unemployment rate  and 2.3%

potential output  growth  in the  forecast period.  Quarterly  figures  for change in BEB  and FI  are not  at  annual  rates.  Change  in HEB,  as  a percent
of nominal  potential GNP,  is  reversed in  sign.  FI is  the weighted difference  of discretionary federal  spending and  tax changes  (in 1982  dollars),
scaled by  real  federal purchases.  For change  in HEB  and FI,  (-) indicates  restraint.

DOMESTIC FINANCIAL  DEVELOPMENTS

Recent  Developments

Mounting evidence  of  an end to  the  recession and the  disappearance of

expectations of  further System easing have  caused market interest rates  to

firm during the  intermeeting period.  While the  federal  funds  rate  has

remained around 5-3/4  percent,  Treasury and most private market rates  have

risen 5 to  25  basis points.  At  the  same  time,  quality spreads  have

narrowed, as  yields  on investment-grade corporate bonds  and asset-backed

securities  have risen less  than those on Treasuries.  Demand  for  such

securities  has been  strong, with  investors  reaching for higher  returns  and

apparently becoming more confident  that  corporate  financial  health will

improve  in a growing economy.  Share  prices  rose to  record highs  in May,

responding positively to signs  of a business upturn, but  retraced these

gains  in  June when  bond rates  jumped;  on balance since  the May FOMC meeting,

major  stock  indexes are  little  changed.

M2 growth picked up  moderately in May, but  appears to have waned in

June.  Although inflows to  liquid retail deposits have  been brisk, in part

because  their rates  have  lagged the  decline in market yields,  other

components  of M2,  including small  time deposits and shares  of money market

mutual  funds,  have  been notably weak.  Rather than rolling over maturing

time  deposits  at  greatly reduced rates, many households  evidently have

sought  higher returns on  assets outside M2.  Continued strong inflows  to

bond and  equity mutual  funds  indicate these  funds  have  been the  frequent

choice. 

Apparently, the inflows  to retail accounts have  more than

satisfied depositories' needs  for funds  to support  credit expansion, and

I-22

I-23

domestic institutions have  continued to  run off large  time  deposits and

other managed liabilities  in  recent weeks.  As  a result, M3  was little

changed  in May and June.

Bank  credit  was  unchanged in April  and contracted  in May owing to  a

drop  in  loans.  While all  loan  categories were  weak, the  contraction in

business  loans was especially sharp  in April  and May.  The decline  in

business  loans  in part may reflect  tight standards  by banks, but  it is

difficult  to disentangle this  effect  from generally weak  demands associated

with  declining outlays  for inventories  and fixed capital and with efforts by

firms  to strengthen balance  sheets.

Total debt  of nonfinancial  businesses is  estimated to  have  increased at

only a 2 percent  annual  rate  in  the  first quarter,  and growth  appears to

have  remained subdued  in the second.  The bulk  of the borrowing this year

has  been by investment-grade  firms  in  the bond markets;  many of these

companies  reportedly have  used proceeds  to  pay down  commercial paper.  Bond

issuance was  particularly heavy  in April  and May, and it  dropped only a bit

in  June  when bond  rates backed up.  Outstanding commercial  paper of

nonfinancial  companies dropped sharply in May and, on net  this  year,  is down

about  5 percent  at  an annual  rate.  A small but  growing number  of lower-

rated companies  also have been able  to  issue bonds,  suggesting  some

improvement  in investor sentiment.  In  addition, equity markets have been

receptive to  new offerings, including those of new  and smaller corporations.

The volume  of  initial public offerings  in May was the  largest  since before

the market break  in  1987,  and the backlog of potential offerings  reportedly

is substantial.

I-24

Household debt  growth has  shown  some  pickup,  judging from the  partial

data  available for  the second quarter.  Home  mortgage borrowing appears  to

have  increased somewhat  as  a result  of a step-up  in home  sales  and increased

borrowing against  home  equity lines.  Consumer installment  credit  increased

in April after  four months of decline, with the drag from falling auto loans

much less than in earlier months;  however, consumer loans at  banks  remained

weak  in May, even when  account is  taken of securitization.  As  in  past

recessions,  interest  rates  on consumer loans  have  remained high in the  face

of  falling market  rates.  This  has helped to  sustain the profitability of

lending despite  rising delinquency rates  and  loan losses.  However, the

competitive pressures in the  credit  card market  have been  reflected in a

proliferation of  nonrate enticements  offered customers.

The  Treasury has  continued to borrow heavily in the  second quarter

despite  a seasonally small  federal deficit.  Some proceeds  from the debt

issuance  are being used to build cash balances in anticipation of large

deficits in  coming quarters.  In tax-exempt  markets,  state  and local

governments have  issued  large volumes  of  long-term debt  in recent  weeks.

Short-term volume  also  surged in June  owing to  note placements  by New York

State and  Los  Angeles, which needed to fund  outlays  in advance  of tax

payments.  Quality spreads on municipal debt  widened, but  only slightly,  in

the  wake  of the bankruptcy  filing by  Bridgeport,  Connecticut.

Outlook

The  interest  rate  forecast  associated with the staff's  economic and

financial projections is  little  changed  from the May Greenbook.  As  before,

the  federal  funds  rate  and other  short-term interest  rates  are assumed to

remain near  their current  levels through  1992.  Although intermediate- and

I-25

INTEREST  RATES  IN  POSTWAR  CYCLES
(Monthly levels)

P 

T

Percent

N

C

10-year Treasury Bond

/ 
'^I\  k 
/

_Federal 
Funds
Federad  Funds

IIllIIIrI  lll  I lI
1959 

1960 

1962 

1961 

1963

1969 

1970 

1971 

1972 

1973

P 

T

P  T 

P 

T

Percent

Percent

/\

I/ \

\ / 

\ 

10-year Treasury  Bond

Federal  Funds

I

IEf
II  I
I ii
I  'ir

IvifI

I

'I

VII

10-year Treasury  Bond

A

Federal  Funds
Federal  Funds

1973 

1974 

1975 

1976 

1977

11dilil  lii

1979

1981

ltil iIl 
1983

i Ill
1985

CHANGE  IN INTEREST RATES
(Basis points)

-Trough date

Period 

Federal 
funds 

10-year  Federal 
bond 
funds 

10-year  Federal 
funds 

bond 

February  1961 

November 1970 

March  1975 

November  1982
10-year  Federal  10-year
funds 

bond 

bond

Peak to trough

-138 

-50 

-337 

Trough +  6 months

Trough  + 12 months

Trough  + 18  months

-54 

-17 

39 

26 

26 

20 

-97 

-69 

-133 

-81 

-45 

-103 

-71 

-449

70

-70

-29 

)0 

70 

0 

-14

-984 

-373

-57 

14 

112 

-17

114

286

I-26

long-term rates  (especially on Treasuries)  currently are a shade  higher than

projected in May, as noted earlier, we  continue to  anticipate  that  they will

fall  back over the next  year or  so.

The  steepness of the term structure today  indicates  that  the market

perceives  a clear  risk that  short-term rates will  come  under appreciable

pressure  at  some point  in the next  couple of years--a development that

certainly has  its precedents in  prior business upswings,  including the most

recent  in 1983-84.  But,  as may be seen in the chart,  there  has been a good

deal  of variation in cyclical experience--and in some  instances short  and/or

long rates have been lower a year or  18 months  into the  expansion than at

the trough.

In the  case of the present  projection, stable  short  rates  have been

taken as  the  fundamental  conditioning assumption, and long rates  have been

predicted along with other  facets of  the  economic forecast.  Several

considerations have  led us  to project lower  nominal bond yields  in 1992,

prominent among them being:  (1) The  decline in  short  rates  during the

recession was  not especially large by past  standards  and the behavior  of

other policy indicators  does  not  suggest  that  the economy has  received the

kind  of monetary impulse recently that it  has  in some other cycles.  (2)

Real  long-term interest  rates appear  still  to be  fairly high, especially

viewed in the context of the  restrictive forces  stemming from the  real

estate  and government sectors.  (3) The staff  forecast of wages  and prices

points to a likelihood that market expectations  of inflation will be

declining over  the projection period.

Private  sector borrowing is  expected to increase gradually  over the

forecast period.  On the  demand side,  increased spending by households  and

I-27

businesses will  expand their credit  needs.  On the  supply side,  lenders will

become more  willing to extend credit  as higher  income  flows  lessen credit

quality  concerns;  moreover,  the lenders  themselves  will  be  in a better

position to provide  financing as they build capital and otherwise  strengthen

their own balance  sheets.  Nonetheless,  debt growth of private  domestic

nonfinancial  sectors is expected to trail that  of nominal GNP  by more than a

percentage point this year and by three  quarters of a point  in  1992.

Total debt,  however,  is projected to rise  more  rapidly than GNP  both

this year and next,  given the  large borrowing requirements of the  federal

sector.  An accelerated pace of  RTC resolution activity, coupled with

reduced payments by foreign  governments to the Defense  Cooperation Account,

will add to Treasury borrowing in the  second half of  this year;  federal  debt

growth  should begin to moderate  in 1992  as  rising incomes  generate higher

tax receipts  and RTC  spending begins to decline.

In contrast to the  federal  government,  debt  growth of  state and local

governments  is  expected to remain moderate.  These units  continue to grapple

with serious budget  problems,  as  well  as  a rash of debt  downgradings, and

these are  likely to  inhibit bond-financed capital spending programs.

Borrowing by nonfinancial  businesses is expected to pick  up in coming

months,  largely because  of a swing  from inventory liquidation to inventory

accumulation.  In  1992,  capital outlays,  including spending on plant  and

equipment as well  as  on  inventories, are expected to  rise  somewhat more

rapidly than corporate cash flows,  further  adding to  financing needs.  The

staff also  anticipates a modest  resumption in debt-financed merger activity

in a more  favorable financing environment.  Overall,  however, the projected

acceleration in business borrowing is quite modest  by historical  standards,

I-28

reflecting both the moderate  rebound  in real  activity and the lingering

effects of  financial  strains on borrower  and lender behavior.

An obvious  uncertainty  in the  outlook is the  willingness and  ability of

banks and other  intermediaries to accommodate rising credit  demands.

Smaller  risk  spreads on  corporate bonds and increased IPO and junk  bond

issuance  are  signs of more positive lender attitudes  in  capital markets.

Although we expect  this trend to continue,  insurance  companies  and other

financial  institutions will  remain cautious  in extending credit  to weaker

firms.  Bank  credit growth,  in particular, is  likely to be more  restrained

than usual  in this  recovery, although we anticipate  some  loosening of

lending  standards as  the  economy and borrower balance  sheets  improve;  credit

for  real estate  acquisition and development  is  likely to remain hard to  come

by,  especially for  speculative commercial  projects, but  banks are  likely to

become more  aggressive in  seeking  sound business and consumer  loans.

In the  household sector,  growth in consumer  credit  is expected to  show

a gradual  rise  through 1992.  This  sluggish pattern reflects the

exceptionally subdued pace  of  consumer durable  spending anticipated in this

recovery.  In addition, the distinctly lower after-tax borrowing cost

associated with home  equity loans  for many borrowers will  continue to damp

the  growth of  consumer  credit  somewhat.  The  acceleration in home mortgage

debt also  is  expected to be  relatively restrained, in line  with the

unusually small  rebound in  single-family home building in the  staff

forecast.  Home mortgage  credit is  likely to remain readily available to

households, and, with continuing strong investor demand for  high-quality

mortgage-backed securities,  spreads of mortgage  rates  over Treasuries  should

stay  narrow.  Mortgage  pools  are  likely  to supply a substantial  share of

home mortgage  financing.

Confidential  FR  Class  II

June 26,  1991

GROWTH RATES  OF  DEBT  BY SECTOR 1

(Period-end  to  period-end)

--------------------

Domestic  Nonfinancial  Sectors------------------- 

------- Memo--------

Total 2  

U.S. 
govt. 2  

Non- 
federal 

Home 

Cons. 

Total  mtgs.  credit  Business 

-----Households-----

.State &  Private
local 
govts. 

financial 
assets 3  

Nominal
GNP4

1982 
1983 
1984 
1985 
1986 

1987 
1988 
1989 
1990 
1991 

1992 

1989  --  Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 

1990  -- Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 

1991  -- Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 

1992  -- Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 

9.3 
11.5 
14.4 
14.2 
12.3 

9.0 
9.1 
7.5 
6.5 
6.0 

6.5 

8.2 
7.2 
7.2 
6.4 

8.2 
6.1 
6.4 
4.6 

4.5 
5.2 
7.1 
6.5 

6.8 
5.5 
6.5 
6.5 

19.4 
18.8 
16.9 
16.2 
13.4 

8.0 
8.0 
7.2 
12.0 
11.5 

9.8 

7.0 
4.6 
8.0 
8.3 

10.9 
9.7 
11.8 
13.2 

8.0 
9.2 
15.2 
11.8 

11.9 
6.6 
9.9 
9.3 

Annual  (percent)

5.4 
11.4 
12.9 
14.1 
12.8 

11.6 
10.9 
8.9 
7.3 
5.8 

4.5 
11.0 
11.7 
11.9 
14.9 

14.0 
12.2 
10.5 
9.1 
7.5 

6.6 

7.9 

4.4 
12.6 
18.7 
15.9 
9.6 

5.1 
7.2 
5.3 
1.8 
0.1 

2.9 

Quarterly  (percent-SAAR)

9.2 
8.0 
8.7 
8.5 

10.4 
7.4 
5.9 
4.2 

5.0 
5.7 
5.9 
6.0 

6.2 
6.3 
6.5 
6.6 

10.6 
9.7 
10.2 
9.6 

12.1 
9.4 
7.1 
5.8 

7.1 
7.3 
7.4 
7.5 

7.4 
7.6 
7.7 
7.9 

5.1 
4.9 
4.8 
5.7 

3.8 
0.4 
2.6 
0.3 

-2.9 
0.4 
1.1 
1.7 

2.6 
2.8 
3.1 
3.1 

7.8 
8.3 
15.6 
11.4 
12.0 

7.0 
8.2 
6.7 
2.9 
2.6 

4.4 

8.4 
8.3 
5.6 
3.8 

5.5 
2.9 
3.4 
-0.2 

2.0 
1.8 
2.9 
3.7 

4.1 
4.2 
4.4 
4.5 

6.9 
9.6 
13.7 
13.6 
12.0 

9.3 
9.5 
7.5 
4.9 
4.2 

5.4 

8.6 
7.9 
6.9 
5.9 

7.5 
5.0 
4.7 
1.9 

3.4 
3.9 
4.4 
4.8 

5.1 
5.1 
5.3 
5.4 

9.1 
7.1 
7.9 
23.7 
7.6 

9.6 
8.2 
4.9 
2.3 
3.0 

3.1 

6.6 
5.4 
4.6 
2.6 

1.4 
2.8 
4.5 
0.5 

1.1 
4.2 
3.3 
3.2 

3.1 
3.1 
3.0 
3.0 

10.3 
11.8 
13.4 
12.0 
9.1 

7.8 
8.7 
7.4 
4.4 
5.5 

4.7 

7.5 
8.0 
8.4 
4.6 

7.4 
5.1 
3.7 
1.0 

5.8 
4.4 
6.0 
5.3 

5.9 
3.6 
4.7 
.4.3 

3.1
10.4
8.6
6.6
4.6

8.2
7.8
5.6
4.5
5.3

6.1

7.5
5.8
5.1
3.9

6.7
5.1
5.3
0.9

2.5
3.3
8.1
7.6

7.3
6.0
5.6
5.5

1. Published data through  1991:1;  projections  for  other periods.
2. RTC activity  adds  roughly  .6 and  .7 percentage  points to  total  debt  growth  in  1991  and 1992,  respectively;

it  adds  about  2.2  and  2.6  percentage points to  federal  debt  growth  in 1991  and 1992,  respectively.

3. Sometimes referred  to as  the  "Kaufman debt proxy";  includes  liquid assets  and credit market instruments.
4. Annual  figures  are  Q4  to  Q4.

2.6.3  FOF

Confidential
June  26,  1991

FR  Class  II

FLOW OF FUNDS  PROJECTION HIGHLIGHTS 1
(Billions of  dollars,  seasonally  adjusted annual  rates)

1989 

Calendar year 
1991 

1990 

1992 

----1990----  -----------1991----------  -----1992----
H2

Q3 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

HI 

Q4 

Net  funds  raised by domestic
1  nonfinancial  sectors 
2 
3 

Net equity issuance 
Net debt  issuance 

554.0  578.2  616.2  690.3  581.7  421.6  457.7  555.9  766.0  685.1  659.7  720.8
0.0  -35.0  -35.0  -35.0
-124.2  -63.0  -12.5  -35.0  -74.0  -61.0  -17.0 
678.2  641.2  628.7  725.3  655.7  482.6  474.7  553.9  766.0  720.1  694.7  755.8

2.0 

4 
5 
6 

7 
8 
9 
10 

11 
12 

13 
14 
15 

Borrowing  sectors

Nonfinancial business
Financing gap 2  
Net equity  issuance 
Credit market  borrowing 

Households

Net borrowing, of which: 

Home mortgages 
Consumer  credit 
Debt/DPI  (percent)3  

33.9 

37.1 

33.1  -17.5 
-124.2  -63.0  -12.5  -35.0  -74.0  -61.0  -17.0 
70.3 
211.9 

92.4  157.3  119.4 

50.9 

71.6 

13.3 

99.8 

-8.3 

8.7 
2.0 

80.1
19.8 
0.0  -35.0  -35.0  -35.0
64.3  101.9  133.1  149.8  164.7

63.1 

42.3 

285.0  254.3  222.0  267.6  221.7  159.4  192.6  222.5  234.2  238.7  256.6  278.6
221.6  214.1  200.1  226.0  183.7  150.9  189.3  197.5  204.4  209.2  217.0  235.0
25.8
96.5

2.5  -23.6 
96.9 
96.1 

21.3 
95.9 

8.7 
97.3 

21.8 
96.2 

13.8 
97.1 

3.0 
97.2 

14.3 
93.1 

39.1 
89.8 

23.8 
96.4 

0.5 
96.6 

State  and local  governments

Net borrowing 
Current  surplus 4  

U.S.government

Net borrowing from public 
Net borrowing from public5  
Unified budget deficit5  

29.6 

19.3 
14.6 
-25.7  -30.9  -23.3 

20.7 

22.0 
6.8  -35.7  -36.8  -37.9  -28.4  -19.1 

28.5 

27.2 

7.1 

3.1 

20.9 
-7.8 

20.7 
2.1 

20.7
11.5

151.6  272.5  295.0  279.7  286.1  328.4  204.7  239.9  408.0  327.4  267.6  291.8
98.0  121.5  158.3
98.7 
151.6  272.5  295.0  279.7 
86.5  117.2  117.2  164.7
155.0  236.1  285.9  281.9 

55.8 
65.6 

42.5 
16.7 

68.4 
57.9 

98.7 
86.2 

Funds  supplied by

16  depository  institutions 

92.8  -22.1  -42.8  -19.5  -60.6  -92.8  -10.0  -81.7  -38.2  -41.3  -32.7 

-6.3

Memoranda:  As  percent of  GNP:
17 
18 
19 
20 

U.S.  government 6  
Private 

Dom. nonfinancial debt 3  
Dom. nonfinancial borrowing 

181.7  186.3  191.6  190.9  189.3  191.1  192.0  192.9  192.6  192.2  190.4  191.1
12.3
4.8
7.6

11.6 
4.5 
7.2 

13.4 
7.1 
6.3 

12.4 
5.6 
6.7 

12.0 
4.6 
7.4 

11.9 
5.2 
6.7 

11.1 
5.2 
5.9 

11.7 
5.0 
6.7 

13.0 
2.9 
10.1 

8.7 
5.9 
2.8 

9.9 
4.3 
5.6 

8.5 
3.7 
4.9 

1. Published data through  1991:1;  projections  for other periods.4. NIPA  surplus,  net of  retirement  funds.
2. For corporations:  excess  of  capital expenditures  over 

5. Quarterly data  at  quarterly rates, nsa.
6. Excludes  gov't-insured mortgage pool securities.

U.S.  internal  funds. 

3. Annuals  are  average  debt  levels  in  the year  (computed as  the
average  of year-end  debt positions)  divided by  annual  GNP.

2.6.4  FOF

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS

Recent Developments

The  foreign exchange  value of  the  dollar,  in  terms  of  the  other G-10

currencies,  has  risen 4-1/2  per cent since  the May  FOMC meeting.  The  dollar

strengthened during  the period with the  release  of a range  of statistical

reports  indicating an upturn in U.S.  economic  activity.  Around the  time  of

the  G-7  meeting on June  23,  the  dollar declined slightly on perceptions that

authorities might act to  limit  the  rise  in  the  dollar.  The dollar has risen

strongly against  the mark and other  European currencies  over  the

intermeeting period, but has  remained little  changed against the yen on

balance.  This  differential performance  can be  explained in part by

perceived differences  in  the  actual  and prospective stances  of monetary

policy  in Germany and Japan.  In  the  face  of strong  first-quarter growth  in

both  countries, Japanese  authorities are perceived  to  have postponed

anticipated monetary easing, while  the  Bundesbank  is perceived to  have

postponed anticipated tightening.  In  addition,  the  mark has been affected

negatively by market  reactions  to  recent  and prospective  domestic political

developments  in  Germany  as  well as  to  uncertainties  in  the  Soviet Union.

the  Bank of Japan sold $300 million, and the  Desk did not

intervene.

Recent  indicators  of economic  activity  in  the  major foreign  industrial

countries  have been mixed.  In Germany and Japan, unusually  favorable

I-31

I-32

weather and other transitory factors helped to  push GNP  to  unexpectedly high

levels  in  the  first-quarter.  Economic  activity  in both  countries  appears  to

have declined a bit in  the second  quarter.  In Canada and the United

Kingdom,  first-quarter GNP data  confirmed the  continuation of recessions,

while  in France,  economic  activity was  flat  in  the  first  quarter.  Signs  of

improvement have emerged recently, however,  at  least  in  Canada and possibly

in France.  Recent Canadian data on new orders,  shipments,  auto  sales,  and

housing suggest  a pick-up,  and the  Canadian unemployment rate,  though  still

above  10  percent, has  started to  edge  down.

Inflation has  been steady to  somewhat  lower  in most  industrial

countries  in  recent months.  Twelve-month inflation in the  United Kingdom

has  dropped sharply, partly because  of special  factors;  even absent  special

tax  and interest rate  effects the  underlying rate of U.K. inflation has

declined to  about  6-1/2 percent.  Germany  is  an exception to  the  general

trend toward easing  inflationary pressures.

The U.S.  merchandise  trade  deficit narrowed further  in April,  from a

substantially improved  rate  in  the  first  quarter.  While  lower imports had

accounted for  most  of the  narrowing of  the deficit  in  the  first  quarter,  a

rebound in  exports  led  the  improvement  in April.  Exports  in April were

about  5 percent higher  than in  the  first  quarter, and imports  were about  2

percent higher.  Import prices declined  further  in April;  all  of the  decline

was  in  non-oil  import prices  (reflecting the  effects  of the  stronger

dollar),  whereas  the decline  in  the  first  quarter had been concentrated in

oil  prices.  The  current account showed a surplus  of $41 billion at  an

annual rate  in the  first quarter, primarily because  of an  inflow of $91

billion  (annual rate)  in  transfers  associated with Operation Desert Storm.

Outlook

I-33

Relative  to  the May Greenbook, the  current  forecast  incorporates a

higher path for  the  dollar,  stronger  near-term growth  in the  United States,

and  slightly weaker near-term growth abroad.  As  a result,  the outlook  for

real net exports  of  goods  and services  has worsened somewhat.  The  projected

nominal  trade  and current account deficits  for 1991  remain little  changed

from the May  forecast, because  the  initial favorable  effects  of a stronger

dollar on import  prices offset most of  the near-term weakening in  real net

exports.  Next year the  current account deficit is  projected to widen  to

nearly $50  billion, about  $5 billion more than  in the  previous  forecast.

The  Dollar.  In  the  staff forecast,  the  foreign exchange  value of  the

dollar  against the  other G-10 currencies  is projected  to  decline  somewhat

from  its recent highs  in  the near  term  and then to  remain unchanged.

However, over the  forecast period on average,  the  projected value of  the

dollar has been  revised up by about 5 percent  compared with  the May

Greenbook, largely  in  response  to  the  persistent  strength  of the  dollar.

Against the  currencies  of eight  developing countries,  the  dollar  is  expected

to  show a small depreciation in real  terms  over  this  year and next.

Foreign Industrial  Countries.  Average real  GNP growth among  the

foreign G-7  countries  (weighted by their shares  in U.S.  nonagricultural

exports),  which is  expected to have been essentially zero  during the  first

half of the  year, is  projected to  pick up  to  2 percent  in  the  second half

and to  strengthen to  3 percent next year.  Differences  in  growth rates  among

countries are  expected  to narrow significantly over  the  next year as  Canada

and  the United Kingdom recover from recessions  and growth in  France picks

up.

The  outlook for  inflation in  the G-6  countries has been lowered

slightly  from that  in May, to  an average  rate  of  about  4 percent  for  1991.

I-34

The revision reflects  recent  improvements  in  inflation performance  in  the

United Kingdom and, to  a lesser  extent, Japan and Canada.  In  1992,  average

inflation  is  expected to  slow by an additional  1/2  percentage point to  a

rate  of  3-1/2  percent.

The  outlook for  interest rates  in the major foreign  industrial

countries  remains  consistent with a cautious  easing of monetary policy in a

context of  slowing inflation and weak, but recovering, real  demand.  Short-

term interest  rates  are  expected to  move down gradually by another 1/2

percentage point  from current  levels  on average by the  end of 1992.  German

short-term interest rates  are  expected to  rise  slightly in  coming months  in

response  to mounting  inflationary pressures,  and then to  return to  about

present  levels by the  second half of next year.  Japanese  authorities  are

expected to  allow short-term interest  rates  to  decline somewhat  during  the

second half of  this year as  growth of aggregate  demand eases;  Japanese  rates

are  expected  to  level  off thereafter.  Foreign long-term interest rates  are

expected to  decline  slightly on average over  the  forecast period.

Developing  Countries.  Growth  in  developing countries  that  are major

U.S.  trading partners  is  projected to  increase moderately in 1991  to  about

5-1/4 percent,  on average, and  to  rise  slightly further  in 1992.  All

countries  in this  group  are  expected to be  affected negatively by the

decline  in growth in  industrial  countries  this  year.  However, government

policies  are  sufficiently expansionary in several key developing countries

to  offset  expected slower growth  in external demand.  Lower  average oil

prices  expected for this  year  also will be  a net positive  factor.

U.S.  Real  Net Exports  of Goods  and Services.  After having improved

dramatically through  the  first  quarter of this  year,  real net exports  of

goods  and  services  are expected  to  decline  fairly steadily  through  the end

of  next year.  The  decline reflects  primarily the  effects  of a faster pickup

I-35

in  growth  at home  than abroad.  The  trajectory  of net  exports  is  more

negative  in  the  current  forecast  than in  the previous  one,  primarily because

of  the higher  projected value of  the  dollar.

TRADE QUANTITIES
(Percent change  from end of preceding comparable  period, annual  rate)

1990 

Q1 

------  Projection  -----
1991 
Q2 

H2

1992

Nonagricultural  exports 
Agricultural  exports 

8.6 
-6.1 

6.5 
13.1 

Non-oil  imports 
Oil  imports 

1.4 
-12.3 

-10.2 
21.2 

11.4 
2.1 

5.4 
45.0 

9.4 
1.5 

9.4 
4.9 

8.7
0.6

9.2
9.9

* GNP basis,  1982 dollars.

The  growth of real exports  of goods  is  projected to  increase  to more

than 9 percent at  an annual rate  during the  second half  of this  year as

growth abroad recovers.  Export  growth is  then projected  to decline  to  about

a 7 percent  rate  in  the  second half of  1992  as  the  negative  effects  of the

recent  rise  in the  dollar begin to  outweigh the positive  effects of  the

earlier  decline  in  the  dollar.  Because of  the stronger  dollar,  the  export

growth  rate over  the next year and a half is  more  than 1 percentage point

below the  previous forecast.  The  quantity  of computer exports  is  expected

to  continue  to  expand rapidly, adding nearly  2 percentage points to  the

growth rate  for  total  export volume  over the  projection period.

Agricultural  exports  are  expected  to  pick up  somewhat  in  the near  term,

largely because  of the  recent provision of  credit guarantees  to  the  Soviet

Union, but  to  remain sluggish  over the  rest  of  the forecast period.

The  quantity of non-oil  imports  of  goods  is  projected to  rise  at  about

a 5 percent  rate  in  the  second quarter and  then to expand at  an  average

annual  rate of  9-1/4 percent over  the  next six quarters.  The U.S.  economic

recovery  and recent declines  in  the  relative price  of  imports associated

I-36

with  the  rise  in  the  dollar  are  expected to  stimulate demand for  imports.

Constant-dollar  imports  of computers  are expected to  grow especially

rapidly, as  in  the  case of  exports,  and will add several  percentage points

to  the  growth  rate  for  total non-oil  imports.  Oil  imports  are  expected to

jump  in  the  current quarter as  stocks  are  rebuilt and  to  expand steadily

thereafter,  in  line with  growing domestic  consumption and gradually receding

domestic production.

Oil  Prices.  The  outlook for  oil prices  in  the  near  term has been

lowered somewhat since  the May forecast,  reflecting the market's  response  to

OPEC's  agreement  in early June not  to  cut its  production quotas,  and to

continued strong  increases  in petroleum stocks.  We now assume  that  oil

import prices will  remain under $18  per barrel  through the  summer, before

returning to  a flat $18  per barrel  path by  the  end of the  year  (a level

consistent with  a posted price of $19.25  per barrel for  West Texas

Intermediate crude).

SELECTED PRICE INDICATORS
(Percent change  from  the  end of preceding comparable period, annual rate)

1990 

Q1 

------  Projection -----
1991 
2 

H2

1992

PPI  (export-share wts.) 
Nonagric  exports  (Fx-Wt) 

4.8 
4.0 

-2.0 
-1.0 

-2.5 
-1.6 

1.8 
0.5 

2.3
2.0

Non-oil imports  (Fx-Wt) 
Oil  imports  ($/barrel) 

2.9 
20.57 

4.0 
20.33 

0.3 
17.68 

1.5 
17.92 

2.0
18.00

Prices  of Exports  and Non-oil  Imports.  The  fixed-weight price  index

for U.S.  nonagricultural  exports  is  projected to  decline  further in  the

second quarter, owing primarily  to  recent declines  in domestic producer

prices  (particularly among  industrial supplies  and materials).  The rise  in

the  dollar may restrain U.S.  exporters  from raising their  prices  as well.

I-37

Moderate  growth  in  export prices  should resume  by  the end of  this  year with

the  projected turnaround in  domestic materials  prices.  Non-oil  import

prices are projected to  remain about unchanged in  the  current quarter, and

to  rise  only slowly through the  end of  the  forecast period;  the  recent  rise

in  the  dollar  is  expected to  depress  import prices  for much of this  year.

Nominal Trade  and Current Account Balances.  The merchandise trade

deficit  is  projected to  narrow further  in the  second quarter, to  less  than

$70  billion  (annual rate),  as  a result of sluggish  imports  and expanding

exports.  Thereafter, the  deficit  is  projected to widen gradually, returning

to  a level of close  to  $80 billion next year.  Excluding the  effects of

transfer payments  associated with the  Gulf War, the  current account deficit

this year  is  projected to be roughly $45 billion, or  about  $25  billion  less

than the  trade deficit.  Next year, the  widening of  the trade deficit  is

expected to be only  slightly offset by  net improvements  in  the non-trade

portions  of the  current  account  (other than transfers),  resulting in  a

current account  deficit approaching  $50 billion.

NOMINAL EXTERNAL BALANCES
(Billions of dollars,  SAAR)

1990 

Q1 

------  Projection  -----
1991 
1992
Q2 

H2

Trade  Balance 
Current Account excl.

-108.1 

-73.5 

-67.0 

-69.5 

-80.3

Gulf War  Cash Grants 

-87.8 

-49.9 

-48.7 

-42.8 

-47.7

Gulf War Cash Grants 
Current Account 

4.3 
-92.1 

90.8 
40.9 

48.0 
-0.7 

16.0 
-26.8 

0.0
-47.7

Within the  non-trade portions  of  the  current account,  net service

receipts  are  expected to  expand steadily  in the  near  term;  this  growth will

be  depressed somewhat over  time by the  effects  of  the higher  dollar.  Net

I-38

investment  income  receipts  are  expected to  decline  from a level  in  the  first

quarter  that  had been pushed to  abnormal heights by a transitory  surge  in

the earnings  of U.S.  oil  companies  abroad.  Through  the  forecast  period, net

investment  income  receipts  are projected to  make  a small  positive

contribution to  the  current  account, as  they did  in  1990;  that contribution

is  expected to  increase  slightly over the  next few quarters  as  recent

declines  in  dollar  interest rates  show through  to  lower  net payments  on U.S.

debt  to  foreigners.

With respect to  transfer  payments,  total  cash grants  from foreign

governments to  support Operation Desert  Storm are  expected to  amount  to  $43

billion  this  year.  Payments  received in the  first quarter this  year totaled

$23  billion  (not at  an annual  rate).  An additional  $12  billion is  expected

in  the  second quarter,  and a remaining $8 billion  in  the  third quarter.  As

a result,  a current  account surplus  of  $41 billion was  recorded in  the first

quarter and a near  zero balance  is  expected in the  second quarter.  The

current account  is  then projected to  move  significantly  into  deficit  in  the

second half of  the  year.

I-39

June  26,  1991

STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL  - FR
CLASS  II  FOMC

REAL GNP AND CONSUMER PRICES,  SELECTED COUNTRIES,  1988-92
(Percent  change from fourth  quarter to fourth  quarter)

Measure and  country 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992

Projection

REAL GNP

Canada
France
Western  Germany
Italy
Japan
United Kingdom

Average,  weighted by 1987-89  GNP

Average, weighted by  share  of

U.S.  nonagricultural  exports

Total  foreign

G-6
Developing countries

CONSUMER PRICES

Canada
France
Western  Germany
Italy
Japan
United Kingdom

Average,  weighted by  1987-89 GNP

Average, weighted by  share of
U.S. non-oil  imports

3.1
4.0
3.5
3.7
5.6
3.3

4.2

4.1
3.8
5.3

4.1
3.0
1.6
5.2
1.5
6.5

3.2

-1.6
2.1
5.3
1.1
4.8
-1.3

2.5

1.8
0.7
4.7

4.9
3.6
3.0
6.3
3.5
10.0

4.9

-0.2
1.2
2.8
1.9
3.6
0.3

2.1

2.2
1.1
5.6

5.3
2.6
3.8
6.2
3.1
4.7

4.0

2.7
2.4
2.9
2.8
3.6
2.0

2.9

3.4
2.8
5.6

3.4
2.9
2.8
5.2
3.0
4.6

3.5

5.2
3.6
3.1
6.6
2.9
7.6

4.4

3.0 

4.2

4.5 

4.1 

3.3

Strictly Confidential  (FR) Class  II-FOMC

June 26,  1991

OUTLOOK  FOR  U.S.  CURRENT  ACCOUNT AND  REAL  NET  EXPORTS

(Billions of dollars,  seasonally  adjusted annual  rates)

ANNUAL

1990

1991

1990  1991-P  1992-P

91 

Q2 

03 

Q4

l1 

Q2-P 

Q3-P 

94-P

1. GNP  Real  Net  Exports  (82$)

-33.8 

-1.2  -10.7

-35.4  -44.6  -46.5 

-8.8

6.4 

-7.3 

-0.3 

-3.6

a.  Exports of  O+S
Merchandise
Services

631.5  650.3  690.1
423.9  457.0  496.1
207.6  193.3  194.0

628.1  620.1  630.5  647.2
422.4  418.4  421.0  433.8
205.7  201.7  209.5  213.4

643.0  641.6  651.7  664.8
441.3  452.5  462.5  471.8
201.7  189.1  189.2  193.1

b. Imports  of G+S

Merchandise

Oil
Non-oil

Services

Memot

Percent  Changes  (AR) 1/

Exports G+S

Imports G+S

of which* Merchandise

of whicht  Non-oil  Merch.

665.3  651.5  700.7
517.0  518.8  569.2
94.2  104.3
421.5  424.5'  464.9
148.3  132.7  131.6

95.5 

663,5  664.7  677.0  656.0
517.8  515.2  526.5  508.4
100.8 
83.3
417.1  418.3  425.5  425.1
145.6  149.4  150.5  147.6

96.9  100.9 

5.8 
7.1 
-0.5 
1.4 

2.7 
8.8 
1.9 
3.2 

6.0 
8.0 
7.6 
9.2 

11.2 
18.1 
2.5 
-2.1 

-5.0 
-3.7 
0.7 
1.2 

6.9 
2.5 
7.6 
7.1 

11.0 
12.7 
-11.8 

-0.4 

636.6  648.9  652.0  668.4
501.2  515.2  522.0  536.7
98.2
413.8  419.3  426.5  438.6
135.4  133.7  130.0  131.7

95.5 

87.4 

95.9 

-2.6 

7.1 

-11,3 
-10.2 

-0.9 
10.6 
8.0 
5.4 

6.4 
9.2 
1.9 
7.1 

8.3 
8.2 
10.5 
11.8 

5.9
7.0
7.6
7.9

1992

Q4-P

-14.1

704.9
509.7
195.2

719.0
586.7
107.9
478.8
132.3

2. U.S.  Current Account  Balance

-92.1 

-3.3  -47.7 

-90.7 

-88.7  -95.5  -93.6 

40.9 

-0.7 

-8.2  -45.3 

-52.4

a. Merchandise  Trade,  net

-108.1  -69.8  -80.3 

-110.1  -96.4  -115.0  -110.9 

-73.5  -67.0  -66.1  -72.9 

-83.6

Exports

Agricultural
Nonagricultural

Imports
Oil
Non-oil

389.5  416.9  453.4 
41.8 
40.3 
349.3  376.7  411.6 

40.2 

497.7  486.8  533.7 
57.6 
52.6 
435.6  434.2  476.1 

62.1 

381.0  388.4  386.6  402.3 
37.8 
338.0  347.5  347.3  364.5 

39.3 

40.8 

43.0 

403.4  412,9  421.5  429.9 
40.1 
363.7  372.5  380.7  389.8 

40.9 

39.7 

40.4 

491.1  484.7  501.6  513.2 
72.1 
63.2 
427.9  433.4  439.8  441.1 

51.3 

62.8 

476.9  479.8  487.7  502.7 
54.0 
424.3  428.1  435.7  448.7 

52.0 

51.7 

52.6 

466.3
42.8
423.5

549.9
59.7
490.2

b. Other  Current Account 

16.0 

66.5 

32.7 

19.5 

7.6 

19.5 

17.3 

114.3 

66.3 

57.9 

27.6 

31.2

Investment  Income, net 

Direct,  net 
Portfolio,  net 

of whichi  Gov't  Payments 

11.9 
52.7 

5.6 
8.7 
43.0 
48.7 
-40.7  -40.0  -37.4 
35.9 
36.5 

37.9 

12.0 
51.9 

0.0 
43.6 

24.5 
61.7 
-39.8  -43.6  -42.3  -37.2 
39.1 

11.2 
53.5 

38.1 

37.4 

36.8 

Military Transactions, net 
Other  Services,  net 
Unilateral  Transfers,  net 

-7.2 
33.6 
-22.3 

-2.1 
-5.6 
46.9 
40.0 
23.4  -17.8 

-6.9 
30.5 

-9.0 
38.9 
-16.1  -18.8  -17.3  -37.1 

-6.7 
32.3 

-6.2 
32.6 

18.6 
60.6 

3.3 
45.8 
-42.0  -42.5 
36,5 

38.5 

6.5 
43.9 

6.5 
44.6 
-37.4  -38.1 
35.2 

35.7 

-8.7 
36.7 
67.8 

-6.8 
38.8 
31.0 

-4.8 
-2.0 
43.1 
41.2 
15.0  -20.0 

4.1
42.7
-38.6
36.5

-1.2
48.4
-20.0

1/  Percent  change  from  previous  period;  percent  changes  for  annual  data  are  calculated  Q4/Q4.




==== GREENBOOK | 1991-07-03_fomc19910703gbpt219910626.txt ====

Prefatory Note 

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 

available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain. 

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 

gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.    

1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Confidential  (FR)  Class  III  FOMC

June  26,  1991

RECENT  DEVELOPMENTS

Prepared  for  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee
By  the  staff  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of the  Federal  Reserve  System

CONTENTS

....  ............. 

II  DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS
Employment  and  unemployment....................................... .
1
Industrial production ............. 
... ............. 
7
Personal  income................................................... 
9
Consumer  spending ............  .... .................................  13
Housing markets.............................  ........... 
17
Business  fixed investment..........................  ...... ........... 
21
26
Inventories ........................... .......................... 
.
29
The  federal government............................................ 
...... 31
State and local governments.................................... 
33
Labor costs....................................................... 
35
Food prices and agricultural conditions............................ 
39
Energy prices  and  supplies....................................... 
39
Prices ............................................................ 
47
Probability of  expansion.......................................... 
47
1987-based real  GNP.......................................................... 

............ 

Tables
Changes  in employment............................................ 
Unemployment  and labor  force  participation rates.................. 
Changes  in employment:  Household survey............................ 
Growth in  selected components  of industrial  production............. 
Capacity  utilization in manufacturing............................. 
Production of  domestic autos  and trucks............................ 
Personal  income................................................... 
Movements  in disposable personal  income  relative to GNP........... 
Retail  sales...................................................... 
Sales  of  automobiles and light trucks............................. 
Private housing activity................................... 
Housing starts by  region................  .. ..........  ..  ......  .. 
Business capital  spending indicators.............................. 
Inventories of  domestic autos  and  light trucks.................... 
Changes in manufacturing and trade inventories.................... 
Inventories  relative to  sales..................................... 
Federal  government outlays and  receipts........................... 
Cash and in-kind contributions

..... 

for Operation Desert Shield/Storm............................. 
Average hourly earnings............................................ 
Employer  costs  for  compensation................................... 
U.S.  agricultural production and  inventories....................... 
Recent  changes  in consumer prices................................. 
Recent  changes  in producer prices................................. 
CPI  excluding food  and energy.................................... 
Price  indexes  for  commodities and materials....................... 
Recent data  on coincident  indicators.............................. 
1990:4 GNP  expenditure  shares  in 1982  and 1987  dollars............ 
Recent movements  in  1982-  and 1987-based  real  GNP ................. 

Charts
Output  per hour.................................................... 
.............. 
Private housing starts............................... 
Speculative construction of  single-family housing.................. 
Recent  data on  orders  and shipments............................... 
Nonresidential  construction and selected indicators................ 
Nonresidential  structures  excluding drilling and mining............ 
States  with deficits  in their general  fund  accounts............... 
........ 
Average  hourly earnings........................................ 

2
2
5
6
6
8
10
10
12
15
16
18
20
27
28
28
30

30
33
34
36
38
38
40
42
48
50
53

4
16
18
22
23
24
32
34

ii

DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS--Continued

II 
Index weights......................... .........  ................... 
Commodity price measures.......................................... 
Spot prices  for  industrial metals................................ 
Composite  index of  leading  indicators........................... 
Probability of  expansion........................................... 

DOMESTIC FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS

III 
Monetary aggregates  and bank  credit............................... 
Business  finance.................................  ................. 
Treasury and sponsored-agency financing........................... 
Municipal securities.............................................. 
Mortgage markets................................................. 
Consumer credit................................................... 

Tables
Monetary aggregates........................................ 
Commercial bank credit  and short-  and intermediate-term

... 

business  credit............................................... 
Gross offerings of securities  by U.S.  corporations................ 
Treasury and agency  financing.................................... 
Gross offerings of municipal securities............................ 
Mortgage-backed security issuance................................. 
Consumer credit ................................................... 
Consumer  interest rates........ 
....... ...... .......  ..............  .

Charts
Retail CD  rollover differential  and inflows to  bond funds.......... 
Initial  rate  spread vs. ARM share  of loans  closed................. 
Home mortgage  delinquency rate  at  all lenders...................... 
Consumer loan delinquency rates.................................... 

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS

IV 
U.S.  merchandise trade............................................ 
Oil  imports:  Quantities and prices............................... 
Prices  of  non-oil  imports and exports............................. 
U.S.  current account through  1991:1.............................. 
U.S.  international  financial  transactions......................... 
The U.S.  international investment  position......................... 
Foreign exchange markets........................................... 
Developments in foreign industrial  countries...................... 
Developments in East  European economies.......................... 
Economic  situation in other  countries.............................. 

Tables
U.S. merchandise trade:  Monthly data.............................. 
U.S.  merchandise trade:  Quarterly data............................. 
Major trade  categories............................................ 
Oil imports....................................................... 
Import and export price measures.................................. 
U.S.  current account:  Quarterly data............................... 
........... 
U.S.  current account:  Annual  data.................... 
Summary of U.S.  international  transactions....................... 
International  banking data........................................ 
Major industrial  countries

............. 

Real  GNP  and industrial  production............................. 
Consumer and wholesale prices................................... 
Trade  and  current  account balances.............................. 

42
44
45
46
46

3
7
9
12
14
19

2

5
6
10
13
16
18
18

4
16
17
20

1
4
4
6
10
14
15
19
28
30

1
2
3
4
5
7
8
11
13

20
21
22

Charts
Weighted average  exchange value  of the dollar.......................  17
17
Selected dollar exchange  rates..................................... 

DOMESTIC  NONFINANCIAL
DEVELOPMENTS

DOMESTIC  NONFINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS

Incoming data point  to a bottoming out  of  the recession during the

early spring and a subsequent  upturn in economic activity.  Domestic  final

demand appears to be  rising moderately, led by solid gains  in consumer

spending.  Inventory liquidation continued through April, helping to move

inventory-sales ratios  back to more  comfortable  levels  in many sectors.

With  stocks  sharply reduced, the production of  motor vehicles  has moved up

appreciably from its  first-quarter low.  Elsewhere  in the manufacturing

sector, output  appears to be  leveling off  or  edging up  slightly.  "Core"

inflation has  eased from  its very  rapid pace  at the beginning of  1991.

Employment  and Unemployment

Labor demand appears  to  have  firmed.  Total  payroll employment  edged up

59,000  in  May, and the  average  workweek  jumped  0.3  hour.  As a result,

aggregate  hours  of  production or  nonsupervisory workers moved  up

0.9 percent--more than offsetting the  April  decline  of  0.7  percent.  After

dipping  to  6.6  percent  in April,  the  unemployment  rate  more  than  retraced

that  movement in  May, rising to  6.9  percent.  However,  averaging through the

last  two readings, the  unemployment  rate  has  been essentially  flat  since

March. 

Filings for  initial  claims  for unemployment  insurance  reached a

cyclical  high of  535,000  (FRB seasonals)  in  late  March and have  fluctuated

narrowly  just  below  450,000  since the  week  ended May 11.

The May increase  in payroll  employment  was  fairly broad-based.  The

diffusion  index  of monthly employment  changes  in  356 private  industries

1. The unemployment  rate when seasonally  adjusted using a concurrent

method dropped  0.2 percentage point  to  6.6  percent in April but  returned to
6.8  percent  in  May.

II-1

CHANGES  IN EMPLOYMENT  1
(Thousands of employees;  based on  seasonally adjusted data)

II-2

1989 

1990 

1990 
Q4 

1991 
Q1 

Feb. 

1991
Mar. 

Apr. 

May

-----------------

Average  monthly  changes--------------

Nonfarm payroll  employment 2  

176 

36 

-164 

-240 

-258 

-258 

-180 

Private 

Manufacturing 

Durable 

Motor  vehicles 

Nondurable 
Construction 
Transportation, public  utilities 
Wholesale  trade 
Retail  trade 
Finance, insurance,  real  estate 
Services 

Health services 

Total  government 

Private  nonfarm production workers 
Manufacturing production  workers 

143 
-13 
-16 
-3 

3 
2 
15 
5 
25 
3 
105 
27 
32 

119 
-14 

3 

-48 
-39 
-5 
-9 
-23 
9 
-5 
-5 
1 
72 
34 
33 

-172 
-98 
-74 
-13 
-24 
-59 
4 
-13 
-40 
-6 
37 
34 
8 

-258 
-102 

-81 
-11 
-21 
-64 
-14 
-20 
-67 
1 
9 
27 
18 

-282 
-139 
-118 
-17 
-21 

-5 
-32 
-19 
-78 
-4 
-7 
28 
24 

-276 
-89 
-68 
-8 
-21 
-72 
-10 
-14 
-86 
3 
-7 
25 
18 

-193 
-44 
-22 
15 
-22 
-37 
-9 
-23 
-53 
-17 
-7 
35 
13 

-9 
-41 

-169 
-83 

-223 
-83 

-288 
-116 

-206 
-64 

-199 
-20 

59

49
12
4
22
8
13
7
-3
-13
-4
43
31
10

32
16

Total  employment 3  
Nonagricultural 

Private wage  and salary workers 
Self-employed 

148 
148 
125 
5 

-32 
-38 
-45 
20 

-103 
-123 
-193 
29 

-273 
-222 
-265 
10 

-4 
-63 
-227 
138 

-164 
-40 
-178 
50 

644 
587 
44 
283 

-807
-924
85
-477

1. Average  change  from  final  month of preceding period to  final month of period indicated.
2. Survey  of  establishments.
3. Survey of  households.

UNEMPLOYMENT  AND  LABOR  FORCE  PARTICIPATION  RATES
(Percent;  seasonally adjusted)

1989 

1990 

Q4 

Q1 

1990  1991 

1991
Feb.  Mar. 

Apr. 

May

Civilian,  16  years  and older

5.3 

5.5 

5.9 

6.5 

6.5 

6.8 

6.6 

6.9

Teenagers
20-24  years  old
Men,  25  years  and older
Women,  25 years  and older

15.0
8.6
3.9
4.2

15.5
8.8
4.4
4.3

16.4
9.2
4.8
4.6

18.0
10.1

5.5-
5.0

17.1
10.5
5.6
4.9

18.7
10.3
5.8
5.3

18.1
10.1
5.6
5.2

19.1
11.2
5.8
5.1

Labor  force participation rate

66.4 

66.4 

66.2 

66.1 

66.1 

66.2 

66.4 

66.1

-- 

--

II-3

moved up--indicating that,  for  the  first time  in a year,  the number of

industries  gaining  jobs  equalled the number  losing them.  Manufacturing

employment  edged up  in May.  Recalls  of workers  in the motor vehicle

industry more than  accounted for the  increase, but most manufacturing

industries registered greatly moderated  job  losses  or  small  job  gains.  The

notable exception was  the machinery industry, where employment  dropped

another  10,000.  Construction employment  turned up in May;  that  industry had

shed about  half a million  jobs  since last  June.

In  the  private  service-producing  sector, hiring  rose  in May, the first

increase  since  January.  Business  services  gained 14,000  jobs,  about  equal

to  its  loss  over the  past three months,  and employment  in  health  services

continued its  steady  increase.  Although employment  fell  further  in

wholesale  and retail  trade, the pace  of  job  losses  slowed markedly.

Swings  in  employment  as measured by the  household survey were  unusually

large  over  the  April-May period, principally because  of  large  swings  in  the

counts  of  individuals  reporting themselves  to be  government  workers  or  self-

employed  (table).  However,  the  household survey estimate  of  employment

changes  for  private wage  and salary  workers  (excluding private household

workers)  has  flattened out  in the  past  two months  and is  not  sharply at  odds

with the pattern in the  establishment  survey.

II-4

OUTPUT  PER  HOUR

Nonfarm  Business Sector

1 

P 
I 
I 
I 
* 
I 
I 
I 
I 

M uc 

1 

I 
I 
1 

I 

I 
I 
I 
I 

I 
I 
I 
I 

I 
I 

I 
..... 
I 
II 

I 
I 
I 

I 
I 

1 

* 
* 

Se
1. 

T 
I 
1 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 

I 

I 
I 
I 
I 
I 

I 

I 
I 
I 
I 

I 
I 
I 
I 

I 
[ 

I~E 

I~ 

I' 
I 
I 

I 
I 

I 

I 
I 

Manufacturing  Sector

_I 

I 

P 

I 
I 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 

1 
I 
* 
I 
I 

I 
* 

I 
I 
* 
g 

I 

I 
I 
I 
I 

I 

g 

I 

1 
I 

I 

I 

T 

I 
I 
I 
I 
I 

I 
I 
I 
I
I 
I 
i 
r 

1 
I 
I 
I 

I 

I 
I 
g 
I 
I 
r 
I 
I 

I 

I/ 

I 

PT 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I * 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 

II 

I 
I 
I 
I 
t 

I 
I 
I 
I 

I 
I 
I 
I 
r 

' 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 

I 
I 
I 
I 

l 
I 
I 

1 
1 

I 
1 

I 
IE 
I II 
I 

I 

t 

P 
1 
1 
I 

1 

I 
I 
I 

I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 

I 

I 
I 
I 

I 
I 
I 
I 
3 

I 
1y 

I 
I 
I 
I 

I 

T 
I 
1 
I 

1 
I 
I 
I 

I 
HI 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 

I
I
I 

I 
I 
I 
5I 
I 
I
I 

I
I 
L 

Ii C  1  1  1 
I 
I 
II
I 

I  I 
I 

1 

-

; 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 
I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 
I 

I 

I 
I 

1 

PT 

I 
1 

I 

I 
I 
1 
I 

l 
I 

I 

I 

I 

I 
I 
I 
1 
I 

r 

I 
I 
1 

I 
1 

1 
I 
I 
11 

I 

1 

I 

I 

I 
1 

II 

I 
I 

I 

P 

I 
I 

I 
I 
I 
1 

r 
I 
I 

g 

I 
I 
r 

I 

I 

I 
Il 
I 

I 
rI 
I 
11 
li 
flI 

li I 

I 
I 
1  2 
1  -

11 

I 
1 
I 1
r 
1 
I
I 

I 

I 

I 

I 
I 

I 

I 

~ 

I 

1
1

I 

I
I

I .

T 

1
IT
I 
I
I 
I 
1 

1 
1 
1

I 
I 

1 
I 
I

I 

I 
1I 
I 

1

r

I 

I 

I 
I 

$82/hour, ratio  scale

S26

l

P
I
1
I

I
I
I

I
I
I
I
I

I

I

I
I
I
I
I 

1

I
E
I

24

22

20

1

1

I

i'' 

' 

' 

I
''''''' 

14

I

.

.

$82/hour, 

ratio scale-26
P

24

-

22

1

I
I
I

I
I 
1
I 
I 
I f
I 
r
I

II
1
I

I

I
I
I
I

I-r

I

I 

I
I

1973 

1976

1979 

1982 

1985

1988

II-5

CHANGES  IN EMPLOYMENT  - HOUSEHOLD  SURVEY 1
(Thousands of  employees;  based  on seasonally adjusted data)

1990 

1991 
Q1 

Mar. 

1991
Apr. 

May

------Average monthly changes-----

Nonagricultural  employment 
Wage  and salary workers 

Government 
Private  wage and salary workers 
Private  household workers 

Self-employed 
Unpaid family workers 

-38 
-57 
-9 
-45 
-4 
20 
-1 

-222 
-213 
63 
-265 
-11 
10 
-5 

-40 
-114 
37 
-178 
27 
50 
-15 

587 
242 
235 
44 
-37 
283 
-11 

-924
-84
-160
85
-9
-477
-7

1. Components may not  sum to totals  because of independent  seasonal

adjustment of the  total  and its  components.

Other  indicators  from the  household  survey also point to  a

stabilization of labor market  conditions.  Persons  who  reentered the

workforce  or who were  entering the  labor  force  for  the  first  time  accounted

for  almost  half of  the May increase  in  unemployment;  earlier in the  year,

job  losers  had  dominated the net  change  in unemployment.  The  number of

individuals  involuntarily employed part  time  for  economic reasons also

declined over the  past  two months.

Labor productivity in  the  nonfarm business sector grew  at  a 0.3  percent

annual rate  in the first  quarter of  1991,  reflecting large  and nearly

offsetting declines in both output  and hours  worked.  The  behavior  of

productivity in this  recession has  differed somewhat  from the typical

cyclical pattern.  The typical pattern is  that  productivity flattens out  or

declines  near the end of an expansion;  it  subsequently declines  sharply

early in a recession as  production first  slows and then  is  cut back while

labor continues to be  hoarded.  Productivity usually begins  to  stabilize  in

II-6

GROWTH IN  SELECTED COMPONENTS OF  INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION
(Percent change  from preceding comparable  period)

Proportion
in
total
IP
1990:Q4

1990 

1991

1991

19901

Q4  , 

Q1 

Mar. 

Apr. 

May

--Annual rate-

Total  index

100.0

0.3 

-7.0 

-9.6 

-0.6 

0.3 

0.5

Excluding motor vehicles

and parts and utilities

Products, total

Final products

Consumer  goods

Automotive products
Other  consumer  goods

Durables
Nondurables
Energy
Other

Business  equipment
Motor  vehicles
Other business  equipment
Information  processing

and  related

Industrial

Defense  and  space  equip.

Construction  supplies

Materials
Durable
Nondurable
Energy

Memorandum:
Manufacturing

Excluding motor  vehicles

and parts

Mining
Utilities

88.5

61.4
46.9
25.7
2.2
23.5
3.0
20.5
2.7
17.8

15.8
1.0
14.8

6.6
4.3
4.8
5.7

38.6
19.6
8.8
10.2

84.9

81.0

7.5
7.6

1.0 

-4.7 

-8.7 

-0.9 

0.0 

-0.0

0.6
'1.1
-0.7
-7.3
0.0
-3.9
0.6
-2.3
1.0

-5.3
-5.3
-3.8
-37.6
0.4
-16.2
3.2
-2.4
4.1

-8.7
-7.3
-6.9

-24.6
-5.1
-10.9
-4.2
-4.9
-4.1

4.2 
-9.4 
5.3 

-7.6 
-49.8 
-3.4 

-7.4 
-42.2 
-4.5 

5.1
1.3
-0.2
-4.6

-0.1
-0.5
0.5
0.0

0.4
-10.2
-4.7
-12.0

-9.7
-13.9
-5.5
-4.5

7.0

-14.1
-8.7
-21.0

-11.1
-16.6
-6.9
-3.3

-0.3
-0.1
0.1
0.9
0.1
0.7

-0.0
0.7
-0.1

-0.2

2.3

-0.4

-0.3

0.3
-0.8
-2.3

-1.2
-2.1
-0.6
-0.1

0.3
0.4
0.6
6.3
0.1
1.3
-0.1
-0.7
0.0

0.6 
10.0 
0.0 

-0.2
-0.4
-1.4

1.2

0.4
1.0
0.1

-0.5

-0.3
4.2
-0.6

-0.5
-1.0
-0.7
0.5

0.6
0.5
-0.1
1.4

0.3 

-7.4 

-10.4 

-0.8 

0.5 

0.2

0.9 

-4.9 

-9.2 

-0.9 

0.2 

-0.0

2.4 
-2.1 

-1.4 
-7.6 

-3.9 
-7.6 

-1.3 
1.7 

-1.5 
0.1 

-0.1
3.9

1.  From the  final  quarter  of

indicated.

the  previous  period  to  the  final  quarter  of  the  period

CAPACITY UTILIZATION  IN MANUFACTURING
(Percent of  capacity;  seasonally  adjusted)

1967-89  1988-89 

1990 

1991

Avg. 

High 

May 

Mar. 

Apr. 

May

Total  industry 

Manufacturing 

Primary processing 
Advanced processing 

82.2 

85.0 

81.5 

85.1 

82.3 
81.1 

89.0 
83.6 

83.4 

82.9 

85.0 
82.1 

78.4 

77.2 

77.9 
76.8 

78.5 

77.4 

78.1 
77.1 

78.7

77.3

78.3
76.9

II-7

the middle of recessions  as  firing becomes more  aggressive and finally rises

sharply during the  initial phase  of a recovery as production  snaps  back.

In the  current  episode, however, productivity fell more than is typical

in the  late expansion period--at a 1.6 percent annual rate between the

fourth quarter of  1988  and the  first quarter of  1990--as output  growth

decelerated sharply  and firms  continued to hire at  a relatively rapid pace.

Productivity then began to  stabilize prior to the  cyclical peak,  as firms

attempted to  control  labor costs and halt the  slump  in profits.  This  was

particularly true in manufacturing  industries where  competitive pressures

were greatest.  These  cost-cutting efforts  continued during the recession

and were  reflected in a prompt  and aggressive  shedding of  labor as  output

fell.  This  has been quite evident  in construction  and wholesale trade,

while manufacturers  continued the process begun  in  early 1989.

Industrial  Production

Industrial  production rose  in April and May, after declining sharply

earlier this year  (table).  The gains  resulted, in  part,  from an  increase in

motor vehicle output  and a firming in  industries that  produce  construction

supplies.  In addition, unseasonably warm weather in May provided a

transitory boost  to  output  at  utilities, which  raised the total  IP index

more than  1/4  percent  in that  month.

From September to  February, motor vehicle  assemblies plunged 3-3/4

million units at  an annual  rate  (FRB seasonals)  and, when  allowance is made

for  both direct and indirect effects, accounted for  nearly one-half of the

decline in  total  IP  during this  period.  However, motor vehicle  assemblies

have  increased 1-1/4  million units  since  February, which has  boosted the

total index by more than 1/4  percentage point  in  each month.  Currently,

II-8

domestic makers have  scheduled motor vehicle assemblies  in June  at  a

9.2  million unit  annual  rate.  However,  in the  first  three weeks  of June,

auto production was running about  4 percent  short  of the  scheduled assembly

rate;  truck production was  about  on schedule.  If that pace  continues  for

the remainder of the month, domestic motor vehicle production for  June would

likely be up  slightly  from the May level  (table).

(Millions of units at  an annual  rate;  FRB  seasonal basis)

PRODUCTION OF DOMESTIC AUTOS AND TRUCKS

1990 

Q3 

Q4 

1991 

Q1 

1991

Apr. 

May 

June  1

Domestic production:

Autos 
Trucks 

6.9 
4.1 

5.6 
3.2 

5.1 
2.6 

5.1 
3.3 

5.3 
3.4 

5.3
3.6

1. The  estimate  of  domestic auto and truck  production in June  is  based
on actual  assemblies  through the week ended  June  21,  as  seasonally adjusted
by FRB staff.

Output  of  construction supplies,  which  dropped sharply late  last year

and early this year,  turned up  in April  and May, consistent with  the pickup

in housing  starts  in recent months.  In addition, part  of the  rebound in

output  of  consumer durables excluding motor vehicles  (for example,

appliances,  carpeting, and furniture)  probably is  attributable  to  a firming

in the  housing sector.

Output of  business equipment  has  continued to decline  in recent months,

owing in  part  to weakness  in production of office  and  computing machines and

industrial  equipment.  Although  output  in this  sector  continued to  weaken

through May, production of capital  goods  typically continues to decline  in

the  initial months following a trough in the  total index.

II-9

Capacity utilization in manufacturing  edged down  a bit  further in May

and has  declined nearly  6 percentage points  since  July 1990.  During  this

period, the operating rate  in  primary processing has dropped about

8 percentage points to  78.3  percent;  while the  current  operating rate  in

advanced processing industries, at  76.9 percent,  has  declined 5 percentage

points  since  last  July.

Available  physical product  data for  June  are mostly pointing upward.

The expected increase  in motor vehicle  assemblies should  contribute about

0.1  percentage point to total  IP  in June,  and electricity generation through

mid-month is  down  only slightly  from the  May average.  The most  recent

observations  on  other  physical product  data, which include steel,  plywood,

and paper,  are  up,  on net,  from their May averages;  if these  gains hold up

through the  remainder of  the month, these  series  would  contribute  about

1/4  percent  to  total  IP  in  June.  Adjusted durable goods  orders rose

1-1/2  percent in May after  a 5-1/4  percent  increase  in April.  In recent

months,  increases  in new  bookings  have  been fairly widespread--consistent

with an  increase  in  June  IP.

Personal  Income

Although growth in  personal  income remained weak early  in the  second

quarter,  signs  of  a pickup  have begun to  emerge.  Private wages  and salaries

rose  $5.6  billion  in April,  the  largest  increase  since December,  and the

available  labor market  data indicate  a sizable  increase  in May. 2  Higher

subsidy payments  to  farmers  boosted income  growth substantially in March but

were partly  reversed in  April;  growth in  the  remaining  components  of  income

2. Revised labor market data  indicate a sharper decline  in  employment  and
the workweek in  April than originally reported, which likely will  cause  the
wages  and salaries  component  of personal  income  to be  lowered for  the  month.

II-10

PERSONAL  INCOME
(Average monthly change  at  an annual rate; billions  of dollars)

1990 

1991 

1991

1990 

Q4 

Q1 

Feb.  Mar.  Apr.

Total  personal  income

20.5 

15.2 

2.8 

9.8 

17.3 

Wages  and  salaries

Private

Other  labor  income

Proprietors'  income

Farm

Rent
Dividend
Interest

3.3

6.1
5.6

10.9 
8.2 

2.1 
-. 2 

-3.4
-7.3

.4

-2.6

3.1 
.7 

1.3 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0

2.1 
.5 

4.9 
4.8 

-. 6 
.6 
.5 

1.8 
1.9 

9.2 
7.6 

12.9 
11.5 

-. 5
-. 6

-2.5

-. 4
.4

-3.2

-. 5

-2.3
-2.6

-4.3
-5.2

.1
-. 1

-2.0

Transfer  payments

5.2 

6.7 

9.7 

2.6 

6.0 

2.7

Less:  Personal  contributions

for  social  insurance

Less:  Personal  tax and nontax

payments

.1 

2.5

.0 

.2 

.4

4.0 

1.9 

-. 4 

-. 8 

1.4 

2.5

Equals:  Disposable personal  income

16.5

13.2 

3.3 

10.6 

16.0

Memo:  Real  disposable  income

-. 8 

-1.1 

-5.7 

1.0 

9.5 

-4.3

MOVEMENTS  IN  DISPOSABLE  PERSONAL INCOME  RELATIVE  TO GNP
(Percentage point  change  from the peak)

Current 
recession 

Average  of
postwar recessions

Real  disposable  personal  income2  

Disposable  personal income 

Private wages and  salaries 
Government wages  and salaries 
Nonfarm proprietors'  income 
Personal interest  income 
Transfer payments 

Unemployment  insurance payments 
Other transfer payments 

Other income 

-.2 

.3 

-.6 
.3 
-.1 
-.1 
.8 
.1 
.7 
.0 

Minus contributions  to  social  insurance 
Minus personal  taxes 

.1 
.1 

.9

1.1

.0
.3
-. 1
.3
.7
.2
.5
-. 1

.0
.1

1. Recessions  starting in  1953,  1957,  1960,  1969,  1973,  1980,  and

1981.

2. Scaled by  real  GNP.
S.  Sc0A1p  h-  nnmnnal  WNP

II-11

has  remained lackluster.  In  particular, interest  income  is  estimated to

have  fallen  in every month  from December through April.  After accounting

for changes  in consumer prices, real  disposable personal  income  (DPI) fell

o

$4.3  billion in April.  However,  the decline  follows  a $9.5  billion rise  in

March.

On balance,  real DPI  fell  1-1/4  percent  in the  first  two quarters  of

this  recession--a  relatively large  decline by historical  standards compared

with the  contraction in  real  GNP.  On average,  real  DPI as  a percent of  real

GNP  has  risen  0.9 percentage  point  in the first  two quarters of a recession,

while  in  the  recent  downturn, it  fell  0.2  percentage point  (table).  Part  of

this  difference reflects  shifts  in relative  prices associated with the

increase  in  excise taxes  and the oil  price  shock.  3 But  the  bulk  of the

discrepancy lies  in  the growth  of nominal DPI  relative to  GNP  and can  be

traced principally to two  components:  private wages  and  salaries  and

personal interest  income.

Private wages  and salaries  fell  more  in  this  recession than would be

expected  given the movements  in  GNP.  In  large  part,  this  is  the  flip  side

of  the  better-than-average,  peak-to-trough productivity performance:  Hours

fell more  rapidly than is  typical,  as  firms  moved aggressively to  trim

payrolls  and cut  costs.  In addition,  slow growth in  average hourly  earnings

in  1990:Q4  and  1991:Q1  contributed to  sluggish growth in  private wages  and

salaries.

3. Technically, higher energy prices  boosted consumer  prices  (the PCE
deflator),  which are  used to deflate  nominal disposable income, more  than
the GNP  deflator.  Prices  of  the  goods  consumed in  the United States  rose
more  rapidly than the  prices  of goods  produced, in  part because of  the
U. S. position as  a net  importer  of  petroleum products.

II-12

(Seasonally adjusted percentage  change)

RETAIL  SALES

1990 

1991 

1991

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Mar.  Apr. 

May

Total  sales

Previous estimate

Retail  controll

Previous  estimate

Total  excl.  automotive  group

Previous estimate

GAF 2

Previous estimate

Durable  goods  stores
Previous  estimate

.1 

-1.0
-. 9

.5 

.3 

-. 3
-. 3

-. 3
-. 3

-2.0
-1.8

-. 6
-3.4
-1.2
1.9

.2
.4

.1
.1

.0
.0

-. 4

-. 6

.9
1.3

-2.1
1.3
.7
2.8

-. 4
-. 1

-.

6

-. 3

-. 3
-. 2

-. 1
.6

6.2
-. 7
.3
-4.0

1.3

1.4

-1.3
1.6
1.5
3.7

.7 

-2.0

.0 

-1.3 

Bldg. material  and  supply
Automotive  dealers
Furniture  and  appliances
Other  durable  goods

.4
.4
-1.9
.4

-3.1
-. 9

-2.4

-. 5

Nondurable goods  stores
Previous estimate

2.1

.9 

-. 4 
-. 4 

-. 1 
-. 1 

-. 5
-. 5

Apparel
Food
General merchandise 3
Gasoline  stations
Other  nondurables 4

Memo:

Motor vehicle  sales 5

Autos
Light trucks

.9
1.2
1.7
8.5
1.4

-3.0
.5
-1.4
9.5

.4

.0
.3
1.8
-9.8
1.3

14.2
9.7
4.5

12.9
9.0
4.0

11.8

8.2
3.6

-1.8
1.5
-. 2

-2.1
-.

6

12.5
8.7
3.8

2.4
-. 6
.4
-2.5
-1.1

2.4

.9
.7
1.4
.2

11.7
7.9
3.8

12.3
8.4
3.9

1. Total  retail  sales  less  building material  and  supply  stores  and

automotive dealers,  except  auto and home  supply  stores.

2.  General  merchandise,  apparel,  furniture, and  appliance  stores.
3. General merchandise  excludes  mail  order nonstores;  mail  order

sales  are  also  excluded in the  GAF  grouping.

4.  Includes  sales  at  eating and  drinking places,  drug  and proprietary

stores.

5. Millions  of  units  at  an annual rate;  BEA seasonals.

II-13

Changes  in interest  income  also  have been  unusual during this  downturn.

Rather than rising  strongly as  in previous  recessions,  the  level  of interest

income  has  fallen  slightly.  Interest  income  is  affected by both the growth

in  assets  and interest  rates,  and it  is the  behavior  of interest  rates  that

appears  atypical.  Most  previous recessions  were preceded by periods of

rising  interest  rates,  resulting in a rise  in interest  income  during the

first  two quarters  of the downturn.  However,  in the  current  episode, the

cyclical  peak was  preceded by  falling interest  rates,  which has  generated

declines  in  interest  income  over  the course  of this  recession.

Tax policy may have been  slightly less  effective at  stabilizing

disposable  income in the  recent  recession and boosting DPI  in the  early

phases of  the  recovery.  Only during the  initial phase  of the  1973  recession

did personal federal tax payments  fall  more  slowly.  Although  this  result  is

partially explained by the  decline in marginal  tax rates  legislated in  the

1986  Tax Reform Act,  the more  important  explanation concerns  discretionary

tax policy.  Tax cuts  occurred in  each  of the  past three  recessions,

although taxes  were not  reduced until  six  quarters  after the onset  of  the

1973  recession.  In contrast,  discretionary  fiscal  policy has been

restrictive in  the  current  recession, and the  Omnibus Budget  Reconciliation

Act  passed in  October  1990  is estimated to have  raised revenues  $32  billion,

at  a seasonally adjusted annual  rate,  in the  first  two  quarters of  FY1991;

$13.5  billion of  this  increase  represents  higher  income and  social  insurance

taxes.

Consumer  Spending

Incoming data  suggest that  personal  consumption  expenditures  are

continuing on the  upward course that  has  prevailed since the  apparent trough

II-14

in  spending in  January.  Sales  of  cars  and  light  trucks picked up  in May and

rose  further in the  first  20  days of  June.  Spending on goods  other than

motor  vehicles  rose  sharply in May, while  the  consumption of services  also

has  strengthened noticeably.

Nominal  sales  at  stores  in the retail  control category, which provide a

reading on consumption expenditures  for  goods  other  than motor vehicles,

rose  1.0  percent  in May. 4  Sales  were  particularly strong  for the  second

consecutive month at  general merchandise stores, apparel  outlets,  and

furniture  and appliance  stores,  where spending is  thought  to be  largely

discretionary.  With prices  for  comparable  items  rising about  0.4  percent in

last  month's  CPI,  May retail  sales  likely will  translate  into a sizable

increase  in  real  PCE  for  goods other  than motor vehicles.  Sales  at  gasoline

stations  also  increased, but  the rise  appears  to  reflect higher prices  for

gasoline.

Although  sales  of motor vehicles  have  strengthened in  recent  weeks,

they  remain quite  weak by historical  standards.  Domestically produced light

vehicles  sold at  a 10.4  million unit  annual  rate  in  the first  twenty days  of

June, up  from a 9.6 million unit  annual  pace  in May.  The  recent  pickup was

particularly notable in  the market  of  light  trucks and vans,  where  sales

were  especially  sluggish  last  winter.  Sales  of imported autos  also  have

recovered  from their weak  January-February  pace.

4. The  retail  control  category  is  calculated  by  subtracting sales  at  auto

dealers  and building materials and  supply stores  from total retail  sales.

II-15

SALES  OF AUTOMOBILES AND LIGHT TRUCKS  1

(Millions of units  at  an  annual  rate,  BEA seasonals)

1990 

1991 

1991

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Mar. 

Apr 

May 

June2

Autos  and light  trucks 

Autos 
Light  trucks 

Domestically produced 3 

Autos 
Light  trucks 

Imports 
Autos 
Light  trucks 

14.18  12.95  11.80  12.49  11.68  12.29 
8.43 
3.86 

8.22 
3.57 

8.73 
3.76 

8.98 
3.97 

7.93 
3.76 

9.72 
4.47 

11.30  10.18 
6.59 
3.59 

7.21 
4.09 

2.89 
2.51 
.38 

2.76 
2.38 
.38 

9.25 
5.99 
3.26 

2.54 
2.23 
.31 

9.63 
6.18 
3.45 

2.87 
2.55 
.32 

8.96 
5.50 
3.46 

2.72 
2.43 
.29 

9.63 
6.09 
3.55 

2.66 
2.34 
.32 

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

10.4
6.7
3.7

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

1. Components  may not  add to totals due  to  rounding.
2. First  twenty days,  FRB  seasonals.
3. Includes  vehicles  produced in  Canada  and Mexico  for  General Motors,

Ford, and Chrysler.

Note:  Data  on sales  of  trucks  and imported autos  for  the  current month

are  preliminary and subject  to  revision.

Service outlays were  estimated to have  increased  0.5  percent  in April

and  0.9  percent  in March;  spending in  both months  was  boosted by a rebound

in energy  outlays,  further strong gains  in medical  services,  and increases

in  net  foreign  travel.  Information on  spending on  services  in May is  not

yet  available, but  with temperatures unseasonably warm  in many parts  of the

country,  outlays  likely were  boosted by  higher  spending  on  electricity for

air  conditioning.

Because the  recent  increases  in  personal  consumption  expenditures  have

come  against  a backdrop of  continued weakness  in  real  disposable  personal

income,  the personal  saving rate  dropped to  around 3-1/2  percent  in  March

and April.  That  reading is  a touch below the rates  that  prevailed early  in

the  third quarter  of  last  year, when  consumers dipped  into their  saving to

II-16

PRIVATE HOUSING ACTIVITY
(Seasonally adjusted annual  rates;  millions  of  units)

1990 

1990 

1991 

1991

Annual 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1r  Marr 

Apr 

Mayp

1.11 
1.19 

1.04 
1.13 

.90 
1.04 

.86 
.92 

.89 
.91 

.79 
.90 

.76 
.86 

.67 
.79 

.67 
.73 

.69 
.74 

.91 
.98 

.74 
.81 

.98
.98

.76
.83

All units

Permits 
Starts 

Single-family units

Permits 
Starts 

Sales

New homes 
.53 
Existing homes  3.30 

.52 
3.30 

.47 
3.12 

.47 
3.09 

.49 
3.22 

.50 
3.31 

n.a.

3.51

Multifamily units

Permits 
Starts 

Vacancy rate

Rental  units 
Owned units 

.32 
.30 

9.1 
7.2 

.29 
.28 

.23 
.26 

.19 
.19 

.20 
.17 

.17 
.17 

.22
.15

9.5 
6.6 

9.0 
6.6 

9.4 
7.6 

n.a. 
n.a. 

n.a. 
n.a. 

n.a.
n.a.

1.  Percent.  Owned units  consist mainly of  condominiums.

p  Preliminary.

r  Revised estimates.

n.a.  Not  available.

PRIVATE HOUSING  STARTS

(Seasonally adjusted  annual  rate)

Millions  of unts

1982 

1983 

1984 

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991

II-17

spend through what  apparently was  perceived as a transitory surge in  energy

prices  following the  invasion of  Kuwait.  The  rebound in the  saving rate

this  winter roughly  coincided with the beginning of the  downturn in consumer

energy prices  and likely also was  supported by households'  increased

uncertainty about  future  employment  prospects because  of the deepening

recession.  Some  of the recent  decline  in the  saving rate may reflect

increased  consumer optimism about the  economy.  The  unusually large  decline

in personal  interest  income  also may account  for  a small portion;

historically, consumption expenditures have  not been very  sensitive  to

fluctuations  in interest  income,  and  as  a result,  a decline in  interest

income  tends to  lower  the  saving rate  in the  short  run.

Housing Markets

The  housing sector  has been  on  a path of  gradual  recovery  in  recent

months.  Single-family housing starts  strengthened in  April and May, and

sales  of  new and  existing homes moved higher.  However,  construction

activity in the multifamily  sector remains  quite  weak.  Starts of

multifamily  units fell  further  in May.  Regionally, data  for April and May

suggest that  construction in  each of the  four Census  regions now may have

bottomed  out  (table).

By May,  single-family housing  starts  stood 28  percent above  the  January

level  when starts  hit  a recent  low.  The pickup  in  production is  consistent

with this year's  gradual expansion of  demand  for  single-family homes.  The

volume of  new  home  sales  rose  for the third  consecutive month in April,

reaching the  half-million unit pace  for the  first  time  since  last  September

5. Construction first  began to decline  in the  South, and the  contraction

has been most  severe  in the Northeast.

II-18

Speculative  Construction of Single-Family Housing *
(As a share of all single-family starts)

Percent
(seasonally  adjusted)
S64

P

60

56

1970 
1973 
Sunits  started before  sale

1976 

1979 

1982 

1985 

1988 

1991

HOUSING STARTS  BY REGION

Region 

Cyclical 
Peak 

Date  of 
Peak 

Change  from 
peak to  91:Q1 

Change  from 91:Q1
to April/May average

----------------

Percent----------------

U.S.  Total 

1899 

86:Q1 

Northeast 

Midwest 

South 

West 

315 

372 

984 

514 

86:QI 

87:Q1 

83:Q3 

86:Q2 

-52 

-70 

-38 

-62 

-59 

7

11

-2

1

26

1.  Thousands  of  units  at  a seasonally adjusted  annual  rate.

II-19

and  rising 21  percent above the  eight-year low recorded in  January.  In  the

market  for  existing homes,  sales  rose  an additional  6 percent  in May to

their highest monthly volume  in a year  and a half.  Recent  sales prices  of

existing homes also  suggest  some  firming in demand.  Surveys of housing

market  participants indicate a pickup in activity in the  single-family

sector.  Homebuilders surveyed by their national  association at  the  end of

May reported about the  same  improved volume of  current  sales  and

expectations  for the year ahead as  they had  reported in late April.

Consumer attitudes, meanwhile,  remain more  favorable toward homebuying than

at  any time  since  1988,  according to the University of Michigan's  surveys in

May and June.

In the  still-depressed multifamily sector,  starts  fell  to an  annual

pace  of  150,000  units  in May, the  lowest monthly reading since  the  1950s.

However,  the average  level  of  permit  issuance  for multifamily  construction

in  recent months  suggests  that  the  true level  of  apartment  and condominium

construction might  be  somewhat higher  than the May estimate  of  starts  would

indicate.  Nevertheless, multifamily construction clearly is  quite  weak and

is  unlikely to  recover in  the  near term.  More than  80  percent  of  all  newly

built  multifamily housing units are  rental apartments,  and vacancy rates

remain high  at  almost  9-1/2  percent.  Until these  rates  come  down

substantially,  a sustained  increase  in  developer interest  in  construction of

multifamily housing is  unlikely.  Even then,  lenders  are  likely to  remain

cautious.

Inventories of  unsold new homes  have  continued to  trend down  in part

because of  a falloff in  speculative  construction.  While most of the  drop-

off  in  speculative  construction reflects normal  cyclical movements, the

II-20

BUSINESS  CAPITAL SPENDING  INDICATORS
(Percentage change  from preceding  comparable periods;
based on  seasonally adjusted data)

1990 

1991 

1991

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Mar. 

Apr. 

May

Producers' durable  equipment

Shipments  of nondefense  capital  goods 

Aircraft  and parts 
Excluding aircraft  and parts 

Office and computing 
All  other categories 

Shipments  of  complete aircraft 
Weighted PDE  shipments  (incl. air) 1  

1.2 
11.5 
-0.9 
-1.1 
-0.8 

16.2 
1.6 

1.4 
-2.2 
2.2 
4.2 
1.6 

-2.2 
2.9 
-3.3 
-3.9 
-3.1 

-2.5 
-15.6 
0.9 
1.5 
0.7 

-3.2 
1.8 

4.4 
-3.6 

-15.7 
-3.3 

1.0 
9.3 
-0.7 
0.1 
-1.0 

17.8 
3.3 

1.0
2.1
0.8
-2.3
1.7

8.0
1.2

Sales  of heavy-weight  trucks 

6.4 

-10.8 

-9.1 

-0.4 

-7.6 

-2.8

Orders  of nondefense  capital  goods 

Excluding aircraft  and parts 

Office  and computing 
All  other categories 

4.5 
-0.2 
6.0 
-1.9 

5.3 
0.8 
-7.0 
3.3 

-6.6 
-4.0 
3.6 
-6.1 

-5.4 
-6.8 
2.3 
-9.4 

-10.0 
3.9 
-5.3 
6.9 

4.2
2.9
7.4
1.6

Nonresidential structures

Construction put-in-place 

Office 
Other  commercial 
Public utilities 
Industrial 
All  other 

1.1 
1.6 
-2.5 
0.0 
2.3 
4.5 

-5.5 
-8.4 
-9.3 
1.4 
-6.0 
-6.0 

-1.9 
-3.4 
-7.8 
0.7 
3.9 
-2.3 

-4.3 
-3.5 
-7.3 
-3.5 
-4.4 
-3.1 

3.4 
1.5 
7.2 
0.1 
5.5 
3.9 

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

Rotary  drilling  rigs  in  use 

-2.8 

-2.8 

0.9 

-3.5 

-6.0 

-3.0

Footage  drilled 2

11.8 

6.9 

-7.0 

3.8 

-11.2 

n.a.

1. Computed as  the  weighted  sum  of  26  individual  equip
Census  M-3  report, with  weight for  each type of  equipmen
final  business  spending  to  shipments.

2. From Department  of Energy. Not  seasonally adjusted.
n.a.  Not  available.

ment  series  from the
t equal to the  ratio  of

II-21

decline as  a share of  single-family starts has  been somewhat  greater than  in

previous cycles  and may  indicate that  lenders  have been  particularly

cautious  (chart). 

By the  end of April, inventories  had dropped

20  percent  from the cyclical peak  in 1989.

Business  Fixed  Investment

Real  outlays  for business  fixed  investment  fell  16-1/4  percent  at  an

annual  rate  in the  first  quarter.  7 Declines were  registered in almost

every major category, with double-digit  drops  posted by  spending on motor

vehicles,  industrial  equipment,  and office  and other  commercial building.

However,  recent  indicators  suggest  some  flattening out  of the  path  for both

equipment  and  structures.

For equipment,  the most  recent orders  and shipments  data  suggest  that

spending may have  stabilized  somewhat  in the  current  quarter.  Indeed, the

average  level  of nominal  PDE  shipments  in April  and May, including aircraft

and weighted to  reflect  only final  business purchases,  was  1.2  percent  above

the  first-quarter  level.  Much of  this  rise  reflects  greater  shipments  of

complete  aircraft, but  spending  on  other types of  equipment  edged up  as

well.  In  addition, although nominal  computer  shipments have  been  soft

6. Speculative  construction  represents new  homes  that  are  built  before

buyers have  been  secured.

7. Nominal  BFI  fell at  a 14-3/4  percent  annual  rate  in the  first  quarter;

in  contrast,  the  latest  Commerce Department  survey  of  nominal plant  and
equipment  expenditures  (P&E) reported  a 5 percent  increase  at  an  annual  rate
in the  first  quarter.  Such a discrepancy reflects the  fact  that  the  two
investment  series  are  obtained from very different  sources.  BFI  reflects
the  actual  shipment  of equipment  and the  progress made  in  new  construction,
while  P&E  is measured  from the  recorded expenditures  of  firms.  In addition,
there  are differences  in coverage  that  can  only be  reconciled on an  annual
basis.  For example,  capital  expenditures  by the farm sector  and outlays  for
new motor vehicles  held  for less  than one  year are  included in BFI  but  not
in  P&E.  Thus,  the  P&E  estimate  for the  first  quarter  provides  little
evidence  that  BFI  was  stronger than  reported.

II-22

Recent  Data  on  Orders  and Shipments
(Excluding  motor vehicles and  parts)

Office and  computing  equipment

Billions of dollars

Orders

Shipments

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991

Other equipment  (excluding aircraft and  computers)

Billions of dollars

Orders

Shipments

--  16

I 

I

1985 
1985 

1986 
1986

1987 
1987 

1988 
1988 

1989 
1989

1990
1990

II-23

Nonresidential  Construction and  Selected  Indicators

(Dec. 1982  =  100, ratio scale)

Total  building

1979 

1981 

1983 

1985 

1987 

1989 

1991

Other corn mercial

Office

-

Construction

Permits

'  ''-

-

160

-120

80

I 

1983

I 

I 
1985

I 

t 
1987

I 

I 
1989

I

1983 

1985 

1987 

1989 

1991

industrial

institutional

New  commitments 

_,' 

18C

CosI 

ruto 

-

" 

-- ,12C
60

Construction

--60

I 

1983 

I
I 
1985 

I 

I 
1987 

I 

I 
1989 

I
1991 

1983 

1985 

1987 

1989 

1991

1. Six-month  moving average  for  all series  shown.  For contracts, tolal  only includes private, while individual  sectors include private  and public.
New commitments  are  the sum of permits and  contracts.  Contracts  and permits extend  through  May.

II-24

6/26/91

NONRESIDENTIAL  STRUCTURES  EXCLUDING  DRILLING  AND  MINING

P  T 

PT  P  T

Billions of 1982  dollars

-- 

130

-Ir

PT

I 
I 

I
I

II
I  ,
I  4
I 
I
II
I  '

I 
I
SII

Iml
I 
I
I 
SII
II
II
II
II
II

I 

I

I

I

I 

I 
- 11

I 

b

I'1 1.. 

II

I 
I 

I

I
I

I 

* 
I 
* 
I 
* 
I 
I 

I
I
r
r
I
r
r
r
I
r
I
I
r
I
I
I
I
r
I
I
r
r
r

I 

T 
t 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 

I

I
I
I

I
I
I
I
I

I
I
I

I
I
r
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
r
I
r
r
I

I

I
I
I
I
I
I
I

I
I
I
I

I
I

II 

II 
II 
II 
II 
II 
II 
II 

II 
II 
I  I 

II 
II 

IF 

II 

I  I
II 
I  I 

II 
II 

I 

I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 

I

I

I

I
I

F

I

I

F

I
I

1960 
1960 

1965 
1965

1 

1 

I

1 

I

m
1970 
1970 

1975 
1975 

1980 
1980

; 

,,,,,,

1985 
1985 

"
1990
1990

II-25

recently  (chart),  computer prices  have been falling quite  rapidly because of

competitive pressures,  and  real gains  in  spending are  likely in the  current

quarter. 

Finally, with total  auto  and light truck  sales  rebounding this

quarter, business  purchases of motor vehicles are  likely to  stabilize  as

well.

On the nonresidential  construction side,  excluding drilling and mining,

outlays fell  rapidly between the middle  of  last year  and 1991:Q1.  A large

overhang of  commercial  space  along with recessionary declines in  most other

sectors depressed spending.  However,  a pause  in this  decline  is  suggested

by the nominal  construction put-in-place data  for April, which  stood almost

1 percent  above the  first-quarter average.  Although the construction

estimates  are  subject  to large  revisions,  it  also  appears  that  total

contracts  for  new construction  flattened  out a bit  last  quarter  as well.

The  current-quarter outlook  for  drilling and mining is  decidedly

negative.  Although this  sector  was  supported  through the  recession by the

run-up  in  oil  prices,  a retrenchment  now appears  to be  in  progress.  Footage

drilled  dropped sharply in April, and the May level  of  rigs  in  use  was

10  percent below that  in  the  first  quarter.

Excess  supply  remains  a problem in the real  estate market.  Coldwell-

Banker estimates  that  national  vacancy  rates  for office  buildings  stood at

19.5  percent at  the  end of  the  first  quarter,  close to its  record high  of

21.5  percent  in  early 1987.  Similarly,  the  industrial vacancy  rate was

7 percent--above  its average  of the past  few years.  Thus,  it  is  likely that

8. Recent  reports  indicate that  computer manufacturers have  cut  prices  on

personal computers  in  order to maintain or  regain market  share.  As  a
result,  the April  and May average  of  the new PPI measure  of prices  for
electronic  computers  fell  12  percent  (at an annual  rate)  relative  to
1991:Q1.

II-26

nonresidential  construction will  provide  some drag to the economy over the

next  year.  Nonresidential building typically lags the business  cycle at

troughs  and does not  play an important  role  in  spurring the economy during

the  initial phase of a recovery  (chart).  Indeed, averaging across  the  last

six  recessions,  nonresidential building  (excluding drilling and mining) has

fallen  almost  1-1/2 percent  in the  four  quarters following a business cycle

trough.

Inventories

Business  inventory liquidation continued  through April.  Inventories in

manufacturing and trade were depleted at a $53.5  billion  (current-cost)

annual rate  in April,  following a $29.3  billion rate  of  liquidation in the

first  quarter.  These  sharp inventory corrections have  returned inventory-

sales  ratios  for  most  industries  to  the middle portions  of the  ranges  of

the  past  year.

After a sharp  runoff around the turn of the year,  factory  stocks  posted

a net  decline of  $2 billion in real  terms during the  first  quarter  as  a

whole.  Preliminary current-cost  data suggest  that manufacturers' inventory

corrections  continued in April.  Since the  recession began last  summer,

manufacturers' inventory  imbalances  have been  concentrated in upstream

industries--primary metals,  chemicals,  rubber  and plastics--likely

reflecting the  reduced demand for  production materials  as  industrial

producers  trimmed their output.  The absence  of excess  stocks  at  final  goods

industries  at  present  suggests that  production may rise quickly  once

companies are  confident that  the recovery  in  final demand is  firmly

established.

II-27

Real  automotive  inventories were  reduced at  an annual pace of

$18.2 billion in the  first  quarter, and because of  conservative assemblies

so  far  this year and recent increases  in  sales, dealers'  inventories have

been drawn down  further.  At  the May pace of  sales,  this level  of  stocks

amounts to only  46  days  of  supply--the  lowest  since  September 1986, when

inventories dropped sharply after automakers put  into  place massive  consumer

buying incentives. 9  Days'  supply of  light  trucks stood at  72  in May.

INVENTORIES OF  DOMESTIC AUTOS AND  LIGHT TRUCKS
(Millions of units;  BEA seasonal basis)

Inventories:

Autos 
Light  trucks 1  

Days'  supply:

Autos 
Light  trucks 

1. FRB seasonal  factors.

1990 

Q3 

Q4 

1991 
Q1 

Mar. 

1991
Apr. 

May

1.40 
1.10 

1.26 
1.07 

1.06 
.83 

1.06 
.83 

1.00 
.85 

60 
82 

59 
92 

54 
79 

53 
74 

56 
75 

.91
.83

46
72

The pace  of  nonauto  retail  inventory  liquidation appears to have

slowed early this  spring.  In  response to  substantial  drawdowns since

January,  inventory-sales  ratios  for most  types  of  nonauto  retail

establishments  have  eased.  In  particular,  for the broad range  of  stores  in

the GAF grouping, a sizable gain in  sales  in  April helped to  lower the

inventory-sales ratio  to  the  lowest  level  since  early  1990.  Given the

further  pickup in  GAF  sales  in May, non-auto  retailers may need to  replenish

their  stocks.  Indeed, the recent  increases  in  orders  received by  domestic

9. The  low reading  on days'  supply  is  affected to  some  extent  by

automakers'  recent  incentive programs to  commercial  rental  fleets.  This
causes  auto dealers  to  hold fewer  new cars  in  inventory.

II-28

CHANGES  IN MANUFACTURING AND  TRADE  INVENTORIES
(Billions of  dollars  at  annual  rates;
based on  seasonally  adjusted data)

1990 

1991 

1991

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Feb. 

Mar. 

Apr.

Current-cost  basis:

Total 

Total excluding  retail auto 
Manufacturing 
Wholesale 
Retail 

Automotive 
Excluding auto 

Constant-dollar basis:

Total 

Total  excluding  retail  auto 
Manufacturing 
Wholesale 
Retail 

Automotive 
Excluding auto 

58.8 
39.7 
26.5 
9.2 
23.1 
19.0 
4.1 

5.1 
1.9 
3.7 
.6 
.8 
3.2 
-2.4 

-.8 
9.1 
-8.7 
10.5 
-2.6. 
-9.9 
7.3 

-29.3 
-14.4 
-11.3 
4.7 
-22.7 
-14.9 
-7.8 

-38.9 
-19.3 
.9 
-5.2 
-34.7 
-19.7 
-15.0 

-103.0 
-72.0 
-29.7 
-22.0 
-51.3 
-31.0 
-20.3 

-53.3
-50.6
-7.9
-38.3
-7.1
-2.7
-4.4

-21.8 
-11.4 
-18.3 
5.0 
-9,3 
-10,4 
1.1 

-16.6 
1.6 
-2.0 
8.8 
-23.4 
-18.2 
-5.2 

-24.7 
-3.7 
11.4 
-2.2 
-33.8 
-21.0 
-12.9 

-59.0 
-36.2 
-14.9 
-9.3 
-34.9 
-22.8 
-12.0 

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

INVENTORIES RELATIVE TO SALES 1
(Months supply;  based  on  seasonally adjusted  data)

1990 

1991 

1991

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Feb. 

Mar. 

Apr.

Range  in
preceding 12  months: 2

Low 
High
--- "---~-w---

Current-cost basis:

Total 

Total  excluding retail  auto 
Manufacturing 
Wholesale 
Retail 

Automotive 
Excluding  auto 

Constant-dollar basis:

1.48 
1.45 
1.54 
1.26 
1.56 
1.91 
1.47 

1.58 
1..55 
1.69 
1.38 
1.65 
2,18 
1.52 

1,51 
1,47 
1.58 
1.28 
1.61 
2.07 
1.48 

1.52 
1.49 
1.59 
1.31 
1.60 
2.01 
1.49 

1.56 
1.53 
1.66 
1.37 
1.58 
1.96 
1.48 

1.57 
1.54 
1.67 
1.38 
1.60 
2.01 
1.49 

1.57 
1.55 
1.69 
1.38 
1.56 
1.91 
1.48 

1,54
1.52
1.64
1.34
1.57
1.91
1.48

Total 

Total  excluding retail  auto 
Manufacturing 
Wholesale 
Retail 

Automotive 
Excluding auto 

1.42 
1.39 
1.44 
1.26 
1.51 
1.63 
1.46 

1.51 
1.49 
1.55 
1.40 
1.60 
1.89 
1.53 

1.43 
1.41 
1.46 
1,28 
1.55 
1.85 
1.47 

1.46 
1.44 
1.48 
1.34 
1.55 
1.77 
1.50 

1.49 
1.48 
1.53 
1.39 
1.53 
1.67 
1.49 

1.50 
1.49 
1.53 
1.40 
1.54 
1.73 
1.49 

1.50 
1-49 
1.55 
1.40 
1.51 
1.63 
1.48 

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

1.  Ratio  of  end  of period inventories to  average monthly  sales  for  the period.
2.  Highs  and

lows  are  specific to  each series  and are  not  necessarily
Range  is  for the  12-month period preceding the  latest month  for
available.

coincidental.
which  data  are

II-29

producers  of  home  goods,  apparel,  and household durables  suggest  that  this

process already may be  under way.

Merchant  wholesalers reduced their  stocks  at  a faster pace  in  April

than earlier  in  the year, and wholesale  inventories currently  appear, on

balance,  to  have  returned to  satisfactory levels.  The  bulk of the  wholesale

liquidation was in  stocks of  business  and industrial machinery.  Over the

preceding year, wholesale machinery inventories had risen persistently as

shipments  weakened.  The  sharp  liquidation in  April reduced the  inventory-

sales  ratio  for wholesalers  in  this  category to  2.36 months  in April,

markedly lower than the  recent  high of  2.47 months  registered  in  February.

The  Federal  Government

The  federal government  posted a $23  billion deficit  in April  and May

(table).  This  was  up  substantially  from the  $1 billion deficit  recorded

during the  same  period  of  1990,  owing to  a combination of  increased outlays

and lower  receipts.  Relative  to  a year  ago,  outlays  in  April and May

increased  8 percent  despite a $3 billion reduction  in deposit  insurance

outlays  and  $11  billion  in  offsetting contributions to  the  Defense

Cooperation Account  (DCA).  The  growth  in outlays  is  largely attributable to

strong growth  in  defense  spending  (excluding DCA),  and  health and  income

security  related  spending.  However, much of  the  increase  in  defense

spending  reflects  shifts  in military pay dates.  Receipts  declined 2 percent

in  April and May  relative  to  a year ago,  as  weak  nominal  income growth  cut

into personal  tax collections.  Nonwithheld  income and  social  insurance

taxes  fell,  and refunds  rose  relative to  last  year.  This  reflects,  in  part,

reduced final  settlements  on  1990  liabilities  as  a result  of  the  recession.

II-30

FEDERAL GOVERNMENT  OUTLAYS  AND RECEIPTS
(Billions of dollars,  except  where  otherwise noted)

April  and  May 
1991 

1990 

.FY1990 

October-May
Net 
change 

FY1991 

Percent
chan-e

Outlays

National  defense

Ex  DCA1
Net  interest
Social  Security
Medicare  and  health
Deposit  insurance
Agriculture
Income  security
Other

209.4
48.5
48.5
30.6
41.7
26.5
11.0
3.3
25.8
22.0

227.2
46.7
57.7
32.8
45.1
31.5
8.0
3.8
32.3
27.0

818.5
198.6
198.6
120.9
162.0
100.4
24.4
11.2
101.8
99.1

861.5
176.8
214.7
129.1
175.2
113.3
24.3
13.4
119.4
110.0

Receipts

208.8 

203.9

667.0 

686.5

Withheld  income  taxes

plus  FICA

118.5 

125.3

476.8 

501.0

Nonwithheld  income
taxes  plus  SECA
Individual  refunds(-)
Corporate  income  taxes
Other

82.0
-34.4
14.9
27.8

77.6
-38.9
15.3
24.7

122.2
-66.6
54.0
80.6

117.8
-72.5
59.9
80.2

Deficit

.7 

23.2

151.5 

175.0

43.0

-21.8

16.1
8.2
13.3
12.9

-. 1
2.1
17.6
10.9

19.5

24.2

-4.4
-5.9
6.0
.4

23.5

5.3

11.0

8.1
6.8
8.2

12.8

-.4
19.0
17.3
11.0

2.9

5.1

-3.6
8.9
11.1
.5

15.5

, About  $6  billion  of  the  increase  between  April  and  May  1990  and  1991  is  due

o  military  pay  date  shifts.

CASH AND  IN-KIND  CONTRIBUTIONS  FOR  OPERATION DESERT  SHIELD/STORM
(Billions of  dollars)

Country 

Commitments 

Cash 

In-kind  Total 

Received1  

Future
receipts

Saudi  Arabia 
Kuwait 
Japan 
Germany 
United Arab  Emirates 
Korea 

Total 

16.8 
16.0 
10.7 
6.6 
4.0 
.4 

54.6 

1.  Through May  31.  1991.

8.2 
11.1 
8.8 
5.8 
3.9 
.1 

3.6 
.0 
.6 
.8 
.2 
.1 

11.8 
11.1 
9.3 
6.6 
4.1 
.2 

5.0
4.9
1.4
.0
.0
.2

37.8 

5.3 

43.1 

11.5

II-31

Taxes  in 1990  were withheld at  rates  based on the  anticipation of  a full-

year's pay;  therefore, employees who were  laid off for part  of the year

tended to be overwithheld.  For the  fiscal year through May, the deficit

stands  at  $175 billion, up  $23  billion  from the year-earlier period.

On May 22,  the House and Senate passed the FY1992  Congressional. Budget

Resolution.  As expected, the resolution adheres closely to  last October's

budget  agreement and  contains no  significant new tax or  spending

initiatives.  Real defense  expenditures, excluding those  attributable to

Operation Desert  Storm, are  slated to  fall  about 4 percent.  Other real

discretionary  spending is held  approximately constant,  and tax revenues  and

mandatory spending are  set  to their baseline  levels.

State  and Local  Governments

Recent  data  indicate  that  growth in  real purchases  of  goods and

services  by state  and local  governments  has  remained weak in  the  second

quarter,  reflecting efforts by many governments to  check  spending  in

response  to  severe  revenue  shortfalls.  Employment growth  was  slow  again in

May, and over the  first  five months  of  1991,  was  only about  half the pace of

last  year.  Real  outlays  for  construction fell  in April to  a level 2 percent

below their first-quarter average.

During the past  six months,  almost  every  state  has anticipated

imbalances between current  receipts  and expenditures  for  fiscal  1991,  as

eroding budgets  became more widespread  (chart).  In  addition,  revenue

shortfalls  remaining from FY1991  will  be  carried forward into  the  next

fiscal  year, which begins July  1 for most governments.  For the  upcoming

fiscal  year,  some  governments  are being forced  to make deep  cuts  in  spending

and to  hike taxes  substantially to  correct  structural  imbalances that have

II-32

STATES  WITH  DEFICITS  IN THEIR  GENERAL  FUND  ACCOUNTS*

Fiscal Year  1989 - Actual

Fiscal Year  1990 - Actual

Fiscal  Year 1991  - Estimate

*Shaded states represent those with  deficits.  Sources:  the National  Conference  of
State  Legislatures and  the National Association  of State  Budget  Officers.

II-33

been building  for  some  time and were exacerbated by  the  recession.  Whereas,

earlier,  some  governments had tried to balance budgets  by making minor tax

and spending  changes,  selling assets,  or transferring funds,  many  states

(including California, Pennsylvania, New York,  and Connecticut) will likely

see major tax increases in  coming months.  In  some  states,  like  New Jersey,

which raised taxes  substantially last  year,  sizable  spending cuts  are  in

train.  Among the  cities,  Philadelphia is  planning to both  reduce outlays

and to  raise  the  sales  tax;  in  the meantime, a $130  million payment  into  the

pension  fund  has  been postponed, and  construction fund  balances are  being

drawn down.  In  Bridgeport,  Connecticut, where  the  choices  included another

round of  reductions in  services  and an 18  percent  hike  in  property taxes,

the Mayor  opted to  file  for bankruptcy, which would allow the  city time to

restructure  its  liabilities.  (See the  financial  portion of  Part  2 for  a

more  detailed discussion of the  Bridgeport  bankruptcy.)

Labor  Costs

Average hourly  earnings of  production  or  nonsupervisory workers  moved

up  0.4  percent  in May  (table).  Over  the  twelve months  ended  in May, average

hourly earnings  increased 3.4 percent,  about  1/2  percentage point  below  the

pace  recorded during the previous twelve months  (chart).

AVERAGE  HOURLY  EARNINGS
(Percentage change;  based on  seasonally adjusted  data)

1989 

1990 

Q3 

Q4 

1990 

1991 
Q1 

1991

Apr. 

May

Total private  nonfarm 

4.0 

3.7 

--- Annual  rate-- 
2.8 
3.2 
2.8 

.4 

Monthly rate

Manufacturing 

2.7 

3.6 

2.6 

3.0 

2.2 

.5 

1. Changes over periods  longer than one month are measured  from  final

month of  preceding period to  final month of  period indicated.

.4

.4

II-34

AVERAGE  HOURLY  EARNINGS

Total  Private  Nonfarm

Percent-change  frorm: 12 months earlier

-- 

12

I 

I 
1977

I 

I 
1979

I 

I  I 

I 

1983

I 

I 
1985

I 
1987

I 1 

I 

I

1989

1991

May
3.41

-1 2

EMPLOYER COSTS  FOR COMPENSATION
(Private industry  workers)

Dollars  per  hour 

1989 

1990 

1991 

Percentage  change
1990 

1991

1989 

Total  compensation 

14.28 

14.96 

15.40 

3.6 

Wages 

10.38 

10.84 

11.14 

Total  benefits 

3.90 

4.13 

4.27 

Paid  leave 
Supplemental pay 
Insurance 
Retirement  and  savings 
Legally  required 

Social  security 
Workers'  compensation 

Other benefits 

1.00 
.34 
.85 
.42 
1.27 
.84 
.27 
.02 

1.03 
.37 
.92 
.45 
1.35 
.89 
.31 
.01 

1.05 
.36 
1.01 
.44 
1.40 
.92 
.33 
* 

3.6 

3.5 

3.1 
3.0 
9.0 
-6.7 
4.1 
3.7 
12.5 
0.0 

4.8 

4.4 

5.9 

3.0 
8.8 
8.2 
7.1 
6.3 
- --6.0 
14.8 
-50.0 

2.9

2.8

3.4

1.9
-2.7
9.8
-2.2
3.7
3.4
6.5
*

Memo:

Employment  cost  index 

4.6 

5.2 

4.4

1. Levels  in  March.
2. Percent  changes  are  from March of  preceding year to March of  year

indicated.

*  Cost  per hour  worked is  $0.01  or  less.  Percent  change cannot  be

calculated.

II-35

The BLS  recently published data  on employer costs--including detailed

data on benefits--from a once-a-year survey  conducted in March.  10 Growth

in both wages  and benefits between March 1990  and March  1991 decelerated

markedly  from their pace  over the previous twelve months.  The deceleration

was evident  in most  components  of benefit  costs,  with the notable exception

of insurance costs, which includes health care  premiums.  These increased

nearly  10  percent  over the  twelve months ended in March.  Continuing the

trend of  recent  years, benefit  costs  (constituting 28  percent  of total

compensation) rose  more rapidly than wages,  driven by higher insurance

costs.

Food Prices and Agricultural  Conditions

Swings  in prices of  fruits  and vegetables have  continued to  dominate

the monthly pattern of  food prices.  The  CPI  for  fresh vegetables retreated

2-1/4  percent  in May, after climbing  15-1/2 percent  in April.  The recent

run-up  in fresh vegetable prices has  reflected supply problems--in part

weather-related--that  are expected to  be  relatively short-lived.  In

contrast,  the prices of livestock  products were nearly flat  in May and have

registered little change, on balance,  so  far  this year;  increases in the

price of beef  were  largely offset  by declines in the price of  pork.  Price

increases  for  other  food categories  have maintained an average monthly pace

of about  0.2  percent  since  late  last  year.

10.  In contrast to the procedure used for  computing pay changes in the
Employment  Cost  Index  (ECI),  which uses  fixed employment  weights  from the
1980  Census,  this survey uses  current  employment  weights in each year.  Over
the past  three years, employer  costs  increased at  a somewhat slower rate
than the  ECI,  suggesting a shift  toward lower-paid occupations  and
industries.

II-36

U.S. AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION AND INVENTORIES  1

CROP PRODUCTION

1980  to  1990

Millions  of bushels

Wheat

Corn

High  Low
-- 

---------- 
-

1988

1989

2785 

1812 

2342

1812 

2037

8875 

4174 

7153

7525

1990
1990-

2739

7933

4929

1549

15.4

Soybeans

2190 

1549 

1893

Cotton  (millions

15.6 

7.8 

12.5

1924 

1922

12.2 

15.5

of bales)

Memo: World Grain 
Production
Production

CROP  INVENTORIES

1766 

1466 

1598

1562

1682 

1766

1731

1725

USDA Projection
for  1991

as of 
May  9 

m

as of
June 11

2071

8275

1875

16.0

2024

8275

1875

16.0

1980  to 1990

Months' supply at  end of marketing year

Marketing year beginning

High 
11.69 

Low 
2.89 

Avg.
6.24

1988 
3.52 

1989 
2.89 

1990 
4.19 

USDA Projection
for  1991

as  of 
May 9 
3.39 

as  of
June  11
3.31

7.93 

1.80 

4.21

3.19 

1.99 

2.13 

2.41

3.42 

1.17 

2.02

1.31

1.53 

2.36 

2.23

8.89 

2.19 

4.46

6.11 

2.19 

1.61 

2.32

2.41

2.23

2.17

2.25

Memo:  World Grain 3.36

2.12 

2.63

2.26 

2.12 

2.25

2.27

Wheat

Corn

Soybeans

Cotton 3

LIVESTOCK PRODUCTION

Percent change  from previous year

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

USDA Projection
for  1991

as  of 
May  9  June 11

as  of

Red meats  and poultry 

Beef 
Pork 
Poultry 

Milk 

1.7 
.6 
.1 
4.9 
5.7 

1.7 
2.8 
-5.0 
6.3 

.7 

2.0 
-3.3 
2.3 
9.5 
-.7 

3.7 
.1 

9.1 
4.2 
2.1 

1.8 
1.3 
-.2  -1.5 
-3.0 
7.3 
3.0 

.9 
7.1 
-.8 

3.5 
1.9 
3.3 
5.1 
1.2 

3.1
1.5
3.3
4.4

.8

.1 Derived from data  in USDA's World Agricultural  Supply  and Demand Estimates,  June 11
'1.  Production, consumption, and stocks -are measured on
fers from crop to crop.

a "marketing year" basis, which

f

2. Million metric tons.
3. The figures  for cotton  exclude  1985.  A pre-announced
policy at the  end of that marketing year caused some consuz
and raised the  stocks-to-use ratio to an  artificially  high

change in  USDA price support
aption to be delayed into  1986
level of  13.42 months.

II-37

Despite  planting problems in  some  areas  of  the  country,  almost  all  of

the  1991  crop  now  is  sown.  Growing  conditions have been excellent  for the

bulk of the acreage  planted to  corn  this  year.  However, estimates by the

USDA call  for  the production of wheat to  be  down about  25  percent  in  1991

from last  year's above-average harvest  (table),  owing to  a combination of

altered  government programs,  low prices for wheat,  and poor growing

conditions  late  in the  winter wheat season in  some  areas.  The production of

soybeans  also is  projected to  fall this year.

The recent  flooding in  some  parts of  northern  Iowa  and  southern

Minnesota adds  uncertainty to projections about  the mix of  crops that  will

be  grown  in 1991.  Although corn is traditionally the major crop in  these

areas,  crop  specialists  claim that  corn yields  fall  precipitously if  planted

after mid-June.  As  a result,  some  acreage that would have  been planted to

corn may be  switched to  soybeans.  Flooding along the Gulf  Coast also  is

reported to be  causing problems with the  cotton  crop.  However,  famers  in

these  areas had planned to expand acreage  sharply in  response  to higher

prices  and  less  restrictive  government  programs  on  cotton.  As  a result,

even with  some  flood damage, production at  this point  appears  likely to

surpass the bumper  crop of  last  year.

Recently, the United  States extended  an  additional  $1.5  billion  in

export  credits to the  Soviet Union, which are  likely to keep  grain

inventories  lean by historical standards.  Nonetheless, this year's

anticipated harvest  for  total  grains  in  the U.S.  appears to  be  large  enough

to meet  consumption demand and to keep  domestic inventories  fairly stable.

This  was  reflected in  futures prices  for  grain, which did not  react  to the

announcement  of  the export  credits.

II-38

RECENT CHANGES  IN  CONSUMER PRICES
(Percentage change;  based on  seasonally adjusted data)  1

Relative
importance-
1990
Dec. 

1990

1991

1991

1989 

1990 

Q3 

Q4

01

Apr. 

May

-----

Annual  rate----- 

-Monthly  rate-

All  items 2

Food
Energy
All  items  less  food

and energy
Commodities
Services

100.0

162  -: I

8.2

75.6
24.5
-.51 .-

-

4.6
'5-6
5.1

4.4
2.7
5.3

6.1
5.3
18.1

5.2
3.4
6.0

8.2
4.6
44.2

6.0
3.3
. 7.2-

4.9
3.9
18.0

3.8
2.3
4.8

2.4
2.4
-30.7

6.8
7.9
6.4

Memorandum:x

CPI-w 3

.100.0 

4.5 

6.1 

.8.4 

5.0 

1.5

.3 

.3
.0
1.4

.2
.3
.2

.3

1.  Changes  are.from  final month of preceding period to  final  month of  period indicated.
2.  Official  index  for  alI  urban consumers.
3.  Index  for  urban  wage earners  and  clerical  workers.

RECENT  CHANGES  IN  PRODUCER  PRICES
Percentage change;  based on  seasonally adjusted  data) 1

Relative 
limportance 
Dec.  1990 

1989 

1990 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Apr. 

May

1990 

1991 

---

1991

-----

Annual  rate----- 

-Monthly  rater

Finished  goods 

Consumer  foods' 
Consumer  energy 
Other  finished  goods 

Consumer  goods 
Capital equipment 

.

Intermediate  materials 2  

Excluding food  and  energy 

Crude  food  materials  i: 
Crude  energy 
Other crude  materials 

100.0 
23.7 
16.8 
59.5 
36.4 
23.1. 

95.2 
78 .5 

34.4 
50.7 
14.9 

4.9 
5.2 
9.5 
4.2 
4.4 
3.8 

2.5 
.9 

5.7 
2.6 
30.7 
3.5 
3.7 
3.4 

11.3 
2.3 
118.7 
3.5 
3.5 
3.6 

5.1 
1.3 
21.1 
3.5 
3.4 
3.3 

-4.5 
.6 
-37.2 
4.4 
5.3 
3.2 

4.6 
1 .9 

13.4 
4.0 

4.2 
2.3 

-9.5 
-1.9 

.2 
.4 
-.3 

.2. 
.4 
-.2 

-.4 
-.2 

.6
.2
2.4
.4
.2
.6

.1
-. 1

2.8 
17-9 
-3-6 

-4.2- 
19.1 
.6 

-7.8 
305.8 
5.9 

-7.3: 
-18.8 
-18.1 

1.1 
-53.5 
-3.0 

-1.0  .
.0 
-. 5 

-3.2
3.0
-. 8

1. Changes  are  from  final  month of  preceding period to  final month  of  period
2.  Excludes  materials  for  food manufacturing and animal  feeds.

indicated.

II-39

In  livestock markets, the USDA projects  that  the production of meats

and poultry will  rise  about  3 percent  in 1991.  Growth  in the  output of

poultry  is expected to  slow, although production still  is  expected to be  up

about  4-1/2  percent.  Production of  both beef  and pork  are expected to

rebound in 1991  as  producers  respond to the  high prices  seen during the past

several years.

Energy Prices and Supplies

Energy prices were  up  1.4  percent in  the May CPI,  after five months  of

declines.  Prices  of motor  fuel  rose  2.5 percent,  reflecting higher  refinery

prices associated with critically  low  levels of  gasoline  inventories.

According to  private  survey data  for  early June,  gasoline prices  at  retail

have moved up  further.  However, inventories  of  gasoline  have  rebounded to

the low  end of  the normal  seasonal  range,  and prices of  crude  oil have

receded.  These developments  point  to a near-term easing of  the recent

upward pressures  on gasoline prices.

Prices

The  CPI  excluding food and energy rose  0.1  percent  in March and

0.2 percent per month in  April and May, down significantly from the

3/4  percent  increases in the  first  two months of  this  year.  This dropoff

has  reflected, in part,  reversals  of  some  of  the large  increases  that

boosted this measure early  in the  year.  In the  services component,  airfares

have  fallen  in the  last three months, particularly in  April, and have

largely retraced their preceding  climb.  The  index  for lodging while out  of

town also  has  retreated  since  February, but  remained about  16  percent above

its  level  of a year earlier.  Among goods,  apparel prices  moved down  in

March and April but were  up in May.  The prices  of  new vehicles  decelerated

II-40

CPI  EXCLUDING FOOD AND  ENERGY
(Percent change  from 12  months earlier)

May 
1989 

May 
1990 

CPI  excluding food and energy 

4.6 

4.8 

Goods  excluding food and energy 

Alcoholic beverages 
Housefurnishings 
Housekeeping  supplies 
Apparel 
Footwear 
New vehicles 
Used  cars 
Medical care  commodities 
Entertainment  commodities 
Tobacco 
Personal care  commodities 

3.6 
4.1 
-.2 
6.0 
3.1 
4.7 
2.8 
3.4 
7.9 
4.2 
12.5 
4.7 

Services  excluding energy 

5.1 
Tenants'  rent 
3.8 
Other renters'  costs 
2.9 
Owners'  equivalent  rent 
4.8 
Other utilities  and public services  3.6 
Housekeeping services 
2.2 
5.8 
Apparel  services 
15.3 
Auto  finance  charges 
Airline  fares 
6.0 
7.1 
Medical  services 
Entertainment  services 
5.5 
Personal  care  services 
5.6 
6.7 
Personal  and educational  services 

Factors Affecting Price Inflation

ECI  hourly compensation1  

Civilian unemployment  rate 2  

Inflation expectations 

Non-oil  import  prices 

4.6 

5.2 

5.8 

4.7 

3.3 
4.7 
1.9 
3.4 
4.4 
3.1 
1.5 
-3.4 
8.1 
3.7 
9.7 
4.6 

5.5 
4.3 
6.3 
5.1 
3.3 
1.9 
4.8 
-3.5 
11.9 
9.3 
6.0 
4.2 
7.9 

5.2 

5.3 

4.6 

.2 

May
1991

5.1

4.1
10.7
1.3
3.2
3.1
2.7
4.0
.1
8.1
3.6
13.0
3.7

5.5
4.0
14.9
4.3
4.6
6.4
4.4
.8
3.3
9.1
5.6
3.5
7.7

4.4

6.9

4.33

2.84

1. 12-month period  ending in March.
2. End-of-period value.
3. Preliminary June  reading of  the  University of Michigan Survey,

12-month  horizon.

4. BLS  import  price index,  12-month period ending in March.

II-41

in recent months but  have  not reversed the large increases  registered in

January and February.  In  addition, the CPI  for nonenergy services was  held

down in May by a relatively small increase in the index  for owners'

equivalent rent.

Despite  this  recent  slowing, significant progress  in reducing the

trend of inflation has been rather difficult  to discern in the  data over

longer time  spans:  For example, in the twelve months ended in May, the CPI

excluding food  and energy rose  5.1 percent, up from 4.8 percent  during the

comparable  period ending in May 1990  and 4.6  percent in May 1989  (table).

Part  of this pickup  reflects higher federal  excise taxes on alcoholic

beverages and tobacco, and the  increase in postal rates in February;  the

January-February increases in these components added about  0.3 percent  to

the  level of prices.  But  the pace of price  increases is  up  as well for  a

number of other  goods and  services.  Prices  of both new vehicles and used

cars  have accelerated over the past  year.  In addition, the  cost  of medical

care  and the  prices of educational  services continue to rise  rapidly.

Although, when looked at  this  way, the core  inflation rate has  changed

little over the past  year, recent  trends in the  factors thought to influence

prices bode well  for  the outlook.  Considerable  slack now exists  in labor

markets,  which has begun to put downward pressure on the growth in

compensation costs.  In addition,  inflation expectations  appear to  have

moved down to about  4-1/4  percent--1/4  percentage point  lower than a year

earlier--and the  appreciation of the  foreign exchange value of the dollar in

1991  likely is  restraining price  increases  on imported goods and their

domestic  substitutes.

II-42

PRICE INDEXES  FOR COMMODITIES AND MATERIALS  1

Last
obser-

vation

May

1. PPI  for crude materials4

la.  Foods and feeds
lb.  Energy
Ic.  Excluding food and energy
ld. Excluding food and energy,
seasonally adjusted

Percent change 2

1991

_

Memo:

1989 

1990 

To 
May 

73 

May 73

to

date

Year
earlier

to date

6.0 

-7.5 

-3.6
18.6
.4

.8
-15.0
-1.4

n.a.

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

.4 

-2.0

na.

2.8
17.9
-3.6

-3.6

2. Commodity Research Bureau

2a.  Futures prices
2b.  Industrial spot prices

3. Journal of  Commerce industrials

3a. Metals

June  25
June  24

June  25
June  25

-9.0
-5.9

-2.7 
.6 

1.3 
-7.2 

-2.4 
-3.9 

-3.1 
-3.3 

-2.4
-3.6

4. Dow-Jones  Spot

June  25 

-10.1 

-1.7 

2.6

5. IMF  commodity index 4

5a.  Metals
5b.  Nonfood agric.

May
May
May

-12.9
-23.4
-4.6

6. Economist  (U.S. dollar  index)

6a.  Industrials

June  18 
June  18 

-22.8 
-23.8 

-5.6
-3.0
-3.5

-4.4 
-3.2 

-1.6
-5.1
-1.3

-4.5
-5.0

-2.3
-2.8

.8
-.3

.9

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

.3
-.1

Not  seasonally adjusted.
Change is measured to end of period,
Week of  the May Greenbook.

from last observation of previous  period.

4. Monthly observations.
n.a.  Not available.

IMF index  includes  items not shown separately.

Index Weights

Energy
D

Food  Commodities
1

Precious  Metals

M".

Others 1
E

-2.4

-7.0
6.7
-5.6

-5.6

-10.1
-10.8

-4.1
-9.4

-1.3

-8.4

-13.0

-4.8

-11.8
-12.2

PPI for crude materials

CRB futures

CRB industrials

Journal of Commerce  index

10 

12 

Dow-Jones

IMF  index

Economist

41 

42 

82 

14 

17

14

100

88

58 

55 

50 

17 

25

45

50so

1.  Forest products, industrial metals, and other industrial materials.

II-43

At  the  producer  level, prices  of  intermediate materials  less  food and

energy edged  down  0.1 percent  further in May.  Widespread declines--notably

for petrochemicals, plastics, and metals--more than offset  increases  for

softwood lumber, plywood, and some more processed materials.  The PPI  for

crude  nonfood materials  less  energy fell 0.8  percent, mainly reflecting

lower prices  for scrap metals.  This index has  declined in seven of the last

ten months and is about 5-1/2  percent below  its  level of a year earlier.

Measures  of commodity prices, although erratic, have tended to bottom

out  around or  soon  after  recession troughs. 11  The  Journal of Commerce

index  for  industrial metals  has  edged down 1/4 percent,  on balance,  since

the week of  the  last Greenbook, and the CRB spot  index for  industrials has

declined  about 2-3/4  percent  (chart).  Among the major industrial  metals,

spot  prices  are down,  on net,  for  steel  scrap  and copper, but may have

bottomed out  for aluminum, which had registered  steep declines  from its  1988

peak.  In  contrast to metals, prices  of  lumber  and plywood have  soared over

the past  two months,  accounting for  the  increase in  the Journal of Commerce

index total. 1 2  Although there has  been some  pickup in demand, market

observers attribute most  of  the upward pressures  to problems with timber

supplies--logging restrictions  in the Pacific Northwest  and heavy  rains  in

the South.

11.  However, in  1975,  several  commodity price measures  declined for  four
months  after the March trough designated by the NBER.  The  index of leading
economic  indicators  includes a measure  for  "sensitive materials prices"
based on  smoothed commodity price changes;  it  appears  to have  leveled off in
the  past  few months.

12.  Plywood has  a substantial  weight  in the Journal  of Commerce index but

is  not  included  in the  CRB spot  industrials  measure.

II-44

COMMODITY  PRICE  MEASURES  *

-
-

-

Journal of Commerce  Index, total
Journal of Commerce  Index, metals

Ratio scale,  Index
(1980=100)

Total

Metals

CRB  Spot Industrials

Ratio scale, Index
(1967=100)

Jun 24

260

240

220

1983  .

1984

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991

CRB  Futures

Ratio  scale,  index
(1967=100)

*Weekly data, Tuesdays; Journal  of Commerce  data monthly  before  1985

Dotted  lines Indicate  week  of

last Greenbook.

II-45

Spot  Prices for Industrial  Metals

STEEL SCRAP

Ratio scale, $/ton

.

!June 

:. 

25

1988 

1989

1990

ALUMINUM  (LONDON  SPOT)*

Ratio scale,  $/Ib

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991

COPPER

Ratio  scale, $/Ib

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991

SSeres redefined  In 1989.

COMPOSITE  INDEX  OF  LEADING  INDICATORS

I  I

II-46

II 
II 
II 
II 

I 
I 
I 
I 

II
I
II
II

I 

.L 

I

Percent change

-- 

6

I

S  I 
i 
1970

I 

I 

I 

I 
1973

I 
i 

1976

1979

I 
II 
I  I 

I 
I 
1982

_

I 
I

1985

1988

1991

PROBABILITY  OF EXPANSION  *

Apr.- 

1

-0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
1991

1990

1970 

1973 

1976 

1979 

1982 

1985 

1988 

1991

'Each  probability represents  the  likelihood that an  expansion will  begin  during the  next three months.

Probability  of  Expansion

II-47

The Commerce  Department's  composite index of  leading economic

indicators  rose  0.6  percent in April--its third  consecutive monthly

increase.  Movements in the composite index can be translated into

probability forecasts  of the  start  of an expansion.  The April  reading

implies  an 86  percent probability that  a cyclical trough already  has

occurred or  will occur by  July  (chart).

Indeed,  recent  data suggest that  the economy already may have bottomed

out.  Identifying an exact month of the most  recent  cyclical trough remains

somewhat  tenuous  given the preliminary nature  of much of the data in hand;

however, a variety of coincident  indicators  can be used to narrow the  range

of likely  dates.  The  coincident  indicators  include real  income  and

consumption,  which bottomed out  in the  first  two months  of 1991  (table).

Industrial production and manufacturing and  trade sales  troughed in March,

and the employment  series  reached low points  in April and May.  If  the  low

values  reached by these  individual  series are  confirmed in  later data

releases, March and April  are  likely candidates  for the  latest  cyclical

trough.

1987-Based  Real GNP

At the end  of November 1991,  the Bureau of  Economic Analysis will

release  its quinquennial revision to the National Income  and Product

Accounts.  In  addition to  incorporating data  from the  1987  Economic Censuses

and the  1982  input-output  table,  the BEA will  shift the  base year  of  the

accounts from 1982  to  1987.  This  section briefly reviews the  likely effects

II-48

RECENT DATA ON  COINCIDENT INDICATORS

Industrial production

1

(index)

1990 
1990
Dec.

Jan.

Feb.

L

1991
1991

Mar.

Apr.

May

107.2

106.6

105.7

105.0

105.3

105.8

Capacity utilization

(percent)

80.6

80.0

79.1

78.4

78.5

78.7

Total  civilian  employment

(millions)

117.6

116.9

116.9

116.8

117.4

116.6

Nonfarm civilian employment

(millions)

114.3

113.8

113.7

113.7

114.2

113.3

Nonfarm payroll employment

(millions)

109.6

109.4

109.2

108.9

108.7

108.8

Nonfarm payroll hours

(billions)

203.3

200.8

201.2

200.4

199.5

200.4

Personal  income

(billions $82)

3400.2

3367.6

3367.4

3377.3

3374.8

Disposable  income
Personal  income  less
transfer payments

(billions $82)

2883.5

2855.8

2856.8

2866.3

2862.0

(billions $82)1

2883.2

2839.6

2838.1

2844.1

2840.5

Retail sales

:ail  sales

PCE

(billions)

149.8

147.8

151.1

151.5

150.9

152.5

(billions $82)

118.8

117.2

119.7

120.3

119.8

(billions $82)

2672.8

2645.4

2660.7

2688.4

2680.9

Manufacturing and trade

sales

Manufacturing and trade

sales

Composite coincident index

(billions)

534.4 

527.1 

527.9 

523.1 

529.6

(billion $82)

461.2

129.3

457.1

459.0

456.5

127.3

126.6

125.9

125.5

1. Components  of  composite coincident  index.

Note:  Low values  reached by indicators  since  July 1990

are  in  bold.

II-49

of  rebasing on the  record of  economic growth and inflation. 13  The analysis

uses  the  BEA estimate  of  1987-based real  GNP  through the preliminary  figure

for  1991:Q1 and extends the series  over the Greenbook projection horizon

using  a staff estimate  derived from our projections of twenty key components

of GNP. 

14

The  focus  is  on how the depth and duration of the 1990-1991

recession and the  dimensions of  the ensuing recovery are  expected to be

influenced by the  shift  to the 1987  base year. 

-

Real GNP.  In moving to a 1987  base year, the BEA will deflate all

nominal  expenditure  components  by  price  indexes  that  are normalized to

reflect  the  structure  of  relative prices prevailing in 1987  rather than

1982.  Such a renormalization  has  the  effect  of eliminating the  changes  in

relative  prices  that  have  occurred  between  the  1982  and  1987  base  years.

For  example,  computer prices  fell  60  percent  between 1982  and 1987,  reducing

the  level  of  the  1982-based computer  deflator to  0.4,  while the  deflator  for

the  remainder  of  GNP  rose  19  percent  to  1.19.  The  shift  in base  years will

reset  all  deflators  to  1.0 in  1987.  As  a  result,  given  unchanged current-

dollar  (nominal) computer  expenditures, the deflation process  (i.e.,

dividing by  1.0  rather  than  0.4)  will  yield less  "real"  computer

expenditures  relative  to other goods  and  services  on the  1987 basis  than on

the  1982 basis.

As  a general  rule,  a measure  of  real GNP  based on the prices of  a more

recent year  increases  less  rapidly than  a measure  based on prices of  an

earlier year.  This  reflects both  the  arithmetic of  the  deflation process  as

13.  For a detailed discussion of  these  issues,  see Allan H. Young,
"Alternative Measures of  Real  GNP,"  Survey of Current  Business, April  1989,
pp. 27-34.

14.  BEA's measure of  real  GNP  is  calculated at  significantly greater  levels

of  disaggregation than the  FRB  staff estimate.

II-50

1990:Q4 GNP  EXPENDITURE SHARES  IN  1982 AND  1987 DOLLARS
(Percent)

S1   ; 
. -
* 

-:::.,. 

..-. .. 

.

Gross  national  product 

1982 

1987

100.0 

100.0

Personal consumption expenditures 

Durables 
Nondurables 

Gasoline and fuel oil1  

Services 

Business  fixed investment 

Producers'  durable equipment 

Computers1  

Nonresidential  structures 

Residential investment 

Change in business  inventories 

Government  purchases 

Federal 
State  and  local 

Net  Exports 
Exports 

Computers 

Imports 
Oil1  
Computers 

1.  FRB staff  estimate.

64.4 

10.0 
21.7 
2.7 
32.7 

12.5 
9.7 
3.3 
2.8 

3.9 

-.6 

20.0 
8.4 
11.6 

-.2 
15.6 
2.3 

15.8 
2.0 
2.1 

66.3

9.3
20.9
2.1
36.1

10.0
7.4
1.1
2.6

3.9

-. 6

20.3
8.1
12.2

.1

13.0

.7

12.9

.9
.7

II-51

well  as  the tendency, over  time,  for  categories  of  expenditure  that  have  the

smallest  price  increases  (or the largest  price declines)  to  experience the

fastest  growth in volume.  Thus, as  the computer  example above  suggests,

when real  GNP  is  recalculated on  the more-recent base,  the  share in  real  GNP

of those goods declines.  In  effect,  a smaller weight  is  given to the

fastest-growing items;  because the growth  rate of  real  GNP  is  a weighted

average of  its  components, the  shift  to  the more-recent base  year reduces

the  historical  rate  of  growth in  real GNP.

The  table presents  the  expenditure shares  of key components of  real  GNP

in  the  fourth quarter  of  1990  when measured in  both  1982  and  1987  dollars.

The critical  differences  (shown in  bold type)  occur in two areas,  computers

and energy.  The  share  in real  GNP  of  business purchases of computers  falls

2.2  percentage points,  while the  shares  of  computer exports  and imports

decline 1.6  percentage points and  1.4  percentage  points,  respectively.  In

the  energy  sector, the price  of  imported crude oil  and  refined products  fell

from $31.50  per  barrel  in  1982  to  $17.30  per barrel  in  1987.  As  a result  of

this  significant  shift  in relative  prices,  rebasing to  1987  reduces

the  share  in real  GNP  of  imported crude  oil  and petroleum products

1.1  percentage points  and the share  of  consumer  purchases of  gas  and fuel

oil  0.6  percentage point.

GNP  prices.  Inflation, as  measured by the  GNP  fixed-weight price

index,  is  lower with the  1987  base  year.  The  reason  for this  is  the  same  as

for real  GNP:  Over the  1982-87  period, substitution took  place that  lowered

the  weight  of those  items  in  the  fixed-weight price  index  whose prices  were

rising rapidly.  In  contrast,  the  shift  in  the base  year to  1987  raises the

rate  of  increase  in  the  GNP  deflator;  this  is  just  the counterpart  of  the

II-52

slower  real  GNP  growth.  Assuming no change  in the  growth of nominal  GNP,

the  slower real  GNP  growth  implies larger  increases in the GNP  deflator. 1 5

The  1990-91 recession on a 1987 base.  The depth and duration of the

current  recession are not  likely to be  significantly different  on a 1987

basis than measured currently.  As  shown in the table below, the  decline in

real  GNP  in the  fourth quarter of  1990  is larger in  1987  dollars, and the

drop  in the  first  quarter of  1991  is  about the  same.  On balance, assuming

the  second quarter  shows  a zero or  small positive real  GNP  change on both

measures,  the peak-to-trough decline  in real  GNP  is 1 percent  in 1982

dollars and  1.4 percent  in 1987  dollars.  Inflation over the most  recent two

quarters,  as  measured by the  GNP  fixed-weight  price index, is  about

1/4 percentage point lower than on the  1982  basis.  Increases  in the GNP

deflator average about  3/4  percentage point  higher over this  period, but

given the lower weight assigned to  oil  imports, the  gyrations  associated

with the  swings  in oil  prices  during the  fourth and first  quarters are

smoothed considerably  in the  1987-based measure.

15.  The mathematics of index numbers  ensures that  movements in the  1987-

based GNP  deflator  over  the 198.2-87  period are  the same  as  those of  the
1982-based GNP  fixed-weight price  index.  In  effect,  computing the  percent
change  in the  1987-based GNP  deflator between  1982 and  1987 uses the
expenditure  shares  prevailing in  1982;  this  raises  the weight  in the  GNP
deflator  of those items  whose prices rose  rapidly over  this  period.

II-53

RECENT MOVEMENTS  IN  1982-  AND  1987-BASED REAL GNP
(Percent change, annual  rate)

1 

1989 

1
1990 

1990 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

19912
Q1

Real  GNP

1982  base 
1987  base 

1.8 
1.4 

.5 
.2 

1.7 
1.0 

.4 
1.1 

1.4 
1.7 

-1.6 
-3.1 

-2.6
-2.4

GNP  fixed-weight
price  index

1982  base 
1987  base 

Nominal GNP 

GNP  deflator

1982  base 
1987  base 

4.0 
4.2 

5.6 

3.7 
4.1 

4.8 
4.5 

6.6 
6.2 

3.9 
3.7 

4.2 
3.9 

4.7 
4.1 

5.1
4.9

4.5 

6.7 

5.1 

5.3 

.9 

2.5

4.0 
4.3 

4.8 
5.6 

4.7 
4.0 

3.7 
3.6 

2.8 
4.2 

5.2
5.1

1. Percent change,  fourth quarter to  fourth quarter.
2. Preliminary estimate  for  1991:Q1.

GNP  growth  in  the recovery.  Looking ahead, the  rebasing of  real  GNP  is

not  expected to  have  a significant effect  on the  projected dimensions  of  the

economic  recovery.  The  lower weight  given  to  computer purchases  likely will

hold  down real  GNP  growth when measured in  1987  rather  than 1982  dollars,

but  this may be  partially offset  by the  larger weight  given to  PCE  services.

In  general,  growth in  this  recovery is  expected  to be  relatively well

balanced across  sectors,  and as  a result,  the shifting of  weights associated

with rebasing is  not  expected to  have  a significant  effect  on real  GNP

growth over the  Greenbook projection horizon.

Rebasing also will  affect  the  staff's  estimates  of potential  output.

The  slower growth between  1982  and 1990  in real  GNP  in  1987  dollars  likely

will  result  in  a small  downward adjustment to the  estimated trend  in the

growth  of labor productivity over  this  period and, hence,  to the  historical

II-54

growth rate  of  potential output.  Judging by prior experience with the

rebasing of  real GNP,  the levels  of  actual  and potential GNP  tend to  be

revised downward proportionally, leaving the estimated margin of  slack  in

the economy little  changed by the  shift  in base years.  Looking  ahead,

revisions to the projected growth in potential output  will depend on the

extent  to which historical downward  revisions to trend growth in labor

productivity are  carried  forward.  Given that  the other determinants of

potential output  (e.g.,  growth in potential  labor input)  are unaffected by

the  rebasing, downward revisions  to projections of trend productivity growth

would have a one-to-one  effect  on potential output  growth.

DOMESTIC  FINANCIAL
DEVELOPMENTS

------------------------------------------------- 

----  ----- 

---  -------

III-T-1 
SELECTED  FINANCIAL  MARKET  QUOTATIONS
(percent)

1

1989

1990

1991

Change  from:

-------

~------------------------

March 
highs 

Dec 
lows 

POMC
Aug 
highs  May  14  Jun  25

Aug 90  FOMC
highs  May  14

-----------------------------------

Short-term rates

Federal  funds 2

Treasury bills 3
3-month
6-month
1-year

Commercial  paper

1-month
3-month

Large  negotiable  CDs 3

1-month
3-month
6-month

Eurodollar deposits 4

1-month
3-month

9.09
9.11
9.05

10.05
10.15

10.07
10.32
10.08

10.19
10.50

9.85

8.45 

8.21 

5.77 

5.79

7.53
7.29
7.11

7.59
7.51
7.45

5.49
5.62
5.75

5.58
5.76
5.98

-2.42

-2.01
-1.75
-1.47

8.51 
8.22 

8.10 
8.05 

5.92 
5.93 

6.07
6.11

-2.03 
-1.94 

.15
.18

8.52
8.22
8.01

8.14
8.18
8.25

5.90
5.93
6.07

5.98
6.04
6.26

-2.16
-2.14
-1.99

8.38 
8.25 

8.13 
8.19 

5.81 
5.94 

6.00
6.06

-2.13 
-2.13 

.19
.12

Bank prime  rate

11.50 

10.50 

10.00 

8.50 

8.50

-1.50

Intermediate-  and long-term rates

U.S. Treasury  (constant maturity)

3-year 
10-year 
30-year 

9.88
9.53
9.31

7.69
7.77
7.83

8.50 
9.05 
9.17 

7.13
8.14
8.36

7.45
8.33
8.51

Municipal  revenue
(Bond Buyer) 

Corporate--A utility
recently offered 

Home  mortgage  rates
S&L  fixed-rate
S&L  ARM,  1-yr.

Stock prices

7.95

7.28 

7.80 

7.09 

7.31

10.47

9.29 

10.50 

9.53 

9.58

11.22
9.31

9.69 
8.34 

10.29 
8.39 

9.47 
7.23 

9.65
7.24

-. 64 
-1.15 

.18
.01

1989 

1991 

Percent change  from:

Record 
highs 

Date 

Lows 
FOMC 
Jan 3  May 14  Jun 25 

Record  1989  FOMC
highs  lows  May 14

-1.05
-. 72
-.66

-.49

-. 92

Dow-Jones Industrial  3035.33 
NYSE Composite 
AMEX Composite 
NASDAQ  (OTC) 
Wilshire 

6/3/91  2144.64  2886.85 2910.11 
213.21  4/17/91 
154.00  203.67  203.21 
397.03  10/10/89  305.24  360.25  358.59 
511.31  4/17/91 
378.56  488.79  473.30 
3731.48  4/17/91  2718.59  3562.98  3538.88 

-4.13  35.69 
-4.69  31.95 
-9.68  17.48 
-7.43  25.03 
-5.16  30.17 

.81
-.23
-.46
-3.17
-.68

One-day quotes except  as  noted.
Average  for  two-week  reserve  maintenance  period  closest  to
date shown.  Last observation is  average  to date  for the
maintenance period ending June 26,  1991.

3/ Secondary market.
4/ Bid rates  for Eurodollar

deposits  at  11  a.m. London time.
5/ Based  on one-day Thursday quotes

and futures market index  changes.

6/ Quotes  for week ending

Friday closest to date shown.

Short-Term

Selected  Interest Rates *
(percent)

Daily

12-

-

11

10

9.

8

7

6

Prime  Rate

Federal  Funds

-. , 

-

* / 

-- 

-- 

--

5S

-

3-month Treasury  Bill

10

9

8

7

6

1989 

1990

L  4
1991

I  !  I  1 

5/14

I 

I 
6/25

4

11  H-

--  11

10 

9 

-

Primary  Fixed -
Rate  Mortgage
(weekly)
1_

--

Corporate  Bond
(weekly)

-

8

30-year Treasury  Bond

-4  8

(daily)

7
I 
1991

IlII 

5/14

I 

I
6/25

1989 

1990

---Fdday weeks through June 14, Wednesday weeks through June 19.

DOMESTIC FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS

Since the May FOMC meeting, federal  funds  have traded in a narrow range

around 5-3/4 percent.  Most  other market interest rates have risen somewhat

over the period, however,  in  response to accumulating evidence that the

economic recovery has begun  and therefore that no further monetary easings

are  in the  offing.  On balance, most  yields are up 5 to 25 basis points.

Despite  the apparent  firming in income  and spending, growth in the

broader monetary aggregates has been  sluggish in May and June.  M2  has

expanded at  about  a 3-1/2 percent  pace over  the two months,  placing this

aggregate  a little below the midpoint  of  its annual  range.  M3 has grown

little  since March, leaving this aggregate  also in the middle portion of  its

1991  target  range.  Damped monetary expansion, especially  in M3,  probably

reflects continued weakness in asset  expansion at  banks and thrifts.

Borrowing at  banks and  in the  commercial  paper market by  nonfinancial

businesses  remains weak, partially offsetting continued strong  issuance of

bonds.  Many  corporations have apparently sought  to take advantage of

relatively favorable  capital market  conditions to strengthen their balance

sheets.  In the federal  sector,  Treasury net borrowing from the public has

been restrained by the  reduced activity of the RTC in the current  quarter.

Issuance  of  tax-exempt  securities  has been strong in  recent months;  June's

volume was bolstered by  unusually large  short-term issues  of New York State

and Los Angeles.  Limited data in the second quarter suggest  a slight pickup

in  net  borrowing by the household  sector.

III-1

MONETARY  AGGREGATES
(based  on  seasonally  adjusted  data  unless  otherwise  noted)

III-2

19901 

1991 
Ql 

1991 
QZpe 

1991 
Apr 

Growth
1991 
1991 
Q4  90-
May  Jun  pe  Jun  91pe

----------

Percent  change  at  annual

rates--------------------

4.2 
3.8 
1.7 

5.9
3.4
4.0

7 
44 
2 

-1.1 
2.8 
0.4 

13.8
4.7
0.9

7 
2 
0 

7
4
2\

----------

Levels
Percent  change  at  annual  rates------------  bil.  $
May  91

5.7 

15.3 
-2.5 

4 

4
4

11.0 
-0.6 

-4.0

-0.5 
-5.6 

7.3 

0.9
12.6

7 

543.5

4 
10 

256.8
278.7

1.  M1
2.  M2
H3
3. 

Selected  components

4.  MI-A

5. 
6. 

Currency
Demand  deposits

7.  Other  checkable  deposits

3.5 

6.1 

13 

4.0 

25.4

7 

308.4

8.  M2  minus  M12

3.7 

2.6 

4 

4.2 

1.7

1 

2544.2

9.  Overnight  RPs  and  Eurodollars,  NSA
10.  General  purpose  and  broker/dealer  money

3.0 

-42.3 

-134

0.0 

-26.0

-20 

67.6

market  mutual  fund  shares

Commercial  banks

Savings  deposits  plus  MMDAs
Small  time  deposits

3

it. 
15. 
16. 

Thrift  institutions

Savings  deposits  plus  MMDAs 3
Small  time  deposits

17.  M3  minus  M2 4

Large  time deposits

At  commercial banks, net5
At  thrift  institutions

Institution-only money market

mutual  fund shares

Term RPs,  NSA
Term Eurodollars, NSA

MEMORANDA: 6

24.  Managed  liabilities  at commercial

banks  (25+26)

25.  Large  time deposits,  gross
26.  Nondeposit  funds
27. 

Net due  to  related foreign

institutions

28. 
29.  U.S.  government  deposits  at  commercial

Other'

banks s

11.0
9.9
7.5
12.4
-5.5
-2.2
-7.3

18.2
8.2
7.5
8.9
-6.3
-0.7
-9.7

2.0
4.2
15.9
-7.3

2.5
22.3
-9.4

3.0
6.5
17.5
-4.6
-0.1
22.9
-15.2

2 
10 
19 
1 
-9 
13 
-24 

365.1
1213.2
611.4
601.8
897.3
358.0
539.3

-6.4 

6.6 

-10 

-10.1 

-15.6

-12 

776.9

-9.5
-3.5
-23.9

20.2
-12.0
-12.1

1.2
11.9
-32.1

49.9
-32.8
7.4

-8 
0 
-343 

243 
-24¼ 
-31% 

-11.3
-5.7
-31.2

30.4
-15.9
-50.8

-9.7
0.3
-46.4

4.9
-14.6
-38.9

-7 
1 
-39 

-11 
-22 
-20 

502.6
398.1
104.5

146.2
81.1
65.7

----- Average  monthly  change  in  billions of  dollars----

-0.1 
-2.6 
2.4 

2.2 
0.2 

-1-6 
6.4 
-8.0 

-1.5 
-6.5 

0.3 

3.1 

-3

4
-3½

-434
&

-34 

-1.4 
0.0 
-1.4 

0.6 
-1.9 

-12.1 

-3.5
1.1
-4.6

-4.7
0.1

-6.5

710.0
452.0
258.0

26.0
232.0

-8 
4 

8 

15.2

1.  Amounts  shown  are  from  fourth  quarter  to  fourth  quarter.
2. Nontransactions  M2  is  seasonally adjusted as  a whole.
3.  Commercial  bank  savings  deposits  excluding  MMDAs  grew  during  May  and  June  at  rates  of  14.9

-jnercent  and  21  percent,  respectively.  At  thrift 

institutions,  savings  deposits  excluding  MMDAs  grew

-ing  May  and  June  at  rates  of  18.1  percent  and  13  percent,  respectively.
.non-M2  component  of  M3 

is  seasonally  adjusted  as  a  whole.

At  of  large  denomination  time  deposits  held  by  money  market  mutual  funds  and  thrift 
S. 
6.  Dollar  amounts  shown  under  memoranda  are  calculated  on  an  end-month-of-quarter  basis.
7.  Consists  of  borrowing  from  other  than  commercial  banks  in 
sold  under  agreements  to  repurchase,  and  other  liabilities 
Federal  Reserve  and  unaffiliated  foreign  banks, 

the  form  of  federal  funds  purchased,  securities

for  borrowed  money  (including  borrowing  from  the

loan  RPs  and  other  minor  items).  Data  are  partially  estimated.

institutions.

8.  Consists  of  Treasury  demand  deposits  and  note  balances  at  commercial  banks.
pe  - preliminary estimate

Monetary Aggregates and Bank  Credit

III-3

In May, M2 expanded at  a 4-3/4  percent annual  rate, which was slightly

faster than its pace  from the  fourth quarter of last  year through April.

Preliminary data, however, point  to a slower pace  in June.  One  factor

holding down the growth of M2 may be  shifts by households  to higher yielding

non-M2  assets.

Liquid retail deposits--OCDs,  savings, and MMDAs--have remained the

strongest  component  of M2;  they have benefitted from the  sluggish  response

of their offering rates to the  cumulative declines  in short-term market

rates over the past  several months.  But  small  time deposits,  whose yields

have  largely tracked the  downward trajectory of  money market  rates,  have

continued to  contract.  With rates on most maturing small  time deposits

substantially above those  currently available,  households  with maturing CDs

may be  looking outside M2  for  better  returns.  Indeed, flows  into both bond

and equity mutual  funds have  been robust of  late.  Previous episodes of

sharp  declines  in  rates on  small time deposits  have been  followed by strong

inflows  to  long-term mutual  funds  (chart).  Sluggish inflows to money market

mutual  funds may also be symptomatic of  investors'  reaching for the  higher

yields  available at the  longer end of the  maturity spectrum.

M3 barely increased in April  and in May, and partial data  suggest  no

significant  change in June.  With institutional MMMFs no longer benefiting

from the  lagged response  of their  yields to  declining market  interest  rates,

the only component  of  non-M2 M3  that  has  shown any strength lately  has been

large  time  deposits  at branches  and agencies  of  foreign banks.  Evidence

continues to  suggest  that  the  surge  in large  time  deposits at  foreign

III-4

Retail  CD  Rollover Differential  and  Inflows  to  Bond  Funds

Billions of Dollars

F 

Bond  Fund  Inflows

Percentage Points

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990

1.  Current yield  less year-ago  yield  on  1-year CD.

-U  4
1991

branches  since the change  in reserve requirements reflects substitution away

from other  liabilities, the  rebooking of assets  formerly held offshore,  and

lending to  overseas affiliates.

By contrast,  large time  deposits continued to decline at  a brisk pace

at  thrifts in May and  June,  and were  relatively flat  at  domestically

chartered banks.  Domestic depositories ran down other managed liabilities

as well, as  inflows  of  retail deposits were adequate to  support  lackluster

credit  growth.  Indeed, overall bank credit  decreased slightly in May, after

III-5

COMMERCIAL  BANK  CREDIT  AND  SHORT-  AND  INTERMEDIATE-TERM  BUSINESS  CREDIT

(Percentage  changes  at  annual  rates,  based  on  seasonally  adjusted  data)

1989:Dec.
to
1990:Dec.

1990 
Q4 

Q1 

Mar. 

Apr. 

May 

1991 

-----------

------------ 

Commercial  Bank  Credit  --------------------

Levels
bil.$
May

2749.9

658.9

484.9

174.0

2091.1

633.2

854.7

373.5

39.8

1.  Total  loans  and securities

at  banks

2. 

Securities

3. 

U.S. government  securities

4. 

Other  securities

5. 

Total  loans

6. 

7. 

8. 

Business loans

Real  estate loans

Consumer loans

9. 

Security loans

10. 

Other loans

5.3

8.6

13.9

-3.1

4.3

1.9

9.5

1.2

4.4

-1.8

2.3 

4.0 

6.7 

.0 

.6 

12.5 

25.7 

10.9 

-. 7 

7.3 

3.7 

15.0 

34.8 

19.3 

13.8 

-7.2 

5.7 

2.0 

-11.5 

-10.3 

2.9 

1.5 

3.0 

6.1 

-. 4 

3.4 

1.0 

3.8 

3.5 

.6 

-2.6 

-5.1 

-6.8 

-17.7 

-117.2 

-3.3 

-7.9 

-3.2 

-7.5 

4.5 

4.8 

-3.5 

30.9 

-1.3 

.0 

-4.8 

11.8 

20.0 

-19.7 

-13.7 

190.0

Short-  and  Intermediate-Term  Business  Credit  ----------

Business loans  net of bankers

acceptances

1.9

3.0

.4

4.0

-7.7

-8.0

12. 

Loans  at  foreign branches2

19.3

37.0

-3.1

-9.2

-46.5

-58.1

13. 

Sum of  lines  11  & 12

2.5

4.3

.2

3.5

-9.3

-9.9

14. 

Commercial  paper issued by
nonfinancial  firms

15. 

Sum of lines  13  & 14

16. 

Bankers  acceptances:  U.S.  trade

12.2

4.2

-3.2

2.8

-5.0

-3.2

-.

7

2.2

12.9

-5.2

-34.4

-14.4

627.1

23.6

650.6

145.9

796.6

related

-9.6

17.8 

-24.3 

-69.5 

-58.3 

n.a.

29.45

17. 

Line 15  plus bankers  acceptances:

U.S. trade  related

3.6

18. 

Finance company loans  to business

13.1

3.4

12.0

-1.6 

-.6

-7.3 

n.a.

4.5 

2.0

.4 

n.a.

S

838.5

294.4 5

19. 

Total  short-  and intermediate-

term business credit  (sum of
lines  17  & 18)

5.8

5.6 

-.1 

.0 

-5.2 

n.a.

1132.95

1. Average of Wednesdays.
2. Loans  at  foreign branches  are loans made to  U.S firms by  foreign branches  of domestically chartered banks.
3. Based on average  of data  for current and preceding ends  of month.
4. Consists  of acceptances  that  finance U.S.  imports,  U.S.  exports,  and domestic
shipment  and storage of goods.
5. April data.

--preliminary.
a.--not  available

III-6

GROSS OFFERINGS OF  SECURITIES BY U.S.  CORPORATIONS
(Monthly rates,  not seasonally adjusted, billions  of dollars)

1988 

1989 

1990 

-1990- 
Q4 

-------------
Q 1P 

1991-------------
Junee

May 

Apr? 

Corporate  securities - total-
Public offerings in U.S.

Stocks--total

Nonfinancial
Utility
Industrial

Financial

Bonds

Nonfinancial
Utility
Industrial

Financial
By quality

Aaa and Aa
A and Baa
Less  than Baa
No  rating  (or unknown)

Memo items:

Equity-based bonds
Mortgage-backed bonds
Other asset-backed
Variable-rate notes

Bonds  sold abroad - total

Nonfinancial
Financial

Stocks  sold abroad  - total

Nonfinancial
Financial

22.41
20.39
3.54
1.15
.24
.91
2.39

16.85
6.19
1.79
4.41
10.66

2.77
5.50
2.56
.05

.28
4.72
1.26
1.19

1.93
.73
1.20

.09
.08
.02

19.87
17.80
2.69
1.08
.29
.79
1.60

15.12
6.30
1.78
4.52
8.81

3.17
5.83
2.39
.05

.52
1.68
2.02
1.03

1.90
.48
1.43

.16
.12
.04

19.84
17.70
1.95
1.03
.35
.68
.92

15.75
5.63
1.95
3.67
10.12

3.42
6.39
.15
.04

.38
2.41
3.35
.82

1.92
.46
1.46

.22
.10
.12

22.23
20.79
1.33
.56
.36
.20
.77

19.46
7.79
2.84
4.95
11.67

4.85
7.62
.11
.01

.26
2.27
4.62
1.13

1.42
.17
1.25

.02
.02
.01

27.65
25.48
2.22
1.29
.47
.82
.93

23.26
8.81
2.21
6.60
14.45

4.74
12.22
.41
.03

.77
2.06
3.84
.76

2.01
1.04
.97

.17
.05
.11

31.45
27.91
5.31
3.80
.49
3.32
1.51

22.60
11.40
3.40
8.00
11.20

4.15
11.71
2.36
.01

.61
3.33
1.05
.18

2.50
.80
1.70

1.03
.93
.10

33.54
30.22
7.22
4.50
.65
3.85
2.71

23.00
9.50
3.50
6.00
13.50

3.30
10.71
.83
.00

.71
1.50
6.65
.61

2.50
1.60
.90

.83
.77
.06

27.00
25.00
4.50
2.90
.70
2.20
1.60

20.50
8.00
3.30
4.70
12.50

4.00
9.50
1.00
.00

2
4.uv
.50

2.00
1.20
.80

.00
.00
.00

1. Securities  issued in the private  placement market  are  not  included. Total  reflects gross

nroceeds  rather  than par value  of original discount  bonds.

2. Excludes  equity issues  associated with equity-for-equity swaps  that

have  occurred  in

restructurings.  Such  swaps  totaled  $9.4  billion in  1990.

3. Bonds  categorized according to Moody's  bond ratings,  or  to Standard

and Poor's  if  unrated

Dy Moody's.  Excludes mortgage-backed  and asset-backed bonds.

4. Includes bonds  convertible into  equity and bonds with warrants that

entitle the holder

to purchase equity  in the  future.

p--preliminary.  e--staff estimate.

III-7

remaining unchanged  in April,  as a contraction in loans  for the  second

straight month offset a buildup  of U.S.  government  securities.  The  shifting

composition of bank asset  flows  is  reminiscent  of  behavior around previous

business cycle troughs,  when loan demand tended to lag the incipient  revival

in economic  activity, and banks  were induced temporarily to  invest retail

deposit  inflows  in securities.  This cyclical  swing from loans to  securities

may have  been augmented during the current  business cycle by the increased

rate  of asset  securitizations, which has  partly been prompted by pressures

on  depositories' capital positions.  Consumer loans,  for example,  which

contracted again in May, actually posted a modest  increase when adjusted for

securitizations.  Increased securitizations  have also weakened growth of

real  estate  loans at  banks, which expanded at  a 4-3/4  percent  in May.

Overall,  real  estate  lending, though down sharply from the pace prevailing

through the middle of  1990,  was  the only component  of bank loans to  show

continual growth through the  recession.

Business  Finance

Aggregate borrowing by nonfinancial corporations  appears to  have  slowed

somewhat  from its  reduced  first-quarter pace, at  least  partly reflecting a

pickup in  equity issuance and probably declining needs to  finance inventory.

Borrowing has been concentrated  in  long-term markets.  While  new bond

offerings by nonfinancial  firms  in May and June were off  somewhat from

April's extraordinary  level--the highest  in four years--issuance this

quarter  still  should exceed the first-quarter pace.  Corporate treasurers

appear to  have moved aggressively to lock  in  relatively favorable  longer-

term rates and,  in many instances,  have  used the proceeds  to pay down

III-8

commercial  paper.  Outstanding commercial paper declined at  nearly a 35

percent  annual  rate in May and dropped  further in  early June.

While most  recent  corporate offerings  have been by investment-grade

firms, issuance  in the  junk bond market  has  reopened to  some  extent  in the

past  few months.  Most  recent  junk  issues have  been near  investment-grade

and have been concentrated in  noncyclical industries  such as food products.

Financial  institutions also have  been tapping capital markets heavily  of

late, with a number of issues backed by credit  cards  and other receivables.

Issuance of asset-backed securities  reached a record high in May and

remained strong in June.

Corporate bond spreads have narrowed  further during the  intermeeting

period, particularly over the past  few weeks.  As  is  typical  of early

recovery periods,  diminished concerns about  credit  quality have  led to

tighter  spreads over comparable  Treasuries.  Spreads  on investment-grade

industrial  and A-rated utility bonds  have  narrowed more than  50  basis points

since December and  are now close to their  levels  in June  1990.  The average

spread on  financial issues also has  narrowed considerably since year-end

but,  at  104  basis points,  is  still  high relative to a year ago when  it was

73  basis  points.  Spreads on credit-card backed securities,  which

experienced a runup of  65  basis points  between October and February to  over

120  basis  points, are  currently only about  75  basis  points above  Treasuries,

nearly as  narrow as  they were a year ago.

Most major stock market indexes  are  little  changed over  the

intermeeting period.  The  Dow Jones  Industrials reached a record high of

3035  on  June 3, but  along with other major indexes,  retreated with the

increase in Treasury bond yields the  first  week of  June.  The  stock market

III-9

has  been particularly receptive to initial public offerings,  having absorbed

$2 billion of them in May, the  strongest  issuance since September 1987.

May's  volume  included $1.3  billion issued by nonfinancial corporations and

several  issues by former LBOs.

Treasury and Sponsored-Agency Financing

The  staff estimates a relatively small  federal  deficit of  about

$17  billion in the  second quarter, owing largely to seasonal tax inflows,

but  also  reflecting the slow pace of RTC activity. 1  The  decline in the

deficit has not  been matched by  a commensurate  reduction in marketable

borrowing, however, because the Treasury has  continued building its  cash

balance in anticipation of very large deficits over the next  few quarters.

Marketable borrowing  in the  second  quarter will  raise about  $38  billion

in  new cash, with bills paying down $12  billion and coupons  raising

$50  billion.  Much  of  the pressure to  increase the gross  sizes of the

regular auctions was  diminished by a 335-day,  $16  billion cash management

bill auctioned in mid-May.  Nevertheless, over  the quarter, weekly bill

auctions  have been increased on balance  from $15.2  billion to  $20.8 billion,

while  coupon auctions  have been raised as much as  $750 million.

Available data  indicate that  outstanding debt  of  the government-

sponsored enterprises  continued to  shrink  in April and May, keeping rate

spreads  on new GSE debt  over  Treasury issues tight  during the  intermeeting

period.  In  late May, the Treasury sent  the  Congress  a package of proposed

reforms  intended to improve  the  safety  and soundness of the  GSEs.  The

1. The  RTC initially had planned to resolve  ninety-nine thrifts  in the
period, but  because  of  a delay in funding,  only sixty-three  thrifts,  with
combined assets of  $14  billion, now are  scheduled to be  closed.  Through
June  26,  fifty  institutions have  been resolved.

III-10

TREASURY AND AGENCY FINANCING 1
(Total for period;  billions  of  dollars)

1991

Q1 

Q2p   Apr. 

May 

June

Treasury financing

Total  surplus/deficit  (-) 

-65.6 

-16.7 

30.1 

-53.3 

6.5

Means  of  financing deficit:

Net  cash borrowing
from the public 

Marketable borrowings/

repayments  (-) 

Bills 
Coupons 
Nonmarketable 2  

Decrease  in the  cash

balance 

Memo:  Cash balance

56.5 

42.5 

-9.4 

41.8 

10.2

52.9 
5.9 
47.0 
3.5 

38.5 
-11.8 
50.3 
4.0 

-11.0 
-28.9 
17.9 
1.5 

40.9 
8.5 
32.4 
0.9 

8.5
8.5
0.0
1.6

.2  -13.4 

-16.2 

20.4 

-17.6

at  end  of period 

32.0 

45.4 

48.2 

27.9 

45.4

3
Other 

Federally  sponsored credit

agencies,  net  cash
borrowing 

FHLBs 
FHLMC 
FNMA 
Farm Credit  Banks 
SLMA 
REFCORP 

8.9 

-12.3 

-4.5 

-8.8 

0.9

3.2

-5.6 
.5 
1.5 
-1.7 
1.6
6.9 

-
-- 
-- 
-- 

-- 

-1.6 
-1.7 
-. 7

-
--

.2 

-. 6

.0 

.0 

.0

1. Data  reported on a not  seasonally adjusted, payment basis.
2. Includes proceeds  from securities  issued by federal agencies  under  special
financing authorities  and the  face  value  of  zero-coupon bonds  issued to  REFCORP
(the discount  from  face  value  is  offset  in  other means of  finance).

3. Includes  checks  issued less  checks  paid, accrued items  and other

transactions.

4. Excludes mortgage  pass-through  securities issued by FNMA and FHLMC.

p--projected.
e--estimated.

Note:  Details may  not  add to totals due  to  rounding.

III-11

package,  comprising three  separate bills, would increase regulation of the

Federal National Mortgage Association, the  Federal Home  Loan Mortgage

Corporation, the  Student Loan Marketing Association, and the Farm Credit

System.  Treasury, however, did not propose any changes in the  regulatory

structure  for the  Federal Home  Loan Bank  System.

To regulate  FNMA and  FHLMC, Treasury proposed establishing a separate,

arms-length bureau within the  Department  of Housing and Urban Development,

effective January  1, 1992.  The two GSEs  would be assessed fees to  fund  the

oversight office.  In addition to  legislatively mandated minimum leverage

ratios, minimum risk-based capital  ratios  would be  established by the

director of  the oversight office.  Failure to meet  the capital standards

would require  a GSE to develop  and implement  a capital  restoration plan, and

would allow the  oversight office to  limit  a GSE's activities,  assets  and

liabilities,  capital distributions,  and executive  compensation.  However, a

GSE that  received the  highest investment  grade rating  from two private

credit-rating agencies  would be exempt  from the  minimum risk-based capital

ratios.

The proposal  would make Treasury itself the regulator of  SLMA, with

authority and responsibility similar to that proposed for the oversight

office in HUD.  For the  FCS,  Treasury's  proposal would create  an  independent

Farm Credit  System Insurance  Corporation that  would  charge  FCS banks risk-

based insurance premiums, which would  replace the  current  statutory premium

formula. The proposal would also  give explicit  authority to the Farm Credit

Administration to  regulate the Federal Agricultural Mortgage  Corporation.

Municipal Securities

III-12

Issuance of tax-exempt  securities  picked up in May and looks to be

strong in June.  The increase in June  owes to a sharp rise  in  short-term

volume, as both New York State and Los Angeles  have  come  to market with

large  issues of  revenue anticipation notes.  Long-term issuance in June,

although slightly below  its pace  in May, remains robust.

Over the  intermeeting period, the rise in yields on municipal

securities  of nearly 25  basis points reflected the heavy volume  and the

general  rise  in long-term yields.  Quality spreads widened only slightly in

the wake  of the bankruptcy filing by Bridgeport,  Connecticut,  the largest

city ever to  file  for protection under Chapter  9 of the bankruptcy code.

Yields  on uninsured Bridgeport  bonds  reportedly  jumped 200  to 400  basis

points the  day after the  city  filed, but the  filing, which had been widely

discussed ahead of time,  is expected to have only a limited effect on the

market  as  a whole.

Bridgeport's  petition for  relief  followed three years of fiscal  crisis.

The  city  chose bankruptcy rather than allowing its  state-appointed financial

control board to  force through  an 18  percent  increase in property taxes to

close the  $12  million deficit  projected for  fiscal year  1992.  Reportedly,

the primary purpose  of  the filing is  to lower the city's  high labor  costs,

by  drawing upon the bankruptcy court's power to  reject  collective bargaining

3
agreements. 

In response to the  filing, Standard & Poor's  lowered  ratings

2. The  state  of Connecticut  opposes  Bridgeport's  filing, and a court  date
has  been  set  for mid-July to determine  whether or not the  petition will  be
accepted.

3. Whereas Congress  amended Chapter 11  to make  such tactics more difficult
after Continental Air Lines  employed bankruptcy to break  its union contract
in  1983,  it  did not  change  Chapter  9.

III-13

(Monthly rates,  not  seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)

GROSS OFFERINGS  OF MUNICIPAL SECURITIES

1989 

1990 

1990 

1991

Year 

Year 

Q4 

Q1 

Apr. 

May 

Junep

Total offerings1   11.90 

13.10 

12.33  11.39  13.08 

15.15

Total tax-exempt 11.65 

12.85 

11.96  11.25  12.91 

14.54 

19.00

Refundings 
New capital 

Long-term  2  9.47 
2.47 
7.01 
2.17 
.25 

Short-term 
Total taxable 

10.03 
1.45 
8.60 
2.82 
.25 

10.24 
1.01 
9.23 
1.72 
.37 

.79 

9.81  10.92 
.76 
9.02  10.16 
1.99 
1.44 
.17 
.14 

13.38 
.54
12.84

1.16 
.61

12.00

7.00

1. Includes issues for  public and private purposes;  also includes

taxable  issues.

2. Includes all refunding bonds,  not  just  advance  refundings.
p--preliminary.

on Bridgeport's $77.7  million of outstanding uninsured debt  to CCC  from BBB,

and Moody's dropped the city's  ratings to  B from Baa.  Both agencies

retained triple-A ratings  on the  city's  $100  million of  insured debt.  In

any event,  none of Bridgeport's bonds  are  likely to default  soon, if  ever,

because  the city's  financial  control board makes  debt  service payments

before turning over tax  receipts to the  city.  Funds for the  next  debt

service,  due  in August,  already have been placed in escrow.

Budget  problems  continue to plague  states,  as  well  as municipalities.

Over the intermeeting period, one  state  rated AAA by S&P,  Maine, was

downgraded, and four  of the  remaining eight  were listed as  troubled, owing

to declines  in key financial  indicators  and  continued softness in local

economies.

After a considerable  delay, the New York  State  budget  finally was

passed by the  legislature  and signed  by Governor Cuomo,  incorporating nearly

III-14

$1 billion  in line-item veto spending cuts.  Among the items  cut was about

$300  million in aid to New York City.  These  funds  were included in the

city's  plan to close its own fiscal  1992  gap.  The  impasse over the  state's

budget had already  delayed sufficiently the city's  receipt of some  proceeds

to force  it  to  sell  $1.2  billion in short-term notes;  the sale  prompted

S&P's downgrading of the city's  short-term debt.  Now, with the deadline  for

the  1992  fiscal year rapidly approaching, a $3.5  billion budget deficit

remains.  The city plans to  raise property taxes, and is  laying off more

than 5,000  city workers and is  contemplating major cuts in city  services.

New York City's fiscal  problems have  led investors  to demand a large  risk

premium to hold its  securities.  When the  city came to market  recently with

$600  million in long-term debt, yields  on the bonds,  although  lower than

expected, were  still  nearly  150 basis points  higher than  similarly rated

tax-exempt  instruments.

In June,  legislation was passed in Pennsylvania  creating an  "inter-

governmental  cooperation authority" empowered to  approve Philadelphia's

financial plan and to issue  long-term bonds to erase  the city's  fiscal  1991

and 1992 budget  deficits, which currently total more than $250  million.  The

legislation also allows  Philadelphia to defer  a payment to its municipal

pension fund due  on  June  30.  That payment,  as well  as  large  debt  service

payments  coming  due  in  July, had threatened to  send the  city into  default.

In response to  the legislation, S&P  has suggested that  an upgrade  from the

current  CCC rating may be  forthcoming for  the  city's  obligations.

Mortgage Markets

Available data  suggest that  mortgage debt  growth may have  edged up a

bit  in the second quarter,  consistent with the  pickup in sales  of new and

III-15

existing homes.  In the  first  quarter, mortgage  credit  for  all property

types grew at  an estimated 4-1/2 percent  seasonally  adjusted annual rate.

Credit  expansion was  concentrated in loans on single-family properties,

which grew at  about  a 6-3/4  percent rate.  Growth in multifamily mortgage

lending came  to  a halt, while  commercial mortgage debt outstanding fell  for

the second consecutive quarter.  Limited data  for the  second quarter show

growth of  real  estate loans  at  commercial banks moving up  slightly to about

a 4-1/2 percent  annual  rate  in May, boosted in part  by borrowing against

home equity lines of  credit.

Issuance of  federally related mortgage-backed pass-through securities

increased for the  third consecutive month in April to a seasonally adjusted

$19.3  billion.  Issuance of multiclass  securities also  has  been running well

ahead of the  first-quarter pace, as  the  steepness  in the yield curve has led

to an  increase in CMO arbitrage transactions.  Most  of the growth in  pass-

through issuance is  accounted  for by  fixed-rate  securities,  while ARM

issuance remains  light.  With initial  rates  on FRMs  close to their  lowest

levels  of the  past  five years,  the ARM share  of loans  closed remained low in

the  first  quarter,  averaging about  20  percent,  based on the  Federal Housing

Finance Board's monthly interest rate  survey.  More  recently, the initial

rate  advantage of ARMs  has  widened to over  2 percentage points,  which may

enhance ARM demand.  In late  1988,  the  last time the  FRM-ARM initial  rate

spread was  at  its  current  level,  ARMs  accounted for  55 percent  of

conventional  loan originations  (chart).

In other developments,  recent  reports  indicate that  delinquency rates

for  home mortgages  increased a bit  in the  first  quarter for  most property

types.  According to  seasonally adjusted data  from the Mortgage Bankers

III-16

MORTGAGE-BACKED
(Monthly averages, billions

SECURITY  ISSUANCE
of  dollars, NSA unless noted)

Federally related
pass-through securities
ARM-
-T::otal 
backed

Fixed-
Rate

(SA) 

.

Multiclass  securities
Private  FNMA
FHLMC
REMICS

Total  issues1 REMICs-

Agency
strios

1989 
1990 

1990-Q1
Q2
.Q3,
Q4

16.5
19.7

21.5
19.9
18.2
19.1

14.1
17.3

18.4
16.3
.17.5
16.8

2.6
2.3

1.4
2.2
1.6
4.1

8.1 
11.3 

1.4
2.4

11.3
11.1
12.1
10.9

1991-Q1  r

16.8 

14.1 

1.5

9.0 

2.1

1990-Oct.

Nov..
Dec.

1991-Jan.
Feb.
Mar.  r
Apr. 
r
p
May 

18.4
18.7
20.2

15.7
16.2
18.5
19.3
26.6

16.7
17.8
15.8

13.0
14.1
15.2
16.8
21.6

14.2
8,4
10.2

5.3
8.3

13.3
15.2
n.a.

2.2
2.3
2.3

1.5
1.4
3.3
3.3
1.3

3.1
5.0

5.0
4.7
6.6
3.9

4.0

5.6
3.8
2.4

2.4
3.2
6.3
5.9
n.a.

5.7
2.1
5.5

1.2
3.6
3.7
6.0
6.9

1. Excludes
r--revised

pass-through securities with  senior/subordinated  structures.
p--preliminary  n.a.--not  available.

Revised June  25,  1991

Initial Rate  Spread  vs. ARM  Share  of  Loans Closed

Basis Points

-Monthly.

Initial Rate  Spread*

.

NI .
--
.

/

I 

I

ARM  Share of Loans  Closed

/ 

\ 

/ .\

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990

1991

*Cont ract 

te on FRME ns ssIntal  rate on ARMs.

III-17

Association, the 30-day  "all loan" delinquency rate  rose  .25 percentage

point  in the  first quarter to  4.95 percent, generally retracing the previous

quarter's decline.  The  proportion of  single-family loans  60  days or more

past due,  a measure of more serious  payment problems, edged up  .06

percentage point to  1.54  percent in the  first quarter  (chart).  Despite

their recent upticks,  both measures of payment difficulties  remain well

below the averages of the past decade.  At  life insurance  companies, the

delinquency rate on all types of  mortgages rose to a series  high of  4.68

percent  in the  first  quarter;  as in  other recent  quarters,  loans on

commercial properties accounted for much of the increase.

Home  Mortgage  Delinquency Rate  At All Lenders
(Loans 60 days or more  past  due)

Quarterly 

I 
I 
I 

I 
I 
I 

I 

I 

I  I 

I 

I 

I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I  I 

II 

I 

I 
I 
I 

I 
I 
I 

I 
I 
I 

I 
I 
I 

I 
I 
I 
I 

I 
I 
I 
I 

I  I 
I 
I 
I  I 

I 
I 
I 

1 
1 
1 

I 

I 

I 

I I  I  I 

I 

i 

Perent
Percent

2.5

I
I
I

I
I
I

I 
I 

I

I  i 
I  I 
l  I(cid:127) 

_  "

I.. 
I

-/ 

1.5

I

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I

1971 

1975 

1979 

1983 

1987 

1991

Source: Mortgage  Bankers Association.

III-18

CONSUMER CREDIT
(Seasonally adjusted)

Percent change
(at annual rate)

1988  19891  1990

Q3 

Q4

Q1t

Mar.  Apr.

1990

1991

1991

Installment

8.8 

5.9 

2.3 

2.8 

-. 2 

-1.4

-.5 

2.8

Auto
Excluding auto
Revolving
All  other

6.9
10.2
13.7
7.4

1.3
9.2
15.2
4.5

-2.1
5.2
10.6
.6

-4.4
7.6
13.3
2.3

-1.5
.5
1.9
-. 7

-5.5
1.1
8.6
-6.0

-8.2
4.3
17.7
-8.6

Noninstallment

6.0 

2.6  -4.9  -12.6  -6.0  -14.2  -41.8 

5.4

Total

7.2 

5.8 

1.7

.8  -.7  -2.4  -3.6 

3.0

Memo:

Outstandings
(billions of
dollars)
1991
Apr. P

734.1

280.5
453.6
226.1
227.5

57.4

791.6

1. Growth rates  are  adjusted for  discontinuity in  data between December  1988  and

January  1989.

r--revised.  p--preliminary.
Note:  Details may not  add to totals due  to rounding.

CONSUMER  INTEREST  RATES
(Annual  percentage  rate)

1989 

1990 

Jan. 

Feb. 

Mar. 

Apr. 

May

1991

12.07
15.44
18.02

11.81
15.46
18.17

.

11.60
15.42
... 18.28

11.28
15.16
18.22

12.62 
16.18 

12.54
15.99

12.99 
15.70 

13.16 
15.90 

13.14 
15.82 

13.14
15.82

At  commercial banks
New  cars  (48 mo.)
Personal  (24 mo.)
Credit  cards

At  auto  finance  cos.

New cars
Used  cars

1. Average  of  "most common" rate  charged  for  specified type

and maturity during the

first  week  of the mid-month of  each quarter.

2. Average  rate  for  all loans  of  each type made during the month regardless of

maturity.

III-19

The  number of problem real estate  loans also has been rising sharply  at

commercial banks, where the average  delinquency rate  on all property types

in the first  quarter was the highest  rate in eight  years.  Delinquency rates

on construction and development  loans in the first  quarter far  exceeded

those of other  loan categories.

Consumer Credit

Consumer installment  credit  outstanding registered a small increase  in

April after  four months  of small  declines  (table).  The revolving credit

component  grew less rapidly than in March, but  has  apparently recovered from

the unusual  weakness  it  displayed in the fourth quarter and early this  year.

Turnarounds  in the nonrevolving components  from sharp declines  in March to a

slight  decline  (auto credit)  or a moderate increase  ("all other"  loans)

contributed to the modest rebound in the installment  credit  total  in April.

The  behavior of consumer credit  in recent  months, both before  and

during the economic  downswing, has  been quite  consistent with previous

cyclical experience.  Typically, consumer  credit growth has  slowed

progressively in advance of a cyclical peak, before  sliding to  a negative

rate  sometime during the ensuing recession.  Past upturns  in consumer credit

usually have begun at  or  shortly before the onset  of economic expansion.

Interest rates  on consumer  loans  (other than credit  cards)  at

commercial banks  declined about  1/4  percentage point  in early May from

levels  recorded in the February  survey.  Up to that  time,  declines  in

consumer  rates had been shallow relative to yields  on  other instruments of

comparable maturity.  Early this year,  the  spreads between  rates  on consumer

loans  and the yield on  2-year Treasury securities were  around their  widest

levels  in the 15-year period they have been calculated.  The widening in the

III-20

CONSUMER  LOAN DELINQUENCY  RATES

Commercial  Banks

Percent

4

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

1991

Percent

1971 

1975 

1979 

1983 

1987 

SBreak In series  between  1986  and  1987.

Auto  Loans

1975 

1979 

1983

1987

1L9i  0.5
1991

III-21

spreads mainly reflected typical  lags  in adjustment of consumer  rates to

movements  in market  rates, but also efforts by banks  to protect  against  loan

losses during a period of economic slowdown.

Increases in delinquency rates on consumer loans in the  first quarter,

though moderate in some cases  (chart),  likely  fueled  such concerns.

According to the American Bankers Association,  the average  delinquency rate

on closed-end consumer loans  at banks  reached a level  close to, but  still

somewhat below, the highs  of the  1973-75 and 1980-82  recession periods.

Delinquencies  on automobile loans at  the  "captive" auto  finance  companies

also were  near previous highs  in the  first  quarter,  although they increased

only slightly during the  quarter.  Previous patterns suggest  that both

series may  register  sharp declines as the  turnaround in  economic activity

continues.

Delinquencies  on bank  credit  cards have climbed much more  steeply over

the past  year than have these  other  series.  As measured by the  ABA, the

credit  card delinquency rate  jumped  .40 percentage points to  3.19  percent,

more than one percentage point  above its  recent  low in  1989-Q4.  To  some

extent,  the upsurge  reflects an  earlier relaxation of credit  standards by

card-issuing banks  intent  on expanding card programs  that  had become highly

profitable by the mid-1980s.  In particular, large issuers  with nationwide

distribution have been following a strategy of making cards available to

higher-risk individuals and charging higher than  average  interest rates.

Many of these  large  issuers also have  been active  in securitizing parts

of  their  credit  card portfolios.  The higher  delinquency rates  at  these

issuers  are  evident  in a series  prepared by Moody's,  showing the average

rate  for  credit  card accounts that  have been pooled as backing  for

III-22

securities.  At  an average  of  6.2  percent in the  first  quarter, it  was about

double the  rate estimated by the ABA for banks  in general. 4

Like the ABA

series, Moody's index has  experienced a sharp rise  recently, climbing  from

4.0 percent  in the spring of  1989.

4. The  gap between the two  series  is  also partly explained by differing
methods of  calculation:  the Moody's  series  is  based on dollar  amounts  of
delinquent  and total  loans,  and the ABA series  is  based on numbers  of  loans.
Because  delinquent  balances are  typically larger than the average balance
for  a given portfolio, a dollar-based delinquency  rate would be  higher than
a number-based rate  for  the  same  set  of accounts.

INTERNATIONAL  DEVELOPMENTS

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS

U.S. Merchandise  Trade

In April,  the U.S. merchandise  trade deficit  was  $4.8  billion

(seasonally adjusted,  Census basis),  slightly larger than  the  revised March

deficit of  $4.1 billion, but  smaller  than  the  average  for  the  first quarter.

The value  of both exports  and  imports  rose  in April;  exports were  5 percent,

and imports  2 percent, above  the  first-quarter average.

For exports,  the  increase  in April was  primarily  in capital  goods and

automotive products  (in both  categories  it was  the  second consecutive month

of expansion from low  levels  recorded earlier  in  the  year).  There was  also

a pick up  in a  broad range  of exported  industrial  supplies.  Agricultural

exports were  little  changed from the  average  levels  of the  past year.

U.S.  MERCHANDISE TRADE:  MONTHLY DATA
(Billions of dollars,  seasonally adjusted, Customs basis)

Exports

Total  Ag. 
Total 

NonAg.
Ap-  Non,  .

1990-Jul
Aug
Sep

Oct
Nov
Dec

1991-Jan
Feb
Mar-r

Apr

32.2 
32.5 
32.2 

34.6 
33.6 
33.6 

34.1 
33.6 
34.0 

35.6 

3.2
3.3
3.2

3.1
3.1
3.0

3.1
3.4
3.3

3.2

29.0
29.2
29.0

31.5
30.5
30.5

31.0
30.2
30.7

32.4

Total 

Imports

Oil  Non-oil
(nsa)

41.4 
41.9 
41.3 

44.5 
43.1 
39.9 

41.5 
39.1 
38.1 

4.2 
5.3 
5.9 

6.3 
6.5 
5.3 

5.2 
4.1 
3.8 

37.2
36.5
35.4

38.3
36.6
34.6

36.3
35.0
34.2

40.3 

4.2 

36.2

usar~

-9.2
-9.4
-9.1

-9.9
-9.5
-6.3

-7.4
-5.5
-4.1

-4.8

Source:

U.S. Department

of Commerce,

Bureau of the  Census

~

Increases  in  imports  in April were  spread primarily among capital

goods,  non-oil  industrial  supplies,  and consumer  goods;  all  three  categories

turned up  in April after  two months  of declines.  Imports  of  automotive

IV-1

IV-2

products  increased  slightly  as  rising deliveries  from Canada  (from low

levels  recorded in January-February) were  about offset by a drop  in

shipments  from Japan.  Oil imports  also  rose slightly in  value, as  a 13

percent rise  in volume was  largely offset by a 50  cent per barrel decline  in

the  price  of imported oil.

In 1991-Q1  the merchandise trade  deficit was  substantially smaller

than in previous quarters,  resulting almost entirely from a $36  billion (7

percent) drop  in  the value  of imports,  split about equally between oil  and

U.S  MERCHANDISE TRADE:  QUARTERLY DATA
Billions of dollars,  BOP-basis

Years 
1989  1990 

Exports 

361 

390 

1990 
Q3 

1991 
Q2 
Q1 
-------  saar  ----------
388 

402 

387 

403 

Q4 

Imports 
Oil 
Non-oil 

477 
51 
426 

498 
62 
436 

485 
51 
433 

502 
62 
440 

513 
72 
441 

Balance 

Ex Oil 

-116  -108 
-46 

-65 

-96  -115  -111 
-39 
-53 
-45 

477 
53 
424 

-73
-21

Memo:  Percent Change

1991-Q1  from

Prev. Qtr.  Year Ago

0.3 

5.9

-7.1 
-27.0 
-3.8 

-2.9
-16.8
-0.8

Source:  U.S.  Department of Commerce, Bureau of  Economic Analysis,

Balance-of-Payments  Accounts.

non-oil  items.  Nearly all major  trade  categories  showed declines  in

quantity reflecting weakening U.S.  demand;  one  exception was  imports  of

computers  and parts,  which continued to  move up.  While  there was  little

change  in value  of  exports between the  fourth and first  quarters, quantity

expanded at  a 7 percent  annual  rate  (primarily computers,  industrial

supplies,  and  agricultural products).  Both exports  and imports  of

automotive  products  fell  in  the first  quarter,  reflecting primarily sagging

sales  in  the United  States.

IV-3

MAJOR TRADE CATEGORIES
(Billions of dollars,  BOP basis,  SAAR)

Year
1990

1990 

01 

02 

03 

04 

1991 
01 

$  Change

01-01 

01-04

Total U.S.  Exports

389.6 

381.0  388.4  386.6  402.3  403.4 

22.5 

1.1

Agricultural  Export
Nonagric.  Exports

40.2 
349.3 

43.0 
39.3 
39.7 
338.0  347.5  347.3  364.5  363.7 

40.8 

37.8 

Industrial  Supplies

Gold
Fuels
Other Ind. Supp.

96.7
3.0
14.0
79.6

92.5

1.9
12.4
78.1

92.8

2.8
11.7
78.3

95.4
3.0
13.9
78.6

106.0

105.2

4.4

18.1
83.5

4.1
16.8
84.3

Capital  Goods

Aircraft  & Parts
Computers & Parts
Other Machinery

153.8
32.3
25.9
95.6

151.0
32.1
25.7
93.3

155.3
34.6
25.1
95.5

153.1
31.6
26.5
95.0

Automotive Products

To  Canada
To  Other

37.4
22.6
14.8

35.4
21.6
13.8

38.7
23.8
14.8

38.4
23.5
14.9

156.0
30.9
26.4
98.7

37.1
21.5
15.6

155.9
30.8
27.3
97.7

34.1
19.5
14.7

-3.2 
25.7 

1.9
-0.8

12.7

2.2
4.3
6.2

4.8
-1.2
1.6
4.5

-1.3
-2.1
0.8

-0.8
-0.3
-1.4
0.8

-0.1
0.0
0.9
-1.0

-3.0
-2.1
-0.9

Consumer Goods
Other Nonagric.

43.3 
18.2 

40.7 
18.4 

43.8 
17.0 

42.8 
17.6 

45.8 
19.6 

45.9
22.6

5.3 
4.2 

0.1
3.0

Total U.S.  Imports 

497.7

491.1  484.7  501.6  513.2  476.9

-14.2 

-36.3

Oil  Imports
Non-oil  Imports

62.1 
435.6 

63.2 

52.6 
61.8 
427.9  433.4  439.8  441.1  424.3 

72.1 

51.3 

Industrial  Supplies

Gold
Other Fuels
Other  Ind. Supp.

82.5
2.5
3.6
76.4

80.9
1.7
3.6
75.7

82.0
2.1
3.2
76.7

83.3
2.8
3.5
77.0

83.9
3.3
4.3
76.4

80.2
3.3
3.9
73.0

Capital Goods
Aircraft & Parts
Computers  & Parts
Other Machinery

Automotive  Products

From Canada
From Other

Consumer  Goods
Foods
All Other

116.4
10.6
23.0
82.8

87.3
29.7
56.5

106.2
26.6
16.4

113.6

9.3
22.8
81.5

115.6
10.7
22.9
S82.0

116.2

9.9
23.0
83.3

85.5
28.4
57.2

87.3
31.0
56.4

90.3
32.2
58.1

104.5
27.7
15.8

104.7
27.1
16.7

106.6
25.8
17.5

120.2
12.8
23.3
84.1

86.1
27.3
58.8

106.9
26.0
18.1

119.0
11.1
24.2
83.7

82.5
23.5
58.9

100.5
25.6
16.5

-10.6  -19.5
-3.6  -16.9

-0.6
1.6
0.4
-2.6

5.5
1.9
1.4
2.2

-3.1
-4.9
1.8

-4.0
-2.1
0.8

-3.7
0.0
-0.3
-3.3

-1.2
-1.7
0.9
-0.4

-3.6
-3.8
0.2

-6.4
-0.5
-1.6

Source:  U.S. Department  of Commerce, Bureau of  Economic Analysis.

Oil  Imports:  Quantities  and Prices.

IV-4

The pace  of oil  imports  (mb/d) picked up slightly  in  the  first

quarter, but remained well  below rates  recorded  in the  first  three  quarters

of  1990.  Continued stock drawdowns  (especially in January) and weak

economic  activity restrained imports.  In April, oil  imports  increased to

7.9 mb/d, largely  the result  of stockbuilding;  this  was  the  first  increase

in stocks  since  September  of last year.  Weekly indicators  suggest  that oil

imports increased again in May as  stocks  continued to be  rebuilt at a rapid

pace.

From a peak in November  1990,  the price  of oil  dropped nearly $12  per

barrel  to  average about  $17.90  per barrel  in both March and April.  Spot

(BOP basis,  seasonally adjusted, value  at  annual  rates)

OIL IMPORTS

1990 

Q3 

Q4 

1991 
Q1 

Dec 

Jan 

Months
Feb 

Mar 

Apr

Value  (Bil.  $)  61.82 
Price  ($/BBL) 
19.96 
Quantity  (mb/d)  8.48 

72.08 
28.77 
6.86 

52.62 
20.29 
7.10 

63.02 
26.32 
6.55 

62.84 
23.54 
7.31 

49.72 
19.35 
7.04 

45.32 
17.85 
6.95 

49.86
17.90
7.85

Source:  U.S.  Department of Commerce,  Bureau of  Economic  Analysis.

prices  point to  a modest  increase  (about $0.60 per barrel)  in  import  prices

in May.  In June,  spot prices  of West  Texas  Intermediate  crude  oil have

fallen about $1.00  per barrel.  The  decline  occurred as  stocks  continued to

rise  in late May and early June,  and  in the  absence  of  a cut  in production

quotas  at  the June  4th OPEC meeting.

Prices  of Non-oil  Imports  and Exports

The fixed-weight price  index  for non-oil  imports,  reported  in  the GNP

accounts,  rose  4.0 percent at  an annual  rate  during the  first  quarter,  a

slightly  slower  rate  of  increase  than  recorded during  the  fourth quarter.

The deceleration in prices  was  evident  in most major  end-use  groupings,  and

IV-5

IMPORT  AND EXPORT  PRICE  MEASURES
(percent change  from previous period, annual rate)

Year 
1991-01 
1990-01 

Quarters 

1990 

1991 
01 
(Quarterly Average, AR)  (Monthly Rates)

Mar 

04 

Apr

Q3 

Months
1991

--------------------.BLS  Prices------

Imports.  Total

Foods, Feeds,  Bev.
Industrial  Supplies
Ind  Supp  Ex Oil*

Capital  Goods
Automotive Products
Consumer  Goods

Memo:

Oil
Non-oil

Exports.  Total

Foods,  Feeds,  Bev.
Industrial  Supplies
Capital  Goods
Automotive  Products
Consumer Goods

Memo:

Agricultural
Nonagricultural

3.3
3.7
2.8
0.4
4.8
3.6
2.7

7.0
3.0

2.0
-3.9
1.8
3.1
2.7
3.6

-3.3
2.7

10.2
7.4
31.7
-1.5
3.8
3.3
-0.3

24.9

5.2

77.1

2.7
8.2

10.3
4.5

-12.3

7.6

-41.0

-0.3
4.8
6.5
2.3

-0.4
1.0
-2.2
0.0
0.7
0.6
-0.5

-0.7
0.8
-0.5
-0.6
-1.4
-0.7
-0.7

134.1
1.8

307.2
6.3

-73.9
3.6

-6.6
0.2

0.0
-0.7

1.7
-13.1
5.2
3.3
1.9
1.6

4.4
-16.5
15.9
2.1
3.5
3.7

0.6
8.5
-9.8
5.6
3.5
6.0

-0.1
1.0
-1.2
0.4
0.4
0.1

0.0
0.9
-1.1
0.3
-0.1
1.8

-11.9
3.9

-14.2
7.9

6.9
-0.7

0.4
-0.3

1.0
-0.2

------------- Prices  in  the GNP Accounts-------------

Fixed-Weight

Imports,  Total

Oil
Non-oil

Exports,  Total

Ag
Nonag

Deflators
Imports,

Total
Oil
Non-oil

2.8
3.2
2.7

2.1
-1.4
2.8

0.6
3.1
-0.7

Exports,  Total

-0.3
-1.4
-0.1
*/ Months  not  for  publication.
*/  Months not  for  publication.

Ag
Nonag

15.8
135.7
3.9

S0.8
-10.1
3.1

34.4
346.2
5.3

5.7
-11.8

9.5

-18.3
-75.0

4.0

0.4
7.8
-1.0

11.3
135.2
2.1

27.1 
345.0 
0.6 

-20.7
-75.1

-4.5

-3.9 
-10.1 
-3.1 

3.6 
-11.8 
5.6 

-5.3

7.8
-6.6

IV-6

likely reflects,  in part,  the shift  in the  dollar  from depreciation during

the  fourth quarter  to  a moderate appreciation on balance  during the  first

quarter.  With the  continued rise  in the  dollar, prices  of most major trade

categories  of non-oil  imports  declined in April, especially prices  of

imported capital  goods.

Prices of agricultural  exports moved up 7.8 percent  at an annual rate

in the  first quarter,  led by increases  in the  prices of exported fruits,

feedgrains,  and rice.  In contrast,  the  average price  of  nonagricultural

exports declined, as  price  increases  for  exported capital goods,  consumer

goods,  and automotive products were more than offset by declines  in  the

prices of exported  industrial  supplies.  In April,  the price  index  for

nonagricultural  exports  fell  0.2 percent  (not at an annual  rate),  its  third

consecutive monthly decrease, led by a continuing  fall  in  the  index  for

industrial  supplies  (especially fuels,  chemicals, and paper).  This  decline

was offset, however, by a 1.0  increase  in prices  for agricultural exports

(especially wheat).

BLS  import and export prices  for  May will be released  on June  27  and

will be  discussed in  the Greenbook supplement.

U.S.  Current Account  through 1991-Q1

The U.S.  current account shifted to  a surplus  of $40.9 billion SAAR in

the  first  quarter of  1991  from a revised deficit of $93.6  billion  SAAR in

the  fourth quarter  of 1990.  (See  the  tables  below.)  The change  resulted

from two  factors:  a $104 billion shift  in unilateral  transfers  from net

payments  to net receipts  (largely reflecting cash contributions  from

coalition partners  in Operation Desert  Storm),  and a $29  billion decrease  in

the  deficit on  goods,  services, and  investment income  (primarily a drop  in

merchandise  imports).

IV-7

U.S.  CURRENT ACCOUNT:  QUARTERLY DATA

(Billic

Billions of  dollars,  seasonally adjusted annual rates)

nnual  rates)

-------  1990-r  ------ 
Qtr  2  Qtr  3  Qtr 4 

I Dollar Changes
91Q1-

1991  | 90Q4- 
Qtr 1  |  90Q3 

90Q4

Current Account Balance

(Ex Cap  Gains/Loss,Spec Grants

-88.7 
-95.5 
-89.9  -102.2 

-93.6 
-83.5 

40.9
-48.5

1.9 
18.7 

134.5
35.0

Trade Balance

Exports
Imports

-96.4  -115.0  -110.9 
402.3 
386.6 
388.4 
513.2 
501.6 
484.7 

-73.5
403.4 [
476.9

4.1
15.8
11.6

37.4
1.1
-36.3

Other  Current Account, net

7.6 

19.5 

17.3 

114.3

-2.2 

97.0

Investment  Income, net

0.0 

11.2 

24.5 

18.6

13.3 

-5.9

Direct  Investment, net

Capital Gains/Loss,  net
Other, net

Receipts

Capital Gains/Loss
Other DI  Receipts

Payments

Capital  Gains/Loss
Other  DI  Payments

Portfolio  Income,  net

Receipts

Private
Government

Payments

Private
Government

Military, net

Sales
Payments

Other Services,  net

Receipts
Payments

43.6 
1.2 
42.4 

52.8 
1.5 
51.3 
9.2 
0.3 
8.9 

-43.6 
72.5 
65.0 
7.4 
116.0 
78.6 
37.4 

53.5 
6.6 
46.8 

54.7 
1.4 
53.3 
1.2 
-5.3 
6.5 

-42.3 
73.4 
65.4 
7.9 
115.6 
77.5 
38.1 

61.7 
0.7 
61.1 

56.3 
0.7 
55.6 
-5.5 
0.0 
-5.5 

-37.2 
83.0 
66.8 
16.2 
120.2 
81.1 
39.1 

-6.2 
9.0 
15.3 

-6.7 
10.8 
17.6 

-9.0 
10.7 
19.7 

32.6 
120.4 
87.8 

32.3 
123.7 
91.4 

38.9 
132.1 
93.3 

Unilateral Transfers,  net

Cash Grants,  Desert  Storm
Grant  to  Egypt  (debt repay)
Other  transfers,  net

-18.8 
0.0 
0.0 
-18.8 

-17.3 
0.0 
0.0 
-17.3 

-37.1 
17.2 
-28.0 
-26.3 

60.6
-1.5
62.0

63.3
1.3
62.0
2.8
2.7
0.0

-42.0
68.6
60.9
7.7
110.6
72.1
38.5

-8.7
9.7
18.4

36.7
125.4
88.7

67.8
90.8
0.0
-23.0

8.3
-6.0
14.3

1.6

-0.7
2.3
-6.7
5.3
-12.0

5.1
9.6
1.3
8.3
4.5
3.5
1.0

-2.2
-0.1.
2.1

6.5 
8.4 
1.9 

-19.8
17.2
-28.0
-9.0

-1.1
-2.1
1.0

7.1
0.6
6.5
8.2
2.7
5.5

-4.8
-14.3
-5.9
-8.4
-9.6
-9.0
-0.6

0.2
-1.1
-1.3

-2.2
-6.8
-4.6

104.9
73.6
28.0

3.3

IV-8

U.S.  CURRENT ACCOUNT:  ANNUAL DATA

Billions  of dollars

1988 
Year-r  Year-  Year-ri  1987 

1990  I  1988-  1989-  1990-
1989

1988 

1989 

I  -- Dollar  Changes  --

Current Account  Balance 

-126.2
(Ex Cap Gains/Loss,Spec Grants)  -125.4

-106.3 
-106.2 

-92.1
-92.4

34.0 
37.2 

19.9 
19.1 

14.2
13.9

Trade Balance
Exports
Imports

-127.0

320.3
447.3

-115.9  -108.1
389.6
361.5 
477.4 
497.7

32.5 
70.1 
37.6 

11.1
41.1
30.0

Other Current Account, net

0.7

9.6 

16.0

1.5 

8.9

Investment Income,  net

5.4

2.7 

11.9

-2.3

-2.7

Direct Investment, net

Capital Gains/Loss,  net
Other, net

Receipts

Capital Gains/Loss
Other DI  Receipts

Payments

Capital Gains/Loss
Other DI  Payments

Portfolio  Income,  net

Receipts

Private
Government

Payments

Private
Government

Military, net

Sales
Payments

Other  Services,  net

Receipts
Payments

Unilateral Transfers,  net

Cash Grants, Desert  Storm
Grant  to  Egypt  (debt repay)
Other  transfers, net

36.8
-0.8
37.7

50.4
0.0
50.4
13.6
0.9
12.8

-31.5
60.2
53.5

6.7
91.7
61.5
30.2

-5.7
9.4
15.1

16.1
93.1
77.0

-14.9
0.0
0.0
-14.9

42.5 
-0.1 
42.5 

54.0 
1.6 
52.4 
11.5 
1.6 
9.9 

-39.8 
74.7 
69.0 
5.6 
114.5 
78.6 
35.9 

52.7

3.0
49.7

54.4
1.1
53.3
1.8
-1.9
3.6

-40.7
75.6
65.7
9.9
116.4  ]
78.5
37.9

-6.2 
8.4 
14.6 

-7.2
9.9
17.1

28.6 
108.1 
79.5 

33.6
123.4
89.8

-15.5 
0.0 
0.0 
-15.5 

-22.3
4.3
-7.0
-19.6

3.4
-3.3
6.7

9.8
-2.1
11.9
6.4
1.2
5.2

-5.7
10.3
8.9
1.4
16.0
11.1
4.9

-2.1
-1.8
0.3

6.1
13.1
7.0

-0.3
0.0
0.0
-0.3

5.7 
0.8 
4.9 

3.6
1,6
2.0

-2.1
0.8
-2.9

-8.3
14.4
15.5
-1.1
22.8
17.1
5.7

-0.5
-1.0
-0.5

12.5
15.1
2.5

-0.5
0.0
0.0
-0.5

7.8
28.1
20.3

6.4

9.3

10.2
3.0
7.2

0.4
-0.5
0.9
-9.7
-3.5
-6.2

-0.9
1.0
-3.3
4.3
1.9
-0.1

2.0

-1.0
1.5
2.5

5.0
15.3
10.3

-6.8
4.3
-7.0
-4.1

IV-9

Cash contributions  from coalition partners  in Operation Desert Storm

amounted to  $22.7  billion  (not an annual  rate)  in the  first quarter,

compared with $4.3 billion  (not an annual rate)  in the  fourth quarter.  In

addition, data for  the  fourth quarter  included a $7 billion U.S.  government

grant  to  Egypt  to  repay debt to  the United States  ($2.1 billion  for interest

payments  and $4.9 billion for  repayment of principal).  Excluding the  cash

contributions  and the  special grant  to  Egypt,  the current  account moved from

a deficit of $82.8  billion in the  fourth quarter to  a deficit of  $49.9

billion  in  the  first quarter.

The merchandise  trade  deficit narrowed $37.4 billion SAAR in  the  first

quarter.  The  level  of exports was  about the same  as  in  the  fourth quarter;

about half of  the  drop  in  imports was  in  the  value of  oil.

Net  service  receipts  declined slightly  in the  first  quarter  from a

high  fourth-quarter  level.  Most of  the  change  was  in  travel  and passenger

fares;  U.S.  receipts  from  foreigners  fell more  than U.S.  payments  to

foreigners  during the  war  in  the  Middle  East.  Both  exports  and  imports  of

military goods  and services  declined  a bit  from  strong fourth-quarter

levels,  leaving  the  balance  little  changed.

Net portfolio  income  (excluding transactions  related  to  the

forgiveness  of  Egyptian debt)  strengthened $3.5  billion SAAR in  the  first

quarter;  the  general  decline  in  interest  rates  reduced payments  on our  net

liability position.

Net direct  investment income  declined in  the  first  quarter.  This

small  decline was  the  net of  the  elimination of large  fourth-quarter  losses

reported by foreign  direct  investors in  the United States  (which raised U.S.

payments)  and  a  substantial  increase  in  income  receipts  from U.S.  direct

investments  abroad.  The  losses  reported by foreign  investors  in the  fourth

quarter were  largely by banking  and  finance  companies.  Although U.S.  direct

IV-10

investment payments to  foreigners  shifted from losses  to  profits  in the

first quarter,  they  remained at a depressed level  (near zero) as  the U.S.

recession held down profits.  U.S. income  receipts  on direct  investments

abroad were strong  in the  fourth quarter and increased  further in  the  first

quarter, partly reflecting transitory positive effects of  the Persian Gulf

crisis  on the earnings  of U.S.  oil companies  abroad.

U.S.  International  Financial Transactions

In the  first quarter of 1991,  recorded net capital  inflows  and a

current account  surplus  (line 9 of the  Summary of U.S.  International

Transactions  table)  combined to produce a large  negative  statistical

discrepancy  (line 10)  in the U.S.  international  transactions  accounts.

Foreign official holdings  of reserve assets  in the United  States  (line

4) increased by about $6 billion in  the first  quarter,  despite  large

payments by a number of  countries  to cover  the costs  of  Desert  Storm.  While

payments by Germany and Japan  reduced their assets  held in  the United

States, holdings  of  the  OPEC  countries  in  the United States  did not  decline.

Official  assets  in  the United States  of  "other" countries  increased  sharply;

about  one-third was  accounted for by  Spain, and most of  the  rest was

contributed by  Singapore,  Taiwan, and Mexico.  In April,  foreign official

reserves  in  the United States  declined about  $6 billion, but preliminary

information from the FRBNY  indicates  that the  decline was  reversed in May.

Private foreign net purchases  of U.S.  securities  (lines  2a,  2b,  and 3)

were about matched by U.S.  net purchases  of foreign securities  (line  2c)  in

the  first quarter.  In April, however, there was  a small  net capital  inflow

as  the result  of private  securities  transactions.  In both March and April,

foreigners  added to  their holdings of U.S.  stocks  (line 2b),  the  first

substantial  increases  since October  1989.

IV-11

SUMMARY OF  U.S.  INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTIONS

(Billions of  dollars)

1989 

1990 

Year 

Year 

Q2 

1990

Q3 

Q4

1991 

Q1 

1991

Feb. 

Mar. 

Apr.

27.2 

30.7 

2.3

21.4 

-1.0

1.9 

4

-9.

6.3  -16.2

15.4 

-28.4

-9.4 

-3.9 

-7.5 

-4.4 

-5.3 

1.6 

1.5

32.0 

16.4 

5.8 

-0.1 

6.0 

3.8 

-0.5 

4.0 

1.4

Private- Capital

Banks

1.  Change in  net  foreign

positions  of banking  offices

in  the.. U.S  (*-  inflow),

Securities.

2. 

Private securities

'transactions',  .net

a)  foreign net purchases

-(+)  of  U.S.  corporate  bonds

b)  foreign net purchases

2

(+)  of U.S.  corporate  stocks

7.9 

-13.7 

-3.4 

-2.3 

-5.0

1.8 

0.4 

2.0 

3.1

c)  U.S. net  purchases  (-)  of

foreign  securities

-24.5 

-31.0 

-11.7 

-1.6 

-8.5 

-10.0 

-5.1 

-4.3 

-3.1

3.  Foreign net purchases  (+)  of  U.S.

Treasury obligations

30.1 

1.6 

4.4 

0.1 

-1.9 

4.1 

5.3 

-5.3 

0.5

Official Capital

4.  Changes  in  foreign  official

reserves, assets in U.S.

(+  = increase)

a)  By  area

G-10  countries

OPEC

8.3 

31.4 

4.7 

13.6 

19.9 

5.6 

9.5  -12.1 

-6.1

-5.2 

10.1 

9.8

1.6

-0.9 

8.6 

* 

-1.4 

8.4 

0.1 

-11.6

0.6

16.7

-11.8

-0.5

0.3

All  other  countries

3.4 

19.8

5.6 

6.4 

11.4 

b)  By  type

U.S.  Treasury  securities

3

Other

0.1 

29.3 

2.5 

11.8 

20.8

8.2 

2.1 

2.2 

1.8 

-0.9

2.2 

3,4 

7.4  -11.8 

2.1 

-0.3 

-2.0

-4.1

5.  Changes  in U.S.  official reserve

assets  (+  = decrease)

-25.3 

-2.2 

0.4 

1.7 

-1.1 

-0.4 

0.7 

-0.6 

-0.2

Other  transactions  (Quarterly  data)

4

6.  U.S.  direct investment  (-) abroad

7.  Foreign direct  investment  (+)  in U.S.

5

8.  Other capital  flows  (+  =  inflow)

9.  U.S.  current account balance

10.  Statistical discrepancy

-33.4

70.6

-5.0

-33.4

37.2

8.3

-106.3

-92.1

18.4

63.5

-2.9

9.3

-11.0

-22.2

24.4

-17.8

7.1

0.2

-23.9

-3.8

4.5

-4.8

-23.4

1.5

19.1

-8.5

2.0

5.0

10.2

-15.5

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

MEMO:

U.S. merchandise trade balance --  part

of  line 9 (Balance of payments  basis,

seasonally adjusted) 

-115.9 

-108.1 

-24.1 

-28.8 

-27.7 

-18.4 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a.

1.  These  data  have  not  been  adjusted  to  exclude  commissions  on  securities  transactions  and,  therefore,  do  not  match

exactly  the  data  on  U.S.  international  transactions  as  published  by  the  Department  of  Commerce.

2. Includes  all  U.S.  bonds  other  than  Treasury obligations.

3. 

Includes  deposits  in  banks,  conmercial  paper,  acceptances,  borrowing  under  repurchase  agreements,  and  other  securities.

4. Seasonally  adjusted.

5.  Includes  U.S.  government  assets  other  than  official  reserves,  transactions  by  nonbanking  concerns,  and  other  banking  and
includes  amounts  resulting  from  adjustments  to  the  data  made  by
ifficial  transactions not  shown elsewhere.  In  addition, 

it 

'-e Department  of  Commerce  and  revisions  to  the  data  in  lines  1  through  5  since  publication  of  the  quarterly  data  in the
'urvey  of  Current  Business.
*--Less  than $50  million.

NOTE:  Details may not  add to  total because of rounding.

IV-12

Capital outflows  associated with U.S. direct  investment  abroad  (line

6) were very strong  in  the  first  quarter of 1991.  The bulk of  the

investments  were in the  countries  of the  European Community.  The capital

inflows associated with foreign direct  investment in the United States  (line

7) fell  further  in  the  first quarter from  the depressed 1990-fourth quarter

level.  BEA revised the  inflow for the year 1990  up  to  $37  billion  (compared

with the  earlier estimate  of $26  billion),  but  it  remained far below the  $71

billion reached in  1989.  A shift in  financing patterns  appears to  be  the

major  explanation for this  dramatic  decline;  according to  data recently

released by BEA, outlays  by foreign direct  investors  to acquire U.S.

businesses declined by only  $3 billion, from $60  billion in  1989  to  $57

billion in  1990.  Apparently, a far  smaller  fraction of the  financing was

provided by  foreign parent  companies  in  1990,  and  a larger  fraction by

borrowing by U.S.  affiliates  of  foreign direct investors.  Data on  foreign

acquisitions  of U.S.  businesses  in 1991  are  not yet available,  so  it  is  not

possible  to  judge whether  the  depressed level  of capital inflows  in  the

first  quarter  of 1991  reflects  a continuation of 1990  financing patterns or

whether it  indicates  a significant decline  in  the  rate  at which foreigners

are  acquiring U.S. businesses.

Banks reported  small net  inflows  in  the  first  quarter, but  large  net

outflows  in April  (line  1).  In contrast,  monthly average data on banks' net

claims  on their  own foreign  offices  and IBFs  are  far  less  volatile  (line 1

of the  International  Banking Data table).  The volatility of  reported bank

flows  on a last-day-of-the-month basis,  and the  large  swings  in  the

statistical discrepancy in the  international transactions  accounts,  suggest

that  there may be problems  in the  reporting  of transactions  that  occur  at

the  end of quarters;  either  the  counterpart  to  window dressing  that  occurs

at  the  end of  some  quarters  is  not  reported in the  balance of payments

INTERNATIONAL  BANKING DATA
(Billions of  dollars)

1989 

1990 

1991

Mar. 

June 

Sept. 

Dec. 

Mar, 

June 

Sept. 

Dec. 

Mar. 

Apr. 

May

-2.9 

-3.9 

-6.4 

20.4 
-23.3 

19.2 
-23.1 

14.9 
-21.3 

-5.5 

19,2 
-24.7 

-11.7 

-11.0 

-15.6 

-31.3 

-23.8 

-23.0 

12.2 
-23.9 

7.2 
-18.2 

5.7 
-21.3 

5.5 
-36,9 

7.6 
-31.3 

5.1 
-28.1 

-22.6

2.3
-24.9

24.0 

26.0 

21.6 

20.7 

21.8 

22.2 

24.0 

24.7 

26.0 

25.1 

24.5

1.  Net  Claims  of  U.S.  Banking

Offices  (excluding  IBFS)  on Own
Foreign Offices  and  IBFS 

(a)  U.S.-chartered  banks 
(b)  Foreign-chartered  banks 

2.  Credit  Extended to  U.S.

Nonbank Residents  by Foreign
Branches of  U.S. Banks 

3.  Eurodollar  Holdings  of

U.S.  Nonbank Residents  1/ 

144.8 

131.5 

130.3 

123.5 

110.6 

106.5 

109.1 

115.9 

114.8 

110.8 

106.1

1.  Includes  term  and  overnight  Eurodollars  held by money market mutual funds.  Note:  These  data  differ  in
timing  from the  overall banking  data  incorporated  in  the  international transactions accounts,'  Line(cid:127)  1  is  an
daily data  reported  to  the  Federal Reserve by  U.S. banking offices.  Line 2 is an  average  of  daily' data.  Line  3 is'an
average  of  daily data  for  the  overnight  component  and an  average  of Wednesday data  for  the  term cdiponent.

coverage and

average  of  -

IV-14

accounts  or  the  two  sides  of  the  transaction are  reported  in different

quarters.  While  these  reporting problems  may be a  source of  swings  in  the

discrepancy, as  in the first  quarter, they would not  explain the  cumulative

positive  statistical discrepancy  in recent decades.

The U.S.  International  Investment  Position

BEA recently released revised estimates  of the  U.S.  net  international

investment position  for  1982  to  1989.  Data for  1990  are  scheduled  to be

released at  the  end of June.  Last year BEA  ceased publishing  gross  totals

for U.S.  assets  abroad and foreign assets  in  the United States;  they argued

that, because  some  components  of  the  investment  position were  measured at

historical  cost  (particularly direct  investment) while  others were measured

at  current market value,  adding components based upon such  a mix of

valuations would not provide  a useful  indicator  of the  level  of  the

investment position.

Over  the  past  year, BEA has  developed alternative  estimates  of the

value of  direct  investment assets.  In addition  to book value  (the  old

measure, based largely  on historical  cost),  BEA has  made  two new  estimates.

One  is  based on  the  current replacement  cost  of U.S.  and  foreign direct

investors'  share  in  their  affiliates'  investments  in  tangible  assets  --

property, plant,  equipment, and  inventories.  The  other  is  based on the

stock market value  of U.S.  and  foreign parents'  share  of  equity  in  their

direct  investment  affiliates.  In addition, BEA has  revalued gold held in

U.S.  reserves  to  the  market price.

BEA now estimates  that  the U.S.  net  international  investment position

was  between  -$281 billion  and  -$464 billion at  the  end  of 1989  and  that  the

position  deteriorated by anywhere  from $540  billion  to  $828  billion between

the  end of  1982  and the  end of  1989.  These  estimates  are  based on recorded

capital  flows and valuation changes  only  and  take no account  of  the

IV-15

statistical  discrepancy in the U.S.  international  transactions  accounts,

which  cumulated to  about  $175  billion in the years  1960  to  1989.  The

negative U.S.  net  investment position is understated to  the  extent  that part

of the cumulative statistical  discrepancy is  explained by unrecorded net

capital  inflows.

Movements  in the  net international  investment position are of interest

largely as  a crude  indicator  of  future  servicing burden and as  a component

of national wealth.  However, because  rates  of return on various  components

differ, the composition and gross  level  of U.S.  assets  abroad and foreign

assets  in the United States  influence investment  income as  well;  movements

in the  net investment  position are likely  to  indicate  the direction of

change  in net investment  income,  but not  the  level.  U.S. net investment

income  is  currently around zero despite  the  large negative net  investment

position.

Foreign Exchange Markets

The weighted average value  of  the  dollar moved up  about 4-1/4 percent

since  the May 14  FOMC meeting.  Early  in  the  intermeeting period, the dollar

rose  sharply but briefly against the  mark as  market participants readjusted

their portfolios following Sweden's  announcement on May 17  that  it would peg

the krona to  the  ECU.  Subsequent  data releases  suggesting that  U.S.

economic  activity may have begun to  turn around pushed the  dollar higher.

The dollar  rose  more than 5-1/4  percent on balance against the  mark,

reaching a high of DM 1.8190  on June  24  in early  Far  Eastern trading.  In

contrast,  the  dollar edged up  about  1/4  percent against the  yen on balance

during the  period, although it  had been higher--around ¥ 142--in early June.

Near  the  end of the  intermeeting period, the  dollar declined a bit amid

uncertainty about  the  implications  for exchange rate  policy of the June  23

G-7 meeting in London.

IV-16

Changes  in  interest  rate differentials  reflected the bilateral

currency movements.  While short-term and long-term interest  rates  in  the

United States  moved higher during the  period, comparable  interest rates  in

Germany moved slightly lower, even though the  Bundesbank shifted to

variable-rate  repurchase operations  at  the beginning of June  and nudged up

the minimum rate  in these  operations.  The  three-month interbank rate  in

Germany declined 10 basis points since  the May 14 meeting, and the

bellwether bond yield edged down about  5 basis points.  In contrast,  the

yield on the bellwether bond in  Japan rose more  than 15 basis points, nearly

matching the  increase  in the  comparable U.S.  yield, and the  three-month CD

rate in Japan moved up 12  basis points.  First-quarter GNP  growth was  strong

in Japan, and that, combined with expressed concerns  over the weakness of

the  yen against  the dollar,  led market participants  to  expect that  the  Bank

of Japan may delay  easing a while  longer.

The dollar's  rise  prompted intervention sales  of dollars  on two  days

by  the Bank of Japan

The Desk did

not  intervene during the period.

During most of  the  period, the  Spanish peseta  remained near  its

6-percent  intervention limit with respect  to  the  French franc  in  the

exchange rate mechanism of the  EMS.  Even after Spanish short-term interest

rates  declined, as  authorities  reduced the  official  repurchase  rate  3/4

percentage point,  the  French franc  failed  to  gain ground against  the peseta.

Weighing on the  franc were  concerns  about the  direction of policy  in France

under the  new Prime Minister.

France  allowed  short-term

IV-17

WEIGHTED  AVERAGE  EXCHANGE  VALUE OF  THE  DOLLAR

March  1973  =  100

March 

April 

May 

June

SELECTED  DOLLAR  EXCHANGE  RATES

March  1 =100

March

April 

May

June

IV-18

interest  rates  to move  up.  While  the  three-month rate  in Spain declined

nearly 60 basis points during the period  to  about  12-1/2 percent, the

comparable  rate  in France  rose  80 basis  points  to  9-7/8.  Later in the

period, pressure on  the peseta-franc  spread eased amid expectations  that  a

proposed Spanish  government wage pact,  if  enacted, might produce a sharp

reduction  in  inflation and interest rates,  and speed the  peseta's entry  into

the  group  of narrow-band currencies.  Prospects  for  the  wage pact now appear

to be  bleak, and the  peseta-franc  spread rebounded somewhat,  though it  is

still below the  6-percent  limit.

Sterling declined 6-1/2  percent against  the  dollar and more than 1

percent against the  mark since  the  May FOMC  meeting.  Contributing to  the

decline were  increasing uncertainties  about  the political  future  of  the

Conservative  Party as  the  recession persists  and progress on  inflation

remains  slow.  Several reports  during the  period showed  the  Labour Party

with a significant  lead  in  the polls.  Perhaps partly  in response  to  these

political  pressures, U.K. authorities reduced money-market dealing rates

another  1/2 percentage point  in May, and the U.K. three-month interbank

interest rate  declined nearly as  much during the period to  end at  about  11-

1/4  percent.  The yield on the bellwether bond in  the United Kingdom rose

almost 40  basis points  to more  than 10-1/2 percent, possibly  reflecting an

increase  in  inflation expectations.

Developments  in Foreign Industrial  Countries

IV-19

Signs  of a strengthening in  economic  activity  in the major industrial

countries have been mixed.  Large  increases  in German and Japanese  GDP

occurred in the  first quarter.  They were partly  due to  special  factors,  and

there have been signs of weakness  in  some  second quarter monthly indicators.

First-quarter GDP declined in Canada and United Kingdom, although Canada  is

showing some  signs of a second-quarter recovery. 

First-quarter activity in

France and Italy is  likely to have been flat, but there have been some

tentative signs  of recovery in the  second quarter.

Inflation was stable  or  declined in most  industrial countries  except

Germany.  In  the United Kingdom, measured inflation continued to  decline,

reflecting the  effect of lower  mortgage interest  rates on  the retail price

index.  In Italy and Canada, inflation  appears  to be  slowing following

recent  increases  in  indirect  taxes.

German unification has  continued to  influence  the  pattern of  external

imbalances  within Europe.  Germany's  trade  and current account balances

deteriorated sharply  in  the  first quarter, with payments  related to  the  Gulf

war  contributing to  a current account deficit.  First-quarter  improvements

in trade balances  in  France, Italy,  and the United Kingdom were partly due

to  substantial increases  in  exports  to  Germany.  Japan's  trade  surplus  in

May declined slightly, but remained well above  its  level  last year.

Individual Country Notes.  Recent evidence  on the  pace of economic

activity in Japan has been mixed.  Real GNP  (s.a.a.r.)  increased  11.2

percent  in the  first quarter.  Domestic  demand increased 5.1 percent, while

consumption registered a more moderate  3.1 percent increase.  Plant and

equipment investment registered a strong  11  percent increase, while housing

investment  declined a further 10.9  percent.  Inventory  investment made  a

positive 1.3 percent contribution to  growth, following  a 2.1 percent

REAL  GNP AND  INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION  IN MAJOR  INDUSTRIAL COUNTRIES
(Percentage change from previous  period, seasonally  adjusted)  1

Q4/Q4  Q4/Q4
1990

1989 

1990
03 
Q3 

Q2 
Q2 

Q4
Q4

1991

Q1

1991
Jan.  Feb.  Mar.  Apr.  May
Jan.  Feb.  Mar.  Apr.  May

Latest  3 months
from year ago  2

Canada

GDP
IP

West  Germany

GNP
IP

Italy

GDP
IP

United Kingdom

GDP
IP

United States

GNP
IP

2.9  -1.6
-.4  -5.5

-. 2 
-. 0 

-. 3  -1.2  -1.2
-2.5
-. 8  -3.1 

X 
.1  -1.3  -1.1 

K 

X 
.1  n.a.

K

3.9 
2.8 

2.1
-.3

.1 
1.5 

1.1 
1.4  -2.7 

-. 1  n.a.
.3

3.8 

-. 8  -2.8 

3.2  n.a.

3.2 
4.8 

5.3
5.4

.3 
.-.9 

1.8 
3.0 

.6 
.4 

2.3
2.0

3.6  -2.0 

1.4  -1.8  n.a.

2.9 
1.1
3.3  -3.8

-. 1 
-1.5 

.6 

1.4  -1.9 

-. 2  n.a.
.3

-1.0 

-.2 

-. 2  -2.1  n.a.

4.8 
4.2 

4.8
6.9

1.4 
2.2 

1.1 
2.2 

.6 
1.7 

2.7
-. 1

K 
1 .4 

X 
-. 4 

X
-2.1

X 
.5 

X
1.7

1.3  -1.3
.2  -3.4

.4  -1.5 

-.8 
1.8  -3.2  -1.7 

-. 6
-.3

X 
-.6 

K 
1.8 

X 
K 
.1  -2.7  n.a.

X

1.8 
1.1 

.5
.3

.1 
1.0 

.4 

-. 4 
-. 6
1.0  -1.8  -2.5

-. 5 

-. 9 

-. 6 

.3 

.5

1. Asterisk indicates  that  monthly data  are  not  available.
2. For  quarterly data,  latest  quarter  from  year  ago.

o

-2.8
-6.9

2.1
.0

5.2 
4.6

1.1
-3.3

5.9
3.8

-2.4
-4.2

-.6
-3.4

CONSUMER AND WHOLESALE  PRICES  IN MAJOR INDUSTRIAL  COUNTRIES

(Percentage change  from previous  period)

Q4/Q4  Q4/Q4 
1989 

1990 

1989

----

Q4

1990 

Q1 
Q1 

Q2 
Q2 

03 
Q3 

04 
Q4 

1991
Q1
Q1

---------- 

1991

-------------- 

Feb. 

Mar. 

Apr. 

May 

Latest  3 months
from year  ago,

Canada

CPI
WPI

West  Germany

CPI
WPI

Japan

CPI
WPI

United  Kingdom

CPI
WPI

United  States

CPI  (SA)
WPI  (SA)

5.2 

.2 

4.9
1.6

.7 
-. 6 

1.4
.4

.9 
.3 

1.1 
-. 1 

1.4 
1.0 

2.9
.1

.0 
-. 3 

.

.4
-. 7

.0
-. 7

.5
-. 3

3.6 
.9 

3.6
.7

.8

-1.0

1.0 
.2 

1.0
1.1

.2 
M 

.1 
X 

3.1
4.3

3.0
.9

.6 
.3 

1.1
-. 3

.5 
.6 

.4 
.2 

.9 
.4 

.8
.5

.3 
.3 

-.1
-. 8

.3 
3 

.5 
.2 

.2
M

.3
.6

6.6 
n.a. 

6.3
9.9

1.8 
3.2 

1.6 
1.4 

1.2 
-. 0 

1.4 
3.9 

2.0
4.3

.3
.9 
.7  -1.4

.4
n.a.

2.9 
3.7 

3.5
1.9

.4 
.4 

1.2
.8

.2 
.0 

1.6
.7

.8 
.1 

-. 3
-. 4

.3 
.1 

.4
-. 3

7.6 
5.2 

10.0
5.9

2.0 
1.2 

1.8 
1.6 

4.7
2.1

1.6 

.9 

1.6
1.1

.5 
.4 

.5 
.6 

1.1
1 .1

4.6 
4.9 

6.3
6.5

1.0 
1.1 

1.8 
2.1 

1.0 

.1 

1.7 
1.6 

1.7
2.6

.2 

-. 9 

-. 1
-. 3

3.2
.7

2.8
1.1

6.7
8.4

3.4
.6

6.8
6.2

4.9
3.3

1.  Asterisk

indicates that  monthly  data  are  not  available.

TRADE AND CURRENT ACCOUNT BALANCES  OF MAJOR  INDUSTRIAL COUNTRIES  1
(Billions of U.S.  dollars,  seasonally adjusted  except  where  otherwise noted)

1989 

1990

1989

04

1990
---------------------------

Q1 

02 

Q3 

Q4 

1991

Q1

1991

Feb. 
Feb. 

Mar. 
Mar. 

Apr. 
Apr. 

May
May

5.8 
-14.1 

9.3
-14.0

1.0 
-4.0 

1.4 
-4.4 

2.6 
-3.6 

2.8 
-2.9 

2.4 
-3.1 

1.8
-4.6

.6

.7 
N 

n.a.
M

-6.9 
-3.8 

-9.5
-7.8

-2.1 
-2.3 

-.6 
-.6 

-2.0 
-2.3 

-3.6 
-3.4 

-3.3 
-1.6 

-2.6
-2.6

-. 7
N

-. 8 
M 

-. 3 
M 

-. 3
X

71.6 
55.5 

65.2
47.3

16.6 
13.5 

22.4 
18.5 

16.7 
10.9 

16.0 
9.4 

10.1 
8.5 

4.4
-5.7

1.8 
-1.0 

1.8 
-3.3 

-.8 
-1.6 

n.a.
n.a.

Canada

Trade
Current  account

France

Trade
Current  account

Germany  2

Trade  (NSA)
Current  account

Italy

Trade
Current  account (NSA)

-12.6  -12.0
-15.0
-10.9 

-2.4 
-1.5 

-3.5 
-9,1 

-2.2 
-2.6 

-2.3 
-1.6 

-4.0 
-1.3
-1.7.  n.a.

-.2 

1.4 

-1.8 

n.a.

Japan

Trade
Current  account

United  Kingdom

Trade
Current  account

United  States

Trade
Current  account

64.5 
57.6 

52.2
36.2

12.2 
9.2 

15.6 
15.3 

13.5 
8.0 

14.7 
7.0 

8.5 
5.9 

17.4
17.8

5.1 
5.9 

7.3 
8.1 

6.0 
7.8 

5.8
n.a.

-39.2  -31.4
-32.1  -28.2

-6.9 
-6.1 

-9.8 
-7.6 

-8.8 
-8.3 

-7,2 
-6,6 

-5.7 
-5.7 

-5.6
-2.5

-1.4
-. 4

-1.7

-. 6

n.a.
-2.5

n.a.
-. 9

-115.9  -108.1
-106.3  -92.1

-28.6  -27.5  -24.1  -28.8  -27.7  -18.4
-24.7  -22.7  -22.2  -23.9  -23.4 
10'.2

N 
N 

---- 

-

K 
Nt 

N
N

1. The  current  account  includes  goods,
that  monthly data  are  not  available.
2. Before July  1990,  West  Germany only.

services,  and  private  and official  transfers. Asterisk  indicates

IV-23

negative  contribution in  the previous quarter.  Net exports made  a strong

5.9  percent positive contribution to  growth, boosted by several temporary

factors,  in particularly a surge  in  income  from foreign assets,  a drop  in

the  travel deficit,  and a 25  percent  increase  in exports  that  is partly due

to  a change  in  the  seasonal pattern of auto exports.  A decline in  imports

of  9 percent also contributed.

Monthly indicators  of economic  activity suggest less  underlying

strength.  The  index of leading indicators  (s.a.)  signaled a weakening

economy for  the  eighth consecutive month in April.  Housing starts  (s.a.)

dropped sharply for  the  third consecutive month in April and were  16.2

percent  lower  than in December  last year.  The number  of corporate

bankruptcies  (s.a.)  rose  for  the fourth  consecutive month  in May, and were

25.2  percent above  their  level  of  last December.  Retail  sales  (s.a.)

declined  0.3 percent  in April.  The capacity utilization rate  (s.a.)  rose

1.8 percent  in April,  but remains  2.9  percent below its  peak level  last

October.  Industrial  production (s.a.)  increased by 1.7  percent in May, but

was  still  only  1.1 percent  above  its  level  of last  December.  Labor market

conditions  remain tight;  the unemployment rate  (s.a.)  eased to  2.1 percent

in April,  only slightly  above  the  10-year  low of 2 percent  reached  in

February.

Inflationary pressures appear  to  have  eased somewhat  in recent  months.

The consumer price  index  for  the Tokyo  area  (n.s.a.)  was  3 percent  above  its

level  a year earlier,  down from  the previous  month.  Wholesale prices

(n.s.a.)  in May were  only 0.6 percent  above  their  level a year earlier.

Wholesale prices have been held down until  recently by falling import prices

(n.s.a.), which  fell  12  percent since  December, reflecting,  in large part,

lower  oil prices.  The  recently completed  "shunto"  spring wage  round

IV-24

resulted in  average wage  agreements of 5.6  percent, down  slightly from 5.9

percent last  year.

The trade  surplus  (s.a.)  declined in May to  $5.8  billion from  $6

billion in the  previous month.  Through  the  first  five months of  this  year,

the  cumulative trade  surplus  was $70.1  billion  (a.r.),  well above  the  $53.1

billion surplus  rate  in the  same period last year.

Real GNP  in western Germany  (s.a.a.r.)  increased 9.7 percent  in the

first quarter.  Another mild winter  caused seasonally adjusted construction

investment  to  increase  87.5  percent  in  the  first  quarter.  The  strong  first

quarter also  reflects a continuation of  the  factors that  accelerated growth

in the  second half of  1990,  as  virtually all  elements  of  final  domestic

demand increased strongly.  Private  consumption increased 9.5  percent,  and

equipment  investment increased 31.5  percent.  Public  consumption fell  10.5

percent  in  the  first quarter due  to  a change  in  reporting concepts  in  the

west  German national accounts.  Government  expenditure  for eastern Germany

was  shifted from the  category of  government  consumption to  exports  (no

corrections were made  to  previous  data).  West German net  exports were up

sharply  in the  first  quarter,  due  only in part  to  the  reporting change,

increasing the  growth  of total  GNP  in  the  first quarter by 4.2  percentage

points.  A sharp  decline in  inventory accumulation reduced  the  growth of

total  GNP by  8.3 percentage  points.

Industrial  production  (s.a.)  in western Germany  fell  1.8  percent in

April  to  a level  1.5  percent below the  average  for  the  first  quarter.  The

largest  component of  the April  decline was  a 7.9  percent  decline  in

seasonally adjusted construction activity.

The volume of new orders  for west German manufactured  goods  (s.a.)

fell  3.6  percent in April.  Total  orders  have now declined  3.5  percent  since

the beginning of  the year.  Foreign  orders have  marginally out performed

IV-25

domestic  orders  in both March  and April, reversing earlier  trends.  In April

the volume of retail  sales  (s.a.)  in western Germany increased 0.2  percent,

after increasing 1.7 percent  in March.  The west German unemployment rate

(s.a.)  increased 0.1  percent  in May to  6.3 percent,  the  first  increase  since

1989.

Industrial production  in eastern Germany  (n.s.a.)  fell 24 percent  in

January and 1 percent  in February,  to a level  38  percent of the  average

level  in  1989.  Official east  German unemployment  (n.s.a.)  was unchanged in

May at  9.5 percent.  The number of workers  engaged  in government subsidized

"short-time"  work (n.s.a.)  fell  0.6 percent  in May to  22.1 percent of the

labor force.

West German consumer prices  (n.s.a.)  increased 2.9 percent  in May from

their  level  a year earlier, up  from 2.8  percent in April.  West German

wholesale prices  (n.s.a.)  increased 1.3  percent  in May  from their level  a

year  earlier, up  from 1 percent  in April.  West German import prices were

unchanged  in May, after  increasing  1.1 percent  in April.  On a year/year

basis  import  prices were unchanged in March, but  in May they were  up 2.7

percent.

The  combined German current account  (n.s.a.a.r.)  improved in April due

largely to  a decline  in payments  related to  the Gulf War.  The current

account deficit was  $19  billion in April,  compared with $23  billion  for the

first  quarter.  Excluding payments  related to  the  Gulf War  the German current

account  showed a surplus  of $5 billion in  the  first  quarter,  compared with  a

surplus of $47  billion for  1990 as  a whole.  The combined German trade

balance  (n.s.a.a.r.)  ran a deficit  in April of  $9.8 billion.  (The last  time

western Germany had a monthly trade  deficit was  in  the  early 1980s.)  This

IV-26

compares  with a first-quarter surplus  of $17.6  billion and a surplus  of $65

billion for  all  of 1990.  In April exports  (n.s.a.)  were  down 12  percent

relative to  the  first  quarter, while  imports  (n.s.a.)  fell  only 5.9  percent.

The Bundesbank announced that M3  (s.a.)  in western and eastern Germany

had increased 3.5 percent  through May relative  to  the  fourth quarter, up

from 3.4 percent for April.  Although  the May figure  is  below the  1991

target of 4 to  6 percent M3 growth, it  appears  that  the  low level  of

economic activity  in eastern Germany, and the  gradual portfolio shifts  into

previously unavailable  long-term assets  are  depressing monetary growth  in

eastern Germany, and, consequently, the overall  measure.

Recent data confirm that  activity  in  France  stagnated in  the  first

quarter.  Marketable GDP  (s.a.),  an  early indicator of  total GDP  that

excludes most government  services,  was  unchanged.  Consumption and inventory

accumulation expanded, while exports  and fixed investment  contracted.

Early  indicators  for the  second quarter are mixed.  Industrial

production  (s.a.)  grew 3.2  percent in April, after declining  in March, but

household consumption (s.a.)  of manufactured products  fell 0.9  percent.

Business  confidence, measured by near-term industrial production plans

(s.a.),  rose  for  the  third consecutive month in May.

French consumer  inflation remains  moderate.  The  CPI was  up  3.2

percent on a twelve-month basis  in May,  the  same as  in April.  The

differential with German inflation narrowed to  0.3  percentage points  in May.

Prime  Minister Rocard resigned  in May and was  replaced by Edith

Cresson, who  assumes leadership  of the  minority Socialist  government.  The

government remains  intent  on hitting  its  1991  budget  deficit target of  FF80

billion  ($13  billion equivalent).  In  the  face  of slow revenue  growth and

unexpected expansion in  expenditures,  it  announced plans  at  the  end of May

for  spending cuts,  tax increases,  and one-time  levies  totaling FF16  billion.

IV-27

In  Italy, signs  of a recovery  in economic  activity,  following a

stagnant  first quarter, are mixed.  Industrial production (s.a.)  declined

2.1 percent  in April,  after  a slight  increase  of 0.3  percent in  the  first

quarter.  However, unemployment  (n.s.a.) declined  in April  to  10.9  percent

from 11.3  percent in January and was below its  level  of a year earlier.

Consumer prices  (n.s.a.)  increased 6.8 percent  in May  from:their level

a year earlier,  roughly  the  same as  the  increase in the  previous month.

This  high level of inflation, up  from 5.6  percent a year ago,  reflect the

effect of recent  increases  in  indirect  taxes  and administered prices.  In

contrast, wholesale  and producer price  inflation declined  in April, with

wholesale prices  (n.s.a.)  rising 7.2 percent, down from 8.6  percent in

March.  Producer  prices  (n.s.a.)  rose  only 4 percent  in April  from their

level a year  earlier,  down from 4.1  percent  in March.

The  trade deficit  (s.a.)  increased sharply in April,  to  $1.8  billion,

exceeding the  $1.3  billion deficit for  the entire  first quarter. This

deterioration should prove  temporary,  as  it results  from a surge  in  imports

following a customs strike  in March.

In the United Kingdom,  the average measure of  real GDP  (s.a.)  declined

by 2.5  percent  (a.r.)  in  the  first  quarter.  Consumption increased at  a 1.6

percent  rate,  following two  consecutive  quarters  of  decline.  However,  fixed

private  investment remained very weak, falling a further 11.7  percent.  Net

exports made a small negative  contribution to  growth.  Preliminary

indications  are  that  the  recession continued into  the  second  quarter.

Industrial production declined 2.7  percent in April.  The volume  of retail

sales  (s.a.)  declined by  0.3 percent  in May.  The unemployment rate  (s.a.)

increased  to  7.9 percent  in May, the  tenth  consecutive  monthly  rise.

Recent  data show some  easing  of inflation.  The retail price  index

(n.s.a.)  rose  only 0.2 percent  in May, and on a 12-month basis  the  increase

IV-28

was  5.6 percent, down  sharply from 9.3  percent  at  the  end of last  year.

Excluding mortgage interest payments,  the  12-month  increase  in the  index was

6.6 percent.  Output prices  for manufactured goods  (n.s.a.)  rose  6 percent

in May from their year-earlier level.

The current  account deficit  (s.a.)  decreased in May to  $0.9  billion.

Through the first five months of this year, this deficit was $10.1  billion,

down  sharply from  the  $31.9  billion deficit over the  corresponding period

last year.

First-quarter GDP  (s.a.a.r.)  fell 4.8  percent  in Canada,  extending the

recession to  a full  calender year.  All components  except  government

expenditures  fell.  However, several recent  indicators  suggest a recovery is

beginning.  Retail sales  (s.a.)  rose  0.4 percent  in April.  Housing starts

(s.a.),  which have been at very low levels,  increased for  the  third

consecutive month in May, rising 16.4  percent from  the  previous month.

Motor vehicle  sales  (s.a.)  rose  6.8  percent in April.  Manufacturers'

shipments  (s.a.)  increased 2.2  percent  in April  following a 0.5 percent  rise

in March.  New orders  (s.a.)  jumped 5 percent  in April, and unfilled orders

(s.a.)  rose  for  the  first  time  since August  1990.  Unemployment  (s.a.)

dropped to  10.3  percent  in April  from  a recent peak of  10.5  percent  in

February.

Consumer prices  (n.s.a.)  increased 0.5 percent  in May  to  a year-over-

year rate  of  6.2 percent,  the  same  as  the  core  rate  that  excludes  food and

energy.  Canada's  current account deficit  (s.a.)  stood  at  $4.7  billion  in

the  first quarter.

Developments  in  East  European Economies.

High  and rising unemployment shows  signs  of  interfering with economic

reform programs  in Eastern Europe.  In Poland, members  of the  Solidarity

labor union are becoming increasingly  restive.  The  CSFR, where unemployment

IV-29

in certain regions  of Slovakia  is more  than double  the national average,

witnessed the  downfall  of Slovakian Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar who had

threatened to  march on Bratislava with  the unemployed.  Hungary faces

different concerns,  as  problems with Soviet payments  detract  from an

otherwise positive  trade  picture.

In Poland, industrial  output continued to contract 4.8 percent  in May

and 8.6  percent since  the beginning of the year.  Inflation may be

responding to  tight policies,  as  the monthly rate  fell  to  2.7  percent  in

April  (almost half  the March figure  and one  of the  lowest monthly inflation

rates  since  the beginning of the  stabilization program in January  1990).

The  Polish National Bank announced a cut in  interest  rates  from 72  percent

to  59  percent, which yields a positive real  rate  of around 10  percent.

Government spending has  expanded  in  an effort to  revive  economic activity,

and the budget deficit  through April  exceeds  IMF targets.

Poland devalued the  zloty  by 14.4  percent  in May,  the  first  change  in

the  exchange rate  since  it was  pegged, on January 1, 1990,  at  the beginning

of the  stabilization program.  Exports  increased 30  percent  in May from

April, yielding  the  first monthly trade  surplus  in  1991 of  $159  million.

For the year  through May, the  trade  deficit stands  at  $367  million.

April  inflation in  the  Czech and Slovak Federal Republic  decreased to

2 percent, down  from 4 percent  in March.  The monthly inflation  rate  has

fallen each month since  the  initial  25  percent increase  in  the  price level

at  the  start  of the  reform program  in January  1991.

Industrial  production declined 13  percent over the  first  four months

of  1991  compared with the  same period in 1990.  In an effort  to  restart

production, the  State  Bank reduced  the maximum surcharge  that  commercial

banks may charge over the  10  percent discount  rate.

IV-30

The  balance  of payments  deficit  for  the  first  quarter totaled $300

million.  While  total  trade  has contracted since  the  first  quarter of 1990

(exports and  imports  fell  22  and 17  percent,  respectively),  trade with

market economies  increased 7.7  percent to  57 percent of total  trade.  The

CSFR  reforms are being supported by an ECU 375 million loan from the

European Community to strengthen foreign currency reserves.  The loan  is  the

EC's  share  of a $1 billion G-24 package.

Unemployment  in Hungary, although  still expected to  rise,  decreased

slightly  in May to a rate  of 3.4 percent. Industrial  production for firms

employing more  than 50 workers  dropped 19.9  percent  in April  from its  level

a year earlier.  The  seeming inconsistency between the  unemployment figures

and the  industrial production figures  could indicate  either that firms  are

hoarding labor or  that workers  are moving  into  small  enterprises  in  the

private  sector.

Hungary's  convertible  currency current  account surplus  totaled $159

million in the  first quarter,  fueled by strong  exports  and tourism.  Exports

to  traditional Western markets nearly doubled,  offsetting a 50  percent

decline  in exports to  CMEA countries.  Lagging trade payments  from the

Soviet Union are  a developing concern;  of  $500  million  in exports  delivered,

only $100 million have been paid  for.  In contrast, Hungary has paid $400

million to  the U.S.S.R. for  imports  though  the end of May.

Monthly inflation decreased  slightly in April  to  2.4 percent  although

the annual  rate  is  still  over  35  percent.  Given the  strong export

performance,  Central Bank President Gyorgy Suranyi has  suggested a possible

revaluation of  the  forint  to  ease  inflationary pressures.

Economic  situation in  other  countries

The Brazilian Senate approved on June 19  the  agreement with bank

creditors  reached in April  to  restructure  $8 billion in  interest  arrears.

IV-31

Brazil now  seeks  a  Brady-style debt-reduction  plan for  its  remaining  $60

billion commercial bank debt.  Mexican interest rates  declined further  as

U.S.  Congressional approval  of  fast-track procedures  for  the  proposed North

American Free Trade Agreement  spurred  investor  confidence.  In Argentina,

inflation has continued  to  decline  in  response  to  the  stabilization measures

announced  in March, but  additional  fiscal  adjustment is  needed.  In

Venezuela, a  loosening of fiscal policy has  led to  increased inflation and

failure  to  qualify for  the  1991-Q1  drawing on its  IMF  Extended Fund

Facility.  In Korea, real  GDP in  the  first  quarter  of 1991  was  9.1  percent

above its  year-earlier level,  accompanied by a  sharp  rise  in the  current

account deficit.  Taiwan's  economic  growth also  appears  to  be recovering

from its  1990  slowdown.

Individual  Country Notes.  On June  19,  Brazil's  $8 billion  interest

arrears  agreement, reached with  creditor banks  in April,  was  approved by the

Brazilian  Senate,  as  required by  the  Constitution.  The  new economic  team

headed by former  Brazilian Ambassador  to  Washington Marques  Moreira

announced  intentions  to  speed progress  on negotiations on Brazil's  remaining

estimated $60  billion debt  owed to  foreign  commercial banks.  Minister

Moreira also wants  a  Brady-style  debt-reduction  plan, which will require  IMF

support.  It  is  anticipated  that negotiations on  an  IMF program will begin

shortly.  However,  the  government has  not yet  introduced proposals  necessary

for  fiscal  reform, which  should be an integral  component  of  an  IMF program.

The  government reported a  1990  operational  surplus  equal  to  1.2 percent  of

GDP,  compared with an  operational deficit  as  high as  7.8  percent  of GDP  in

1989,  but most  of that  improvement was  due  to  one-time  government revenue

gains  from a  freeze  of bank  assets  in March  1990.

There  are  indications  that economic  activity  is  recovering  from the

steep  recession  over  the  past year.  Industrial  output  rose  13  percent

IV-32

between March and April, but remains at  a low level.  Despite  the  imposition

of price controls  in January, inflation was  over  5 percent in April and

almost 7 percent  in May.  It  is  expected to be 9 percent  in June.  The

government announced that it will phase  out the controls  over the next

month.

Brazil's  trade  surplus  for  the  first  five months  of 1991 was  $6.2

billion, compared with $4.7 billion over the  same period  in 1990.  The

spread between the  official  and parallel market exchange  rates has been

steady at  about  11  percent  in recent weeks.

Mexican interest  rates  fell  sharply  in May, as  the U.S. Congress  moved

toward approval  of  fast-track procedures  for  the proposed North American

Free  Trade Agreement,  and fell  further in early June  after approval was

secured.  At  the June  18  auction of Mexican Treasury  securities,  the  rate

for  28-day bills was  17.51 percent, down 373 basis points  from April 23.

The  decline  reflected not only the  growing capital  inflows  that are  being

stimulated, in part, by  the prospects of successful  free  trade negotiations

but also  the  slowing  of inflation.  The  CPI  rose by only  1 percent  in both

April  and May, down  from 1.7 percent  in February and  1.4 percent  in March,

and  the June  increase  is  widely expected  to be  1 percent as  well.  The

Mexican authorities  are sterilizing  only a part of  the  reserve gains  derived

from the  capital  inflows, being concerned  that  sterilizing most or  all  of

them would raise  interest  rates,  increase  the  government's  indebtedness,  and

therefore increase  the  cost of  servicing  the  internal  public  debt.

The  first  quarter trade  results  show that,  in  comparison with a year

earlier,  imports  were up by  37  percent, with  increases  spread across  all

categories  of  goods.  In part,  this  growth  reflects  the  relatively low level

of  imports  in  the  first  quarter of  1990,  which were  followed by relatively

high imports  and inventory  accumulation in  the third and  fourth quarters.

IV-33

Therefore,  the  year-over-year growth of  imports  is  likely  to decline  during

the balance of 1991  as  inventories  are  reduced.  First quarter  exports grew

only 6 percent  above their year-earlier level, but manufactured exports  were

up by 14  percent.

In May and early June,  the  government  sold more than  1.7 billion

shares  of TELMEX,  the  telephone  system, in  the U.S.,  Japanese,  and European

stock markets for a total $2.27  billion.  This  amount was  added  to  the

contingency fund held by the Mexican authorities  as  a cushion against future

balance-of-payments  problems, bringing  its  total  to  more  than $4 billion.

The contingency fund  is  not  included  in  the  officially reported reserves  of

Mexico.

On June  10,  the  Finance Secretariat  accepted the bid of Grupo

Financiero Probursa, a brokerage house,  to purchase  77.2  percent  of the

shares  of Multibanco Mercantil de Mexico  for  the peso  equivalent  of about

$200  million, 2.66  times  book value.  This was  the  first of  the nationalized

commercial banks to be  privatized.  The  sale of 100  percent of the  shares  of

a second bank for  the equivalent  of about  $182  million, more  than 3 times

book value, was  announced on June  17.

In Argentina,  financial markets  continue  to be  stable  following the

legal  fixing of  the  exchange  rate  to  the dollar  in  late March.  The

expectation that the  authorities will be  able  to  maintain the  fixed exchange

rate,  if only  for the  next  few months, has boosted the  demand  for austral-

denominated assets.  To  keep the  austral  from appreciating,  the authorities

purchased $544  million in  the  foreign exchange  market  in May and have

purchased over  $200  million thus  far  in June.  Short-term call  money rates

of interest have registered roughly 2 percent  (monthly basis)  in recent

weeks,  extremely low by  the standards  of the past  few decades.  Consumer

IV-34

inflation has  continued to  decline,  falling to  2.8 percent  (monthly basis)

in May from  5.5 percent in April.

After running fiscal  deficits,  excluding interest  payments, for  the

first quarter of 1991,  the  government  has achieved estimated surpluses

equivalent to  between $100  million and $150  million in April and May.

However, these  fall short of  the roughly  $300  million surplus  required

monthly to  finance its  debt-service  obligations.  As  a stop-gap measure,  the

government sought Congressional approval  to  spread the  twice-yearly bonus

for public sector workers,  equal  to  a half-month's salary and scheduled for

June,  across the  second half of  1991.  However, heavy political  opposition

forced the  government to withdraw the proposed legislation.  The government

also has  initiated tax reform legislation that will  strengthen the powers  of

the  tax  collection agency, as  well  as  encourage  the  return of flight

capital.

Talks with the  IMF are continuing on a new program to  replace the

stand-by arrangement  that became  inoperative  at the  beginning of the year.

However, IMF  concerns  that  the  adjustment measures proposed by Argentina are

insufficient  to  close its  fiscal  gap have  slowed negotiations.  Executive

Board approval  of a stand-by will  not be  forthcoming until  late  July at  the

earliest.

Monthly consumer price  inflation  in Venezuela averaged 2.6  percent in

April and May, up  from an average  of  1.9 percent  in the  first  three months

of 1991.  This  increase  is  mainly due  to  robust  economic  growth spurred by a

fiscal  expansion and  led by public sector  investment.  In an attempt  to

contain the  rise  in prices,  the Venezuelan central bank has maintained a

relatively  tight monetary policy  in recent  months.  The  level of M2

increased an average  of 1.8 percent per month  in  the  first  third of  1991,

compared with 5.4 percent per month in  the  last half of  1990.  This  slower

IV-35

growth in liquidity helped to  push  the average bank lending  interest  rate

from  29.8 percent  in December  1990  to  36.8 percent  in April.

Having failed to  implement a promised value-added tax,  Venezuela was

not permitted to  make the  1991-Q1 drawing under  its  IMF Extended Fund

Facility.  As  a consequence, Venezuela had to seek waivers  from  the

commercial banks  supplying new money under  last year's  financing package  in

order for  the  second new money tranche to be released.  The  necessary two-

thirds majority  of the banks  agreed  to  provide the waivers,  allowing the

$300  million in new money to be  disbursed.

In Korea, real  GDP  increased 9.1 percent  in the first  quarter  of 1991

over  the  first  quarter in  1990.  First-quarter growth continued to be  led by

the  construction sector.  Chemicals  and heavy industry  output expanded over

10 percent as  exports from those  industries  picked up  relative to  the  first

quarter of 1990.  Korea's current  account deficit rose  to  $4.8  billion in

the  first four  months of 1991  from  $1.2  billion in the  same  period last

year,  as  a steep  rise  in  imports  of  oil  and capital  goods  more  than offset  a

recovery  in exports.

In Taiwan, economic  growth appears  to  be  recovering somewhat from the

slowdown  in  1990.  Industrial  production was  5.5 percent higher in  the  first

five  months of 1991  than a year earlier.  In  the  first  five months  of 1991,

the  cumulative  trade  surplus  (on a customs basis)  fell  slightly to  $3.6

billion from $3.8  billion  in the  same  period last year despite a large

increase  in exports.  Imports  of industrial raw materials,  including crude

oil,  grew rapidly in  the  first  five  months  of  1991.




==== GREENBOOK | 1991-07-03_fomc19910703gbsup19910628.txt ====

Prefatory Note 

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 

available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain. 

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 

gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.    

1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
CONFIDENTIAL  (FR)
CLASS  III  - FOMC

June 28,  1991

SUPPLEMENT

CURRENT ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL CONDITIONS

Prepared for  the
Federal Open Market  Committee

By the  Staff
Board  of  Governors
of  the  Federal  Reserve  System

TABLE OF CONTENTS

THE DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL ECONOMY

Personal  income  and outlays. .
Probability of  expansion  .
Revised  greensheets.  .
.

.
.

.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.

Tables

Personal  income  .
.
.
Real  personal  consumption  expenditures
Recent  data  on coincident  indicators  .
Revised  greensheets.  .
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

Composite  index  of leading  indicators. .
Probability  of  expansion  .

.

.

.

.

.

.

THE FINANCIAL ECONOMY

Tables

Monetary aggregates  .
Commercial bank credit and  short-  and

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

intermediate-term business  credit  .
Selected  financial market  quotations  .

THE  INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY

Page

I f I I I I f

S  3
S  3
.
4
.6-11

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.

.
.. 

.

.
.

.

.

.

.
. .

.

.
.

.

.
.

.
.

.

.

.
.
.

.

.

.

.

.
.

Prices  of  imports  and  exports .
.
.
Erratum  .

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.
.

.
.

.
.

. . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . .

15
15

.

Table

Import  and  export  price  measures  .

.

.

.

16

SUPPLEMENTAL NOTES

THE DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL ECONOMY

Personal  Income  and Outlays

Personal income  increased  $23.8  billion  at an annual  rate in May.

A rise  in private wages  and  salaries, which  accompanied the increases

last month  in  employment and hours,  accounted  for  more than half  of

the gain.  While personal  interest and farm proprietors' income  fell

again  in May, nonfarm proprietors'  income  rose for  the fourth

consecutive month.  In  real  terms,  disposable personal  income rose

$10  billion in  May, more  than offsetting a $5.1  billion decline  in

April.  But with  increases  in outlays  outpacing  gains  in  income, the

personal  saving  rate  fell  back to 3.6 percent  in  May, from its  upward

revised  level  of  4.0  percent  in April.

Real personal  consumption  expenditures  increased  0.9  percent  in

May.  Outlays  for  durable  goods  rose  2.4 percent,  in  part because  of  a

4.0  percent  increase  in  expenditures for  motor vehicles.  Nondurable

goods  outlays  increased  0.6  percent,  with gains  being  recorded in  most

major  components  except  gasoline and  oil.  Expenditures for  service

items  rose  0.6  percent  in May, as  unusually warm weather pushed

outlays  for  electricity up  9-1/4 percent.  Excluding  energy items,

spending on  services  rose a modest  0.2  percent;  the  gain in this

category was  held  down by  declines  in  the personal  business and  net

foreign  travel  components  of  spending.

Probability  of  Expansion

The  Commerce Department's  composite index  of  leading economic

indicators  rose  0.8 percent  in  May--its  fourth  consecutive monthly

increase.  Initial  claims,  manufacturers'  new orders,  and building

permits  accounted  for  almost  all  of the  increase  in May.  A decline  in

the  index  of  consumer  expectations  provided  some  offset, while  other

components  were little changed.  The May reading  implies a 95  percent

probability that  a cyclical  trough has  alreay occurred  or  is  imminent

(chart).

The composite index  of  coincident  economic  indicators  edged up

0.2  percent  in May, the first  gain posted by the  index since July

1990.  All  of the available  components of the index rose  last month,

providing  further  evidence that the  economy has bottomed  out.

Revised  Greensheets

The  following pages  show revised  versions  of the  greensheets,

which incorporate the Commerce Department's  final estimate of  GNP for

the  first  quarter  of  1991.  These data were in  line with  our

expectations  and did  not necessitate modifications  to  the forecast  for

subsequent  quarters.

-3-

PERSONAL  INCOME
(Average monthly  change  at  an annual  rate; billions  of dollars)

1990 

1991 

1991

1990 

Q4 

Q1 

Mar. 

Apr. 

May

Total personal income 

20.5 

15.2 

2.4 

17.1 

4.7 

23.8

Wages  and salaries 

Private 

10.9 
8.2 

2.1 
-.2 

-2.7 
-6.6 

3.7 
1.3 

4.6 
4.1 

15.7
14.4

Other labor  income 

1.3 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0

Proprietors'  income 

Farm 

Rent 
Dividend 
Interest 

2.1 
.5 

.7 
.7 
1.6 

4.9 
4.8 

1.9 
1.9 

12.6 
11.5 

-3.3 
-5.2 

2.0
-1.3

-. 6 
.6 
.5 

-1.1 

-. 6 
-3.2 

-. 2 
-2.3 
-3.2 

.3 
-. 1 
-2.0 

.7
.4
-1.0

Transfer payments 

5.2 

6.7 

9.6 

5.6 

4.5 

6.1

Less:  Personal contributions
for  social  insurance 

Less:  Personal  tax and nontax

payments 

1.1 

.1 

2.5 

.2 

.3 

1.1

4.0 

1.9 

-2.0 

1.0 

2.0 

1.4

Equals:  Disposable personal  income  16.5 

13.2 

4.3 

16.1 

2.7 

22.4

Memo:  Real  disposable  income 

-. 8 

-1.1 

-4.8 

10.3 

-5.1 

10.0

REAL  PERSONAL  CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES
(Percent change  from the preceding period)

1990 

1991 

1991

1990 

Q4 

Q1 

Mar. 

Apr. 

May

Personal consumption
expenditures 

-Annual rate- 

----Monthly rate----

.1 

-3.4 

-1.5 

1.1 

-. 6 

.9

Durable goods 

-1.8 
Excluding motor vehicles  -1.1 

-12.3 
-5.8 

-11.7 
-.8 

3.8 
.2 

-3.6 
-. 4 

2.4
1.3

Nondurable  goods 

Excluding  gasoline 

Services 

Excluding energy 

Memo:

Personal  saving  rate

(percent) 

-2.4 
-2.3 

2.5 
3.1 

-6.5 
-7.3 

1.8 
1.8 

-1.8 
-1.3 

2.1 
3.2 

.5 
.4 

.6 
.3 

-. 8 
-. 7 

.4 
.5 

.6
.8

.6
.2

4.6 

4.2 

4.2 

3.6 

4.0 

3.6

RECENT DATA ON COINCIDENT  INDICATORS

~  ~  ----

Industrial production

(index)

Capacity utilization

(percent)

Total civilian employment

(millions)

Nonfarm civilian employment

(millions)

Nonfarm payroll  employment

(millions)

Nonfarm payroll  hours

(billions)

1990
1990
Dec.

107.2

80.6

117.6

114.3

109.6

203.3

Jan.

Feb.

I-

1991

Mar.

1991

Apr.

I

May

106.6

105.7

105.0

105.3

105.8

80.0

79.1

78.4

78.5

78.7

116.9

116.9

116.8

117.4

113.8

113.7

113.7

114.2

116.6

113.3

109.4

109.2

108.9

108.7

108.8

200.8

201.2

200.4

199.5

200.4

Personal  income

(billions $82)

3400.2

3366.9

3366.5

3378.7

3372.4

3382.1

Disposable  income

(billions $82)

2883.5

2857.8

2858.9

2869.2

2864.1

2874.1

Personal  income less
transfer payments

Retail  sales

Retail sales

PCE

Manufacturing and trade

sales

Manufacturing and trade

sales

(billions $82)

2883.2

2838.3

2837.0

2845.2

2837.2

2843.7

(billions)

149.8

147.8

151.1

151.5

150.9

152.5

(billions $82)

118.8

117.1

119.7

120.3

119.8

120.6

(billions $82)

2672.8

2643.1

2660.1

2688.0

2670.7

2694.3

(billions)

534.4 

527.1 

527.9 

523.1 

529.6

Composite coincident  index

129.3

(billion $82)'

461.2

457.1

127.3

459.1

457.0

464.0

126.6

126.0

126.0

126.2

1. Components of  composite coincident  index.

Note:  Low values reached by indicators  since July  1990  are  in  bold.

COMPOSITE  INDEX  OF LEADING  INDICATORS

-5-

1 

I4 
1 

I 

I 

I 

I 

SI 

I 

I 

I

t I 

I

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I

6/28/91

Percent change

6

I

I

2 
2

t I 

I 
I 
I 
1970 

1 
I 
1973 

11 i  I 
II

1976 

I 
-

I 
1979 

I-, 
1  1--h  -- ! 
I 
1982 

I 
1- -
I 
1985 

I-I 

- f 

1988 

t- '-- 
1991

4
4

PROBABILITY  OF EXPANSION  *

1990

II 

I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I 

I

I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I

1970 

1973 

1976 

1979 

1982 

1985 

1988 

1991

*Each probability represents  the likelihood that  an expansion  has began  or will begin  during  the  next three  months.

-6-

CONFIDENTIAL  - FR
CLASS  II  FOMC 

STAFF  GNP  PROJECTIONS

Percent  changes,  annual  rate

June  28,  1991

Nominal  GNP

Real  GNP

GHP  fixed-weight
price  index

Consumer

Price  Index  <1>

Unemployment
rate
(percent)

5/8/91 

6/28/91

-- - - - - - - - - -- - - - - -

"" 
-----

5/8/91 
-
' 

6/28/91
- -- 
" 
" 

5/8/91 

6/28/91

5/8/91 

6/28/91

-

- -- - - - - -- - - - - --  - - - - --  - - - - -

5/8/91 
6/28/91
- - - - -- - - - -

Annual  changes:

1988 
1989 
1990 
1991 
1992 

<2> 
<2> 
<2> 

7.
6.
5.
3.
6.

Quarterly changes:

1989 

01  <2> 
Q2  <2> 
03  <2> 
04 <2> 

7.
5.
5.
3-

q0 

01
02
Q3
04

1991 

1992 

01  <2>
Q2
Q3
Q4

01
Q2
03
04

Two-quarter changes:  <3>

1989 

Q2  <2> 
04  <2> 

6.7 
4.5 

1990 

02  <2> 
04  <2> 

5.9 
3.1 

1991 

Q2 
04 

1992  02 
04 

2.8 
7.4 

6.6 
5.3 

Four-quarter changes:  <4>

04  <2> 
1988 
Q4  <2> 
1989 
'90 
Q4  <2> 
1 
Q4 
2  Q4 

7.8
5.6
4.5
5.1
5.9

6.7
4.5

5.9
3.1

2.8
7.8

6.6
5.6

7.8 
5.6 
4.5 
5.3 
6.1 

3.6
1.6
1.7
.3

1.7
.4
1.4
-1.6

-2.8

-. 2
4.1
4.0

2.6 
1.0 

1.1 
-.1 

-1.5
4.0

3.3 
2.7 

3.5
1.8

.5

1.2
3.0

<1>  For  all  urban  consumers.
<2>  Actual.
<3>  Percent  change  from  two  quarters  earlier.
<4>  Percent  change  from  four  quarters  earlier.

5.2 
5.3 
5.3 
5.3 

5.3 
5.3 
5.6 
5.9 

6.5 
6.8 
6.8 
6.6 

6.4 
6.3 
6.3 
6.2 

.0 
.0 

.0 
.6 

.9 
-. 2 

-. 3 
-. 1 

-. 5 
.0 
.6 
.7 
-. 4 

5.2
5.3
5.3
5.3

5.3
5.3
5.6
5.9

6.5
6.8
6.8
6.6

6.5
6.4
6.4
6.3

.0
.0

.0
.6

.9
-. 2

-. 2
-. 1

-. 5
.0
.6
.7
-. 3

2.6
1.0

1.1
-.1

-1.3
4.4

3.0
2.5

4.7 
3.4 

5.3 
4.4 

4.2 
3.5 

3.6 
3.0 

4.7
3.4

5.3
4.4

4.2
3.5

3.8
3.3

3.7 
3.1 

3.8
3.5

CONFIDENTIAL  - FR 
CLASS  II  FOMC 

GROSS  NATIONAL  PRODUCT  AND  RELATED  ITEMS
(Seasonally adjusted;  annual  rate)

June  28,  1991

Projection

S  Units 

1984 

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992

EXPENDITURES

----------

Nominal GNP 
Real  GNP 

Real GNP 
Gross domestic  purchases 

IBillions  of  $ 
IBillions  of  82$ 
F 
I
(Percent change*I 
( 

I 

1 

F 

Final  sales 
Private dom. final  purchases 

I 

Personal  consumpt'ion  expend. 

Durables 
Nondurables 
Services 

Business  fixed investment 

Producers' durable equipment 
Nonresidential  structures 

Residential  structures 

Exports 
Imports 

Government  purchases 

Federal 

Defense 

State and local 

3772.2  4014.9  4231.6  4515.6  4873.7  5200.8  5465.1  5673.0  6048.3
3501.4  3618.7  3717.9  3845.3  4016.9  4117.7  4157.3  4160.6  4293.5

5.1 
6.4 

4.7 
5.6 

4.1 
10.8 
2.3 
3.5 

13.8 
14.9 
11.8 
6 .1 

5.9 
17.4 

7.9 
13.0 
6.5 
4.4 

3.6 
4.3 

4.6 
4.6 

4.6 
7.0 
3.3 
5.0 

3.7 
4.6 
1.9 
5.8 

-2.4 
4.5 

8.6 
13.3 
7.1 
4.9 

1.9 
2.1 

2.7 
2.9 

3.8 
11.5 
2.9 
2.1 

5.0 
4.2 

3.1 
2.5 

2.3 
-1.2 
1.3 
4.1 

-5.5 

6.1 

.4  .8.2 

-17.7 
11.6 

.8 
-2.2 

10.6 
10.0 

19.8 
10.4 

3.1 
.5 

6.0 
5.2 

2.0 
1.5 
4.0 
2.3 

3.5 
2.6 

4.5 
4.0 

4.1 
9.3 
2.4 
3.7 

5.3 
8.2 
-2.7 
-.1 

14.0 
5.5 

1.1 
-1.6 
-1.8 
3.1 

1.8 
1.1 

1.7 
1.2 

1.2 
-1.4 
.6 
2.4 

4.5 
5.4 
1.7 
-7.1 

10.1 
4.5 

.3 
-2.8 
-2.1 
2.6 

.5 
-.5 

1.6 
-.1 

.1 
-1.8 
-2.4 
2.5 

2.2 
4.6 
-5.4 
-10.2 

5.8 
-. 5 

3.8 
5.2 
4.0 
2.7 

1.5 
1.4 

.6 
.6 

1.6 
1.3 
.2 
2.7 

-3.8 
-2.8 
-7.5 
-1.2 

3.5 
2.5 

-.4 
-.5 

-2.5 

-.4 

2.8
3.0

2.4
3.5

2.8
4.1
2.0
2.9

5.9
8.6
-4.0
8.8

6.0
7.5

-1.0
-4.5
-7.6

1.6

Nonfarm 
Net  exports 

Change in business  inventories  Billions  of  825$ 
Billions  of  8251 
IBillions  of  82$1 
I 
I
IPercent  change*t 

Nominal  GhP 

62.3 
57.8 

22.8 
28.7 
-84.0  -104.3  -129.7  -118.5 

9.1 
13.4 

5.6 
8.0 

23.6 
26.5 
-75.9 

23.8 
18.7 
-54.1 

-3.6 
-5.1 
-33.8 

-13.5 
-15.6 

29.1
26.8
-.6  -10.1

8.6 

6.6 

4.6 

8.2 

7.8 

5.6 

4.5 

5.3 

6.1

EMPLOYMENT AND  PRODUCTION

Nonfarm payroll  employment 
Unemployment  rate 

FMillions 
IPercent 

Industrial  production  index 
Capacity utilization rate-mfg.  (Percent 

]Percent  change*l 
1 

94.5 
7.5 

4.7 
80.4 

97.5 
7.2 

1.9 
79.5 

Millions 
Millions 
IMillions 
IMillions 

1.77 
10.35 
7.92 
2.43 

1.74 
11.03 
8.22 
2.82 

1.81 
11.44 
8.22 
3.22 

1.62 
10.23 
7.06 
3.18 

1.49 
10.65 
7.55 
3.10 

1 

99.5 
7.0 

102.2 
6.2 

105.5 
5.5 

108.4 
5.3 

110.3 
5.5 

109.2 
6.7 

110.9
6.4

1.4 
79.0 

6.5 
81.4 

4.5 
83.9 

1.1 
83.9 

1.38 
9.89 
7.06 
2.83 

.3 
82.3 

.6 
78.1 

1.19 
9.53 
6.92 
2.61 

1.01 
8.69 
6.31 
2.38 

Corp.  profits with  IVA & CCAdj 

Profit share  of GKP 

Percent  change* 
[Percent 
1 

.7.4 
7.1 

FPercent change*) 
[Percent  change*I 
F 
(Percent 

8.4 
4.3 
6.1 

6.6 
2.7 
4.4 

9.2 
7.0 

5.8 
3.3 
4.1 

8.1 
2.7 
2.9 

7.6 
4.3 
4.2 

6.8 
1.7 
4.6 

-5.6 
6.7 

17.4 
6.8 

8.2 
6.9 

-16.8 
6.0 

5.6 
-.4 
4.6 

-.7 
5.5 

4.6 
1.2 
3.9 

15.7 
5.4 

Federal  govt.  surplus/deficit 
State  and  local  govt.  surplus 
Exc. social  insurance funds 

FBillions  of  $ 

PRICES  AND COSTS

F  -169.6  -196.9  -206.9  -158.2  -141.7  -134.3  -166.0  -150.5  -154.8
69.3
-6.8

46.5 
-16.4 

46.4 
-19.9 

35.4 
-34.0 

40.4 
-32.1 

65.1 
13.8 

62.8 
5.6 

64.6 
19.8 

51.0 
-8.3 

GNP  implicit  deflator 
GNP  fixed-weight price  index 
Cons. & fixed  invest,  prices 

Percent  change*F 
1 

, 

CPI 

Exc,  food  and  energy 

ECI  hourly  compensation 

Nonfarm business  sector

Output  per  hour 
Compensation per hour 
Unit  labor  costs 

3.4 
3.7 
3.3 
4.2 
5.0 

2.9 
3.3 
3.4 
3.5 
4.3 

2.6 
2.6 
2.5 
1.3 
3.9 

3.0 
3.8 
4.5 
4.5 
4.3 

4.1 
4.6 
4.3 
4.3 
4.5 

3.7 
4.0 
4.3 
4.6 
4.3 

4.0 
4.8 
5.3 
6.3 
5.3 

3.7 
3.9 
3.3 
3.4 
4.6 

3.2
3.5
3.4
3.7
3.7

4.7 

4.0 

3.1 

3.4 

4.8 

4.7 

4.7 

4.1 

3.7

1.5 
4.2 
2.6 

1.6 
4.6 
3.0 

1.3 
4.9 
3.6 

2.3 
3.7 
1.4 

1.8 
4.2 
2.3 

-1.6 
2.2 
3.9 

-.3 
4.4 
4.7 

2.6 
4.2 
1.5 

1.6
3.8
2.2

*  Percent  changes  are  from  fourth  quarter  to  fourth  quarter.

Housing  starts 
Auto sales 
Domestic 
Foreign 

INCOME  AND SAVING
*-----------------I
Nominal  personal  income 
Real  disposable  income 
Personal  saving  rate 

4.3
79.3

1.15
9.43
6.85
2.58

6.8
2.8
4.0

4.2
5.7

CONFIDENTIAL  - FR 
CLASS  II  FOMC 

GROSS  NATIONAL  PRODUCT  AND  RELATED  ITEMS

(Seasonally  adjusted;  annual  rate)

June 28,  1991

-8-

Units 

i 

I

S1988 
-
01 

Q2 

03 

04 

01 

02 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

02

------------------------------  --------------

---- 

1989 

1990

EXPENDITURES

Nominal  GNP 
Real  GNP 

Billions  of  $ 
4735.8  4831.4  4917.9  5009.8  5101.3  5174.0  5238.6  5289.3  5375.4  5443.3
Billions  of  82$1  3970.2  4005.8  4032.1  4059.3  4095.7  4112.2  4129.7  4133.2  4150.6  4155.1

Real  GNP 
Gross  domestic purchases 

Percent  Change 

1 

Final sales 
Private dom. final purchases 

Personal consumption expend. 

Durables 
Nondurables 
Services 

I 
I 
15.6 

Business fixed  investment 

Producers'  durable equipment  I 
1 
Nonresidential  structures 
I 

Residential structures 

Exports 
Imports 

Government  purchases 

Federal 

Defense 

State and local 

5.1 
1.6 

7.1 
6.7 

6.9 
21.8 
2.6 

11.4 
20.3 
-10.5 
I  -6.8 

I  31.7 

.5 

-9,2 
-24.1 
-5.6 
3.9 

3.6 
3.0 

5.1 
4.8 

2.7 
3.7 
2.0 
2.9 

15.7 
17.9 
9.9 
6.8 

4.4 
.3 

3.3 
3.5 
-1.4 
3.2 

2.7 
3.2 

1.1 
3.0 

3.5 
-1.1 
4.1 
4.5 

2.7 
2.4 

4.6 
1.7 

3.5 
14.1 
1.2 
1.9 

-6.3 
1.6 
2.2 
-5.5 
-.3  : -8.7 
-.4 

.4 

5.4 
9.2 

-3.8 
-10.4 
-5.0 
1.2 

16.7 
12.4 

15.7 
33.6 
4.9 
4.3 

3.6 
1.2 

2.4 
.8 

-.3 
-6.0 
.6 
.9 

8.9 
9.5 
7.5 
-3.6 

1.6 
1.8 

1.7 
1.4 

1.3 
5.6 
-1.7 
2.1 

6.9 
12.2 
-8.2 
-11.3 

15.8 
-2.3 

12.4 
12.8 

4.0 
7.0 
3.2 
1.8 

-3.3 
-9.1 
-10.9 
1.3 

26.1 
16.4 
-51.1 

1.7 
2.8 

1.8 
4.1 

4.6 
9.6 
3.9 
3.5 

6.3 
6.1 
7.1 
-7.6 

-. 5 
6.4 

-2.4 
-7.9 
7.2 
1.8 

.3 
-1.2 

.9 
-1.5 

1.7 
.5 

3.8 
2.4 

-.8 
-13.0 
-.2 
3.1 

1.1 
14.4 
-3.2 
.1 

-3.8 
-5.2 
1.3 
-5.5 

13.5 
1.7 

3.0 
-. 4 
-7.0 
5.6 

5.0 
5.7 
2.3 
15.1 

11.2 
2.5 

2.9 
.4 
-1.7 
4.8 

.4
1.3

-.7
-1.2

.2
-9.5
-1.9
5.1

-4.7
-3.3
-9.0
-11.2

-5.0

.7

6.2
16.4
3.3
-.6

31.0 
Change  in  business  inventories  [Billions  of 82$1 
IBillions of  82$1 
28.8 
[Billions  of 82$1  -77.3 

Nonfarm 
et exports 

16.9 
19.2 
-72.2 

32.6 
31.0 
-78.5 

14.0 
27.2 
-75.7 

25.5 
21.5 
-53.3 

24.6 
21.7 
-64.1 

18.9 
15.3 
-47.9 

-2.2 
-8.2 
-35.4 

9.5
11.6
-44.6

Nominal  GNP 

[Percent  change 

7.8 

8,3 

7.4 

7.7 

7.5 

5.8 

5.1 

3.9 

6.7 

5.1

EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION

Nonfarm payroll  employment 
Unemployment  rate 

[Millions 
IPercent* 

I  104.3 
5.7 

105.1 
5.5 

105.9 
5.5 

106.8 
5.3 

107.6 
5.2 

108,1 
5.3 

108.5 
5.3 

109.0 
5.3 

109.7 
5.3 

110.2
5.3

Industrial  production  index 
Capacity  utilization rate-mfg.  IPercent* 

(Percent change 

5.0 
83.1 

4.2 
83.6 

5.9 
84.3 

2.8 
84.6 

2.7 
84.7 

2.8 
84.5 

-1.2 
83.7 

.2 
82.9 

.6 
82.7 

4.2
82.8

Housing  starts 
Auto sales 
Domestic 
Foreign 

INCOME AND  SAVING

IMillions 
IMillions 
[Millions 
[Millions 

1.43 
10.91 
1  7.60 
1  3.30 

1.49 
10.67 
7.50 
3.17 

1.48 
10.15 
7.20 
2.95 

1.55 
10.88 
7.89 
2.99 

1.46 
10.03 
7.08 
2.95 

1.36 
10.26 
7.26 
3.00 

1.35 
10.20 
7.36 
2.84 

1.35 
9.09 
6.56 
2.53 

1.43 
10.01 
7.11 
2.90 

1.20
9.53
6.78
2.75

Nominal  personal  income 
Real  disposable  income 
Personal  saving rate 

[Percent change  I 
IPercent change 
IPercent* 

6.4 
7.3 
4.0 

8.6 
2.7 
4.1 

8.1 
4.9 
4.5 

7.4 
2.3 
4.1 

11.6 
4.2 
5.2 

5,8 
-1.2 
4.6 

3.7 
2.7 
4.1 

6.2 
1.2 
4.6 

8.6 
2.5 
4.9 

Corp.  profits  with IVA & CCAdj  (Percent change  J 
1 

Profit  share  of GNP 

9.5 
7.0 

[Percent* 
IBillions  of $  1 -153.7  -136.9  -120.1  -156.3  -132.6  -122.7  -131.7  -150.1  -168.3  -166.0
38.6
[ 
-30.4

1  45.5 
-15.6 

48.3 
-14.1 

38.1 
-30.2 

48.9 
-16.2 

50.3 
-15.6 

46.8 
-17.0 

38.5 
-29.1 

48.1 
-18.7 

45.2 
-19.0 

6.6 
7.0 

-1.7 
6.8 

19.5 
7.0 

-23.2 
6.4 

-7.0 
6.2 

-17.1 
5.9 

-19.1 
5.5 

8.4 
5.5 

Federal  govt.  surplus/deficit 
State and  local govt.  surplus 
Exc.  social  insurance funds 

PRICES AND COSTS

GNP  implicit deflator 
GNP fixed-weight price  index 

Cons.  & fixed invest,  prices 

[Percent change 
1 

2.7 
3.9 
2.9 
3.2 
4.1 

4.4 
4.1 
4.9 
4.5 
4.7 

4.7 
5.5 
4.5 
5.2 
4.6 

4.7 
4.4 
5.0 
4.4 
4.6 

3.9 
4.9 
5.0 
5.1 
4.9 

3.9 
4.6 
5.3 
6.0 
4.2 

3.2 
3.1 
2.3 
3.3 
3.8 

3.8 
3.8 
4.6 
3.9 
4.7 

4.8 
6.6 
6.8 
7.5 
5.9 

5.2 

5.2 

3.8 

5.1 

4.2 

4.9 

5.3 

4.4 

5.6 

I 

4.7 
2.4 
I  -2.2 

-.5 
5.1 
5.7 

2.8 
5.3 
2.5 

.2 
3.8 
3.6 

-2.7 
3.3 
6.1 

-. 3 
1,7 
2.0 

-1.0 
1.6 
2.6 

-2.5 
2.3 
5.0 

-1.3 
3.9 
5.3 

5.3
.3
5.0

13.9

5.6

4.7
3.9
2.6
3.8
4.9

5.1

.3
5.0
4.7

CPI 

Exc. food  and energy 

CI  hourly  compensation** 

donfarm  business  sector

Output  per hour 
Compensation per hour 
Unit  labor  costs 

* Not  at  an  annual  rate.
** Private  industry  workers

CONFIDENTIAL  - FR 
CLASS  II  FOMC 

GROSS  NATIONAL  PRODOCT  AND  RELATED  ITEMS

(Seasonally adjusted;  annual rate)

June  28,  1991

Projection

--------------------------------------

"" 

" 

"

1990 

1991 

1992

S  Units 

I 

3 

04 

01 

02 

03 
Q3 

04 

01 

02 

04

EXPENDITUWES

Nominal  GSP 
PRal  GNP 

Billions  of  $ 
5514.6  5527.3  5557.7  5603.3  5713.2  5817.9  5920.9  6007.8  6090.9  6173.4
Billions  of  82$1  4170.0  4153.4  4124.1  4126.5  4174.8  4217.2  4251.5  4280.3  4307.8  4334.3

Real  GSP 
Gross  domestic  purchases 

IPercent  Change 
I 

I 

final 
sales 
Private  dom. 

final 

purchases 

Personal  consumption  expend. 

Durables 
Nondurables 
Services 

Business  fixed  investment 

Producers'  durable  equipment 
Nonresidential  structures 

Residential  structures 

Exports 
Imports 

Government  purchases 

Federal 

Defense 

State  and  local 

I 
I 

I 

I 
I 

I 

I 

I 

I
I 

I 

1 
1 

I 

1.4 
1.6 

1.9 
2.3 

2.7 
2.6 
2.3 
3.0 

8.9 
10.2 
5.1 
-19.8 

6.9 
7.6 

1.2 
1 
2.7 
2.0 

-1.6 
-5.1 

1.4 
-3.8 

-3.4 
-12.3 
-6.5 
1.8 

.1 
6.3 
-18.2 
-20.6 

11.0 
-11.8 

4.7 
4.6 
12.1 
4.9 

-2.8 
-4.3 

-2.9- 
-5.1 

-1.5 
-11.7 
-1.8 
2.1 

-16.3 
-18.4 
-9.0 
-25.3 

.5 
-8.8 

-1.3 
-. 5 
2.7 
-1.9 

.2 
1.6 

.9 
2.4 

3.4 
7.7 
.3 
4.1 

-2.8 
-1.8 
-6.1 
3.7 

-1.0 
7.7 

1.5 
4.2 
-1.3 
-. 4 

4.8 
4.1 

2.7 
2.6 

2.2 
5.2 
1.2 
2.0 

1.5 
4.6 
-8.3 
12.1 

6.4 
1.9 

-. 4 
-. 8 
-3.7 
-. 1 

4.1 
4.4 

1.7 
2.9 

2.5 
5.0 
1.2 
2.5 

3.5 
6.5 
-6.5 
9.6 

8.2 
10.4 

-1.4 
-4.6 
-7.5 
.9 

3.3 
3.6 

2.1 
3.4 

3.0 
6.5 
1.8 
2.7 

4.4 
7.6 
-6.6 
8.2 

6.3 
8.5 

-1.4 
-4.7 
-7.8 
1.1 

2.7 
3.1 

2.3 
3.5 

2.8 
3.5 
2.2 
2.9 

5.9 
8.8 
-4.7 
9.1 

6.1 
8.1 

-1.1 
-4.6 
-7.7 
1.5 

Change  in  business  inventories  IBillions of 82$1 
4.7 
IBillions of  82$1 
4.7 
IBillions  of  8251  -46.5 

Nonfarm 
%et exports 

-26.4 
-28.5 
-8.8 

-25.0 
-28.1 
7.1 

-31.8 
-33.9 
-6.7 

-10.8 
-11.9 
.3 

13.4 
11.6 
-3.0 

25.6 
23.3 
-6.6 

30.5 
28.2 
-10.0 

2.6 
2.6 

2.5
2.8

2.7 
3.6 

2.7 
3.4 
2.1 
2.9 

6.5 
9.0 
-3.0 
9.6 

5.7 
5.9 

-. 9 
-4.4 
-7.5 
1.7 

29.7 
27.4 

2.4
3.5

2.7
3.0
2.1
2.9

6.8
9.0
-1.9
8.3

5.8
7.6

-. 7

-4.5
-7.6
2.0

30.4
28.1

-10.3 

-13.5

ainal  GtP 

IPercent change  1 

5.3 

.9 

2.2 

3.3 

8.1 

7.5 

7.3 

6.0 

5.6 

5.5

SMPLOYMENT  AND PRODUCTION 
------------------------- 
Nonfarm payroll  employment 
Unemployment rate 

I

IMillions 
IPercent* 

I

110.2 
5.6 

109.8 
5.9 

109.2 
6.5 

108.8 
6.8 

109.1 
6.8 

109,7 
6.6 

110.2 
6.5 

110.7 
6.4 

111.1 
6.4 

111.5
6.3

Industrial  production  index 
Capacity utilization rate-mfg.  IPercent* 

IPercent  change  1 

3.9 
I  82.9 

Millions 
Millions 
IMillions 
Millions 

1.13 
I  9.68 
1  7,21 
I  2.47 

-7.0 
80.8 

1.04 
8.93 
6.59 
2.34 

-9.6 
78.0 

.0 
77.4 

7.2 
78.2 

.92 
8.25 
6.00 
2.25 

.99 
8.43 
6.06 
2.37 

1.05 
8.96 
6.55 
2.41 

5.7 
78.7 

1.07 
9.15 
6.65 
2.50 

5.1 
79.0 

4.8 
79.3 

1.11 
9.35 
6.80 
2.55 

1.13 
9.40 
6.83 
2.57 

IPercent  change 
IPercent  change  1 
(Percent* 
1 
1
Percent  change  1 
IPercent* 

5.0 
-.7 
4.2 

3.5 
-3.5 
4.2 

-7.5 
5.5 

-14.8 
5.2 

1.5 
-1.5 
4.2 

-3.7 
5.1 

4.2 
1.8 
3.9 

5.4 
1.3 
3.7 

7.3 
3.2 
3.9 

8.4 
3.9 
4.1 

-4.2 
5.1 

57.4 
5.6 

23.3 
5.7 

12.5 
5.8 

6.3 
2.4 
4.0 

.3 
5.7 

IBillions  of  $  I -145.7  -184.3  -126.9  -155.2  -148.4  -171.5  -169.1  -157.8  -146.3  -146.0
76.9
-.5

30.0 
-41.0 

33.6 
-38.4 

53.7 
-20.1 

39.3 
-30.5 

44.2 
-28.7 

25.7 
-44.8 

61.3 
-13.4 

72.1 
-4.4 

66.9 
-8.7 

1 

1 

Mousing starts 
Auto sales 
Domestic 
Foreign 

INCOME AND  SAVING

Nominal personal  income 
Real disposable  income 
Personal  saving rate 

Corp.  profits  with  IVA & CCAdj 

Profit  share of GNP 

Federal govt.  surplua/deficit 
State and local  govt.  surplus 
Exc.  social  insurance funds 

PRICES AND COSTS

GNP  implicit  deflator 
GNP  fixed-weight price  index 
Cons.  & fixed  invest.  prices 

CPI 

Exc.  food and energy 

IPercent change  I 

I 

3.7 
4.2 
5.4 
7.0 
6.1 

2.8 
4.7 
6.4 
6.9 
4.2 

5.2 
5.2 
3.1 
3.6 
6.8 

3.0 
3.1 
2.6 
2.2 
3.2 

3.2 
3.6 
3.8 
4.0 
4.1 

3.3 
3.5 
3.5 
3.8 
4.1 

3.8 
4.1 
3.5 
4.1 
4.3 

3.2 
3.5 
3.4 
3.6 
3.7 

3.0 
3.3 
3.3 
3.5 
3.5 

ECI  hourly  compensation** 

4.3 

3.8 

4.6 

4.2 

3.9 

3.8 

3.8 

3.7 

3.7 

>nfarm business  sector 
Output  per  hour 
Compensation  per  hour 
Unit  labor  costs 

I
I 

*  Not  at  an  annual  rate.
**  Private  industry  workers

I 

.6 
4.7 
4.1 

-. 7 
3.9 
4.7 

.3 
4.0 
3.7 

3.5 
4.5 
1.0 

4.4 
4.2 
-. 2 

2.3 
3.9 
1.6 

1.8 
4.3 
2.5 

1.6 
3.7 
2.1 

1.5 
3.6 
2.1 

3.8 
79.4 

1.16 
9.45 
6.86 
2.59 

6.2 
2.4 
4.0 

-1.4 
5.6 

3.7
79.5

1.19
9.50
6.90
2.60

6.5
2.6
4.0

5.8
5.6

3.0
3.3
3.3
3.5
3.5

3.6

1.4
3.6
2.2

CONFIDENTIAL  - FR
CLASS  II 

FOMC

GROSS  NATIONAL  PRODUCT  AND  RELATED  ITEMS
of  1982  dollars)

(Net  changes,  billions 

June  28,  1991

I 

I

1988 

1989 

1990 

S 01 

2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

03 

l4 

Q1 

02 

1  1987 
S(fourth 

1988 
1989 
quarter to  fourth  quarter,

1990

not  change)

Real  GNP
Gross domestic purchases

49.5 
15.5 

35.6 
30.5 

26.3 
32.6 

27.2 
24.4 

36.4 
11.8 

16.5 
18.7 

Final sales
Private dom. final purchases

66.9 
51.8 

49.7 
38.3 

10.6 
24.4 

45.7 
14.2 

24.4 
6.5 

17.0 
11.4 

Personal  consumption  expend.

Durables
Nondurables
Services

Business  fixed investment

Producers' durable equipment
Nonresidential structures

Residential structures

change in business inventories

Nonfarm
Farm

Net exports
Exports
Imports

Government purchases

Federal

Defense
Nondefense
State and local

42.6
19.8
5.7
17.1

12.7 
16.0 
-3.4 
-3.4 

-17.4
-26.6
9.1

34.0
34.7
.7

-18.9
-23.2
-3.8
-19.4

4.3

17.3 
3.8 
4.4 
9.1 

17.6
14.9
2.9
3.2

-14.1
-9.6
-4.5

5.1
5.6
.5

6.3
2.8
-. 9
3.7
3.5

22.3 
-1.1 
9.1 
14.2 

2.0 
2.0 
-.1 
.2 

15.7 
11.8 
3.9 

-6.3 
7.0 
13.3 

22.4 
13.9 
2.7 
6.0 

-8.0 
-5.2 
-2.8 
-.2 

-2.1 
-6.6 
1.4 
3.0 

10.5 
8.4 
2.2 
-1.8 

-18.6
-3.8
-14.8

12.1

-10.8
22.9

2.8 
21.0 
18.2 

24.6 
20.8 
-3.7 

8.6 
5.8 
-3.9 
6.7 

8.4 
10.9 
-2.6 
-5.7 

-. 6 
5.1 
-5.7 

-2.2 
17.1 
19.2 

28.7
23.9

3.1
20.8
4.8

17.5
28.3

18.5
34.1

30.0
9.9
8.8
11.3

7.8
5.7
2.1
-3.7

-. 9
.2

-1.1

-10.8
-.7
10.1

-4.8
-6.9

4.5

-11.4

2.1

3.5 
-12.7 

17.4 
4.9 

4.5
13.7

9.3 
-12.9 

38.4 
20.2 

-7,2
-10.3

-5.4 
-15.0 

-.4 
10.0 

-4.9 
-5.2 

.4 
-2.6 

7.4 
14.5 
-7.4 
.4 

1.5  I

-10.8
-4.4
16.6

6.2 
5.4 

.7 
6.5 

-6.2
-3.3
-2.9
-5.5

-5.7 
-6.4 

-21.1 
-23.5 

.7 

2.4 

16.2 
19.1 
2.8 

12.5 
16.5 
4.1 

6.0
-. 3

-4.7
4.4
6.3

11.7
19.8
-8.1

-9.2
-8.0

1.2

12.3
12.9
2.1
10.8
-. 7

187.1
163.0

117.9
78.5

56.4
-4.9
11.7
49.6

26.6
25.6
1.0
-4.5

69.2
66.3
3.0

24.1
80.5
56.4

15.3
5.3
10.2
-4.9
10.0

138.6 
103.0 

172.9 
128.7 

104.6
36.4
21.9
46.4

24.3
27.7
-3.4
-.

2

-34.4
-28.2
-6.3

35.6 
68.3 
32.7 

8.6
-5.4

-4.9-. 5
13.9

73.9 
46.1 

69.2 
39.1 

31.1 
-5.9 
5.9 
31.0 

21.8
19.8
2.1

-13.8

4.9

-11.9
16.8

27.8 
56.3 
28.4 

2.3
-9.6
-5.6
-4.0
12.0

20.2
-18.9

65.4
-3.8

3.7
-7.5

-21.8
32.9

11.0
17.7
-6.7
-18.5

-45.3
-43.8
-1.5

39.1
35.6
-3.4

30.1
17.2
10.2
7.0

12.9

CONFIDENTIAL  - FR
CLASS  II  FOMC

GROSS NATIONAL  PRODUCT AND RELATED  ITEMS
(Net  changes,  billions  of  1982  dollars)

I.------------------------------------------------------- 

Projection 

1990 
S ------------ 

1991 

1992 

---------------------------- 

.---------------------------- 

03 

04 

01 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

03 

Q4

June  28,  1991

Projection

--------------------

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992

(fourth  quarter to  fourth  quarter,
net  change)

I 

I 

I-

Real  GNP
Gross  domestic  purchases

14.9 
16.8 

-16.6 
-54.3 

-29.3 
-45.2 

2.4 
16.1 

48.3 
41.3 

42.3 
45.7 

34.3 
37.9 

28.9 
32.3 

27.5 
27.9 

Final  sales
Private  dom. 

final 

purchases

19.7 
19.1 

14.5 
-32.8 

-30.8 
-44,0 

9.3 
20.0 

27.3 
21.1 

18.0 
24.4 

22.2 
28,7 

24.0 
29.6 

28.3 
30.5 

Personal  consumption  expend.

Durables
Nondurables
Services

Business  fixed  investment

Producers'  durable  equipment
Nonresidential  structures

Residential  structures

Change  in business inventories

Nonfarm
Farm

Net  exports
Exports
Inports

Government  purchases

Federal

Defense
Nondefense
State  and  local

18.0 
2.7 
5.2 
10.0 

-23.2 
-13.9 
-15.2 
5.9 

-9.9 
-12.7 
-4.1 
7.0 

10.9 
9.5 
1.5 
-9.8' 

.1  -22.6 
-20.0 
-2.7 
-11.5 

6.1 
-6.0 
-9.7 

-4.8 
-6.9 
2.1 

-31.1 
-33.2 
2.1 

1.4 
.4 
1.0 

22.0 
7.6 
.7 
13.8 

-3.5 
-1.7 
-1.8 
1.4 

-6.8 
-5.8 
-1.0 

-1.9 
10.4 
12.3 

37.7 
16.7 
-21.0 

15.9 
.8 
-15,0 

-13.8 
-1.6 
12.1 

2.5 
.1 
1.7 
-1.6 
2.4 

9.6 
3.9 
7.5 
-3.6 
5.7 

-2.7 
-.4 
1.8 
-2.2 
-2.3 

3.1 
3.6 
-.9 
4.5 
-.5 

14.8 
5.3 
2.7 
6.9 

1.9 
4.3 
-2.4 
4.5 

21.0 
22.0 
-1.0 

7.0 
10.1 
3.1 

-.8 
-.7 
-2.5 
1.8 
-. 1 

16.4 
5.1 
2.7 
8.6 

4.3 
6.1 
-1.8 
3.6 

24.3 
23.5 

.8 

-3.3 
13.1 
16.4 

-3.0 
-4.1 
-5.1 
1.0 
1.1 

20.1 
6.7 
4.0 
9.3 

5.4 
7.2 
-1.8 
3.2 

12.1 
11.7 

.4 

-3.6 
10.3 
13.8 

-2.9 
-4.2 
-5.2 
1.0 
1.3 

18.7 
3.7 
4.9 
10.1 

7.3 
8.5 
-1.3 
3.6 

4.9 
4.9 
.0 

-3.4 
10.1 
13.5 

-2.2 
-4.0 
-5.0 
1.0 
1.8 

18.5 
3.6 
4.7 
10.2 

8.1 
8.9 
-.8 
3.9 

-. 8 
-. 8 

.0 

-. 4 
9.7 
10.0 

-1.8 
-3.8 
-4.8 
1.0 
2.0 

---

26.4
29.6

25.7
30.3

18.3
3.3
4.8
10.2

8;6
9.1
-.5
3.5

.7
.7
.0

-3.2
9.9
13.1

-1.4
-3.8
-4.8
1.0
2.4

73.9
46.1

69.2
39.1

31.1
-5.9
5.9
31.0

21.8
19.8
2.1
-13.8

4.9
-11.9
16.8

27.8
56.3
28.4

2.3
-9.6
-5.6
-4.0
12.0

20.2 
-18.9 

65.4 
-3,8 

3.7 
-7.5 
-21.8 
32.9 

-

11.0
17.7
-6.7
-16.5

-45.3
-43.8
-1.5

39.1 
35.6 
-3,4 

30.1
17.2
10.2
7,0
12.9

63.8 
57.9 

23.9
21.5

43.3

5.3
1.9
36.2

-19.9
-11.3
-8.7
-2.0

39.9 
40.1 
-. 2 

5.8 
22.3 
16.5 

-3.4
-1.6
-6.7
5.1
-1.8

117.1
127.7

100.2
119.1

75.6
17.3
18.5
39.8

16.9
16.5
.4

-10.5
39.9
50.5

-8.3
-15.8
-19.8

4.0
7.5

-12-

MONETARY  AGGREGATES
(based  on  seasonally  adjusted  data unless  otherwise  noted)

19901 

1991 
Q1 

1991 
Q2pe 

1991 
Apr 

1991 
May 

Growth
04  90-
Jun  pe Jun  91pe

1991 

------------ Percent  change  at  annual  rates---------------------

1.  MI
2.  H12
3. 

H3

4.2 
3.8 
1.7 

5.9 
3.4 
4.0 

7%
4%
2

-1.1
2.8
0.5

13.7
4.6
0.8

Selected  components

4. 

Ml-A

5. 
6. 

Currency
Demand  deposits

7.  Other  checkable  deposits

8. 

M2 minus  MH1

9.  Overnight  RPs  and  Eurodollars,  NSA
10.  General  purpose and broker/dealer  money

market  mutual  fund  shares

11.  Commercial  banks
12. 
13. 
14.  Thrift  institutions

Savings deposits plus MMDAs3
Small  time deposits

i. 
,. 

Savings  deposits plus MMOAs 3
Small  time deposits

17. M3  minus M24

18.  Large  time deposits
19. 
20. 
21.  Institution-only money market

At commercial  banks,  net5
At  thrift  institutions

mutual  fund  shares

22.  Term RPs, NSA
23.  Term  Eurodollars, NSA

MEMORANDA:

6

24. Managed liabilities at  commercial

banks  (25+26)

25.  Large time deposits,  gross
26.  Nondeposit  funds
27. 

Net due to  related  foreign

institutions

Other 7

28. 
29. U.S. government deposits at  commercial

----------- Percent  change  at

annual  rates------------ 

Levels
bil.  $
May  91

4.6 

5.7 

11.0 
-0.6 

15.3 
-2.5 

6.1 

2.6 

4 

4 
44 

134

4 

-4.0 

-0.5 
-5.6 

4.0 

4.2 

7.3

0.9
12.6

25.0

1.6

6 

4 
9 

543.5

256.8
278.7

12 

308.3

0 

2544.0

3.0 

-42.3 

-13k

0.0 

-26.0 

-20 

67.6

11.0
9.9
7.5
12.4
-5.5
-2.2
-7.3

-6.4

-9.5
-3.5

-23.9

20.2
-12.0
-12.1

18.2
8.2
7.5
8.9
-6.3
-0.7
-9.7

6%
7½
164
-1½

-1¼18k
-13h

2.0 
4.2 
15.9 
-7.3 

2.5 
22.3 
-9.4 

.

3.0 
6.2 
17.1 
-5.0 
0.1 
23.2 
-14.9 

-1 

365.1
9  1212.9
611.2
601.6
897.5
358.1
539.4

18 
1 
-10 
13 
-Z5 

6.7 

-9% 

-9.2 

-15.4

-11 

777.8

1.2
11.9
-32.1

49.9
-32.8
7.9

-8 

0 
-35% 

24
-24%
-26

-11.3

-5.7

-31.2

30.4
-15.9
-43.8

-9.5
0.6
-46.4

4.9
-14.6
-38.5

-16 
-24 
2 

----- Average  monthly  change  in  billions  of  dollars----

-0.1
-2.6

2.4.

2.2 
0.2 

-1.6 
6.4 
-8.0 

-1.5 
-6.5 

-3% 
4 
-4½ 

-4 

-h 

-1.4 
0.0 
-1.4 

0.6

-1.9

-3.4
1.2
-4.6

502.7
398.2
104.5

146.2
81.1
66.4

710.1
452.1
258.0

26.0
232.0

15.1

-8 
1 

8 

bankss

0.3 

3.1 

-3½ 

-12.1 

-6.6

1.  Amounts  shown  are  from  fourth  quarter  to  fourth  quarter.
2.  Nontransactions  M2 
3.  Commercial  bank  savings  deposits  excluding  MMDAs  grew  during  May  and  June  at  rates  of  14.9

is  seasonally  adjusted  as  a  whole.

percent  and  18  percent,  respectively.  At  thrift  institutions,  savings  deposits  excluding  MMOAs  grew
during  May  and  June  at  rates  of  18.7  percent  and  12  percent,  respectively.

4.  The  non-M2  component  of  M3 
5.  Net  of  large  denomination  time  deposits  held  by  money  market  mutual  funds  and  thrift  institutions.
s.  Dollar  amounts  shown  under  memoranda  are  calculated  on  an  end-month-of-quarter  basis.

is  seasonally  adjusted  as  a  whole.

Consists  of  borrowing  from  other  than  commercial  banks  in  the  form  of  federal  funds  purchased,  securities
sold  under  agreements  to  repurchase,  and  other  liabilities  for  borrowed  money  (including  borrowing  from  the
Federal  Reserve  and  unaffiliated  foreign  banks, 

loan  RPs  and  other  minor  items).  Data  are  partially  estimated.

8.  Consists  of  Treasury  demand  deposits  and  note  balances  at commercial  banks.
pe  - preliminary  estimate

-13-

COMMERCIAL  BANK  CREDIT  AND  SHORT-  AND 

INTERMEDIATE-TERM  BUSINESS  CREDIT

(Percentage  changes  at  annual  rates,  based  on  seasonally  adjusted  data)

1989:Dec. 

to 
1990:Dec. 

1990 
Q4 

Ql 

Mar. 

Apr. 

May 

1991 

Levels
bil.$
May

----------------------- 

Commercial  Bank  Credit  --------------------

1.  Total  loans  and  securities

at  banks

2. 

Securities

5.3 

8.6 

2.3 

4.0 

6.7 

.0 

.6 

12.5 

25.7 

10.9 

-. 7 

7.3 

3. 

4. 

U.S. government securities

13.9 

3.7 

15.0 

34.8 

19.3 

13.8 

Other securities

-3.1 

-7.2 

5.7 

2.0 

-11.5 

-10.3 

2750.0

658.9

484.9

174.0

5. 

Total  loans

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

Business  loans

Real estate loans

Consumer  loans

Security  loans

Other loans

4.3 

1.9 

9.5 

1.2 

4.4 

2.9 

1.5 

1.0 

-3.3 

-3.2 

2091.1

3.0 

6.1 

-. 4 

3.8 

-7.9 

-7.5 

3.4 

3.5 

4.5 

4.9 

633.2

854.7

.6 

-2.6 

-5.1 

-3.5 

-1.3 

.

373.5

-6.8 

-17.7 

-117.2 

30.9 

.0 

39.8

-2.4 

-4.3 

11.6 

19.0 

-28.9 

-28.4 

189.9

---------  Short-  and  Intermediate-Term  Business  Credit  ----------

Business  loans  net  of  bankers

acceptances

12. 

Loans  at  foreign branches2

13. 

Sum of lines  11  & 12

14. 

Commercial paper  issued  by
nonfinancial  firms

15. 

Sum of  lines 13  & 14

1.9

19.3

2.5

12.2

4.2

3.0

.4

4.0

-7.7

-8.0

37.0

4.3

-3.1

-9.2

-46.5

-58.1

.2

3.5

-9.3

-9.9

-3.2 

-5.0 

-3.2

12.9 

-34.4

2.8 

-. 7 

2.2

-5.2 

-14.4

16. 

Bankers  acceptances:  U.S. trade

related '

-9.6

17.8 

-24.3 

-69.5 

-58.3 

-16.3

627.1

23.6

650.6

145.9

796.6

29.0

17. 

Line 15 plus bankers  acceptances:

U.S.  trade related

3.6

Finance  company loans  to business3

13.1

3.4

12.0

-1.6 

4.5 

-.6

2.0

-7.3

-14.4

.4

n.a.

825.6

294.4 5

Total  short-  and intermediate-

term  business  credit  (sum of
lines  17  & 18)

5.8

5.6 

-.1 

.0 

-5.2

n.a.

1132.95

18. 

19. 

-.  Average  of  Wednesdays.

. Loans at  foreign branches are loans  made to  U.S.  firms by foreign branches  of domestically

chartered banks.

-.  Based on  average of data for current  and preceding ends  of month.

. Consists of acceptances  that  finance U.S. imports, U.S.  exports, and domestic

snipment  and storage of  goods.

-.  Aril  data.
'iminary.
ot  available

-- 

-- 

-- 

-- 

-- 

------------

-14-

1

SELECTED  FINANCIAL  MARKET  QUOTATIONS
(percent)

----------------------------------------------------------------------
1989 

1990 

1991

Change from:

-~-------"--~---------------------

March 
highs 

Dec 
lows 

Aug 
FOMC
highs  May  14  Jun  27

Aug  90 
FOMC
highs  May  14

---- 

Short-term  rates

Federal  funds 2

Treasury  bills 3
3-month
6-month
1-year

Commercial  paper

1-month
3-month

Large negotiable CDs 3

1-month
3-month
6-month

Eurodollar
1-month
3-month

deposits 4

9.85

8.45 

8.21 

5.77 

5.78

-2.43 

0.01

9.09
9.11
9.05

10.05
10.15

10.07
10.32
10.08

10.19
10.50

7.53
7.29
7.11

7.59
7.51
7.45

5.49
5.62
5.75

5.55
5.73
5.94

-2.04
-1.78
-1.51

0.06
0.11
0.19

8.51 
8.22 

8.10 
8.05 

5.92 
5.93 

6.08
6.13

-2.02 
-1.92 

0.16
0.20

8.52
8.22
8.01

8.14
8.18
8.25

5.90
5.93
6.07

5.99
6.08
6.35

-2.15
-2.10
-1.90

0.09
0.15
0.28

8.38 
8.25 

8.13 
8.19 

5.81 
5.94 

5.94
6.13

-2.19 
-2.06 

0.13
0.19

Bank  prime  rate

11.50 

10.50 

10.00 

8.50 

8.50

-1.50 

0.00

Intermediate-  and  long-term  rates

U.S. Treasury  (constant

3-year
10-year
30-year

maturity)
9.88
9.53
9.31

7.69
7.77
7.83

8.50
9.05
9.17

7.13
8.14
8.36

7.43
8.32
8.49

-1.07
-0.73
-0.68

0.30
0.18
0.13

Municipal  revenue

(Bond  Buyer)

Corporate--A utility

7.95

7.28 

7.80 

7.09 

7.30

-0.50 

0.21

recently  offered

10.47

9.29 

10.50 

9.53 

9.58

-0.92 

0.05

Bome mortgage  rates 6
S&L fixed-rate 
S&L ARM, 1-yr. 

11.22 
9.31 

9.69 
8.34 

10.29 
8.39 

9.47 
7.23 

9.65 
7.24 

-0.64 
-1.15 

0.18
0.01

1989 

1991 

Percent  change from:

Record 
highs 

Date 

Lows 
FOMC 
Jan 3  May 14  Jun 27 

Record  1989  FOMC
highs 

lows  May 14

Stock prices

Dow-Jones  Industrial  3035.33 
NYSE Composite 
AMEX Composite 
NASDAQ  (OTC) 
Wilshire 

6/3/91  2144.64  2886.85 2934.93 
213.21  4/17/91 
154.00  203.67  204.94 
397.03  10/10/89  305.24  360.25  359.43 
378.56  488.79  476.24 
511.31  4/17/91 
3731.48  4/17/91  2718.59 3562.98  3567.32 

-3.31  36.85 
-3.88  33.08 
-9.47  17.75 
-6.86  25.80 
-4.40  31.22 

1.67
0.62
-0.23
-2.57
0.12

One-day quotes except  as  noted.
Average  for two-week  reserve maintenance period closest  to
date shown.  Last observation is  average for the
maintenance period ending June 26,  1991.

3/ Secondary market.
4/ Bid rates  for Eurodollar

deposits at  11  a.m. London time.
5/ Based on one-day Thursday quotes

and futures market  index  changes.

6/ Quotes  for week ending

Friday closest  to date  shown.

-15-

THE  INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY

Prices  of  Imports  and Exports

According to  the Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  prices  of U.S.

imports rose  0.2  percent  in  May, the  first  increase  in  seven months.

The increase was  led  by a 2.9 percent  rise  in  the index for  prices  of

petroleum imports.  The  index for  prices  of  nonpetroleum imports

declined for the  second consecutive  month, after  a string  of  eight

monthly increases.  Further  declines in the  prices  of  imported  capital

and  consumer  goods  caused the  drop in this  index.

The index for prices  of  U.S.  exports  decreased  0.3  percent  in

May.  The decrease  was caused  by a 1.1  percent  fall  in prices  of

exported  industrial  supplies  and  materials, which continued  its  seven-

month downward  trend.  In  contrast,  the  other  four  major  export

categories  (foods, capital  goods,  motor  vehicles,  and  consumer  goods)

each  posted a slight  increase in  May.

Erratum

Greenbook pages  1-31  and  IV-16  incorrectly  state that  the Desk

did not  intervene  during the  intermeeting period.  In  fact,  the Desk

did  intervene  on  one  occasion.  Late  on  May 17,  the  day Sweden

announced  it would peg the krona  to  the ECU, the Desk sold  $50  million

against marks.

-16-

IMPORT  AND EXPORT  PRICE  MEASURES
(percent change  from previous  period, annual  rate)

Year 
1991-01 
1990-Q1 

Quarters 

1990 

1991 
Q1 
(Quarterly Average, AR)  (Monthly Rates)

Apr 

May

04 

03 

Months
1991

Imports.  Total 

Foods,  Feeds,  Bev. 
Industrial  Supplies 
Ind Supp  Ex Oil* 

Capital  Goods 
Automotive  Products 
Consumer  Goods 

Memo:

Oil 
Non-oil 

Exports.  Total 

Foods,  Feeds,  Bev. 
Industrial Supplies 
Capital  Goods 
Automotive  Products 
Consumer  Goods 

Memo:

---------------------BLS  Prices ---------------------

3.3 
3.7 
2.8 
0.4 
4.8 
3.6 
2.7 

7.0 
3.0 

2.0 
-3.9 
1.8 
3.1 
2.7 
3.6 

10.2 
7.4 
31.7 
-1.5 
3.8 
3.3 
-0.3 

24.9 
5.2 
77.1 
2.7 
8.2 
10.3 
4.5 

-12.3 
7.6 
-41.0 
-0.3 
4.8 
6.5 
2.3 

-0.7 
0.8 
-0.5 
-0.6 
-1.4 
-0.7 
-0.7 

0.2
0.1
0.9
-0.1
-0.6
0.3
-0.2

134.1 
1.8 

307.2 
6.3 

-73.9 
3.6 

0.0 
-0.7 

2.9
-0.2

1.7 
-13.1 
5.2 
3.3 
1.9 
1.6 

4.4 
-16.5 
15.9 
2.1 
3.5 
3.7 

0.6 
8.5 
-9.8 
5.6 
3.5 
6.0 

0.0 
0.9 
-1.1 
0.3 
-0.1 
1.8 

-0.3
0.1
-1.1
0.2
0.2
0.2

Agricultural 
Nonagricultural 

-3.3 
2.7 

-11.9 
3.9 

-14.2 
7.9 

6.9 
-0.7 

1.0 
-0.2 

0.3
-0.3

------------  Prices  in  the  GNP Accounts-------------

Fixed-Weight

Imports,  Total 

Oil 
Non-oil 

Exports,  Total 

Ag 
Nonag 

Deflators

Imports,  Total 

Oil 
Non-oil 

Exports,  Total 

Ag 
Nonag 

2.8 
3.2 
2.7 

2.1 
-1.4 
2.8 

0.5 
3.2 
-0.8 

-0.3 
-1.4 
-0.1 

15.8 
135.7 
3.9 

34.4 
346.2 
5.3 

-18.3
-75.0
4.0

0.8 
-10.1 

3.1 

5.7 
-11.8 
9.5 

0.4
7.8
-1.0 

-

11.3 
135.2 
2.1 

27.1 
345.0 
0.6 

-20.8
-75.0
-4.7

-3.9 
-10.1 
-3.1 

3.6 
-11.8 

5.6 

-5.2
7.8
-6.6

*/ Months  not  for publication.




