==== GREENBOOK | 1994-08-16_FOMC19940816meeting.txt ====

Meeting of  the  Federal  Open Market  Committee Meeting
August  16,  1994

A meeting of  the  Federal  Open Market  Committee was  held  in

the  offices  of  the  Board  of Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System in

Washington,  D.C.,  on Tuesday, August  16,  1994,  at  9:00  a.m.

PRESENT:  Mr. Greenspan, Chairman

Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Blinder
Mr. Broaddus
Mr. Forrestal
Mr. Jordan
Mr. Kelley
Mr. LaWare
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. Parry
Ms.  Phillips
Ms.  Yellen

Messrs.  Conrad, Hoenig, Melzer, and Ms.  Minehan,
Alternate  Members  of  the  Federal Open Market
Committee

Messrs.  Boehne, McTeer,  and Stern,  Presidents  of

the  Federal  Reserve Banks  of Philadelphia,
Dallas,  and Minneapolis  respectively

Mr.  Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr.  Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr.  Coyne, Assistant  Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant  Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General  Counsel
Mr.  Patrikis, Deputy General  Counsel
Mr.  Prell,  Economist
Mr. Truman,  Economist

Messrs. Beebe,  Goodfriend, Lindsey,  Promisel,

Siegman, Simpson,  Stockton, and Ms.  Tschinkel,
Associate Economists

Ms.  Lovett, Manager  for Domestic  Operations, System

Open Market  Account

Mr.  Fisher,  Manager  for Foreign Operations,  System

Open Market  Account

Mr.  Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research

and Statistics,  Board of  Governors

Mr.  Slifman, Associate  Director, Division of

Research  and  Statistics, Board of  Governors

Mr. Madigan,  Associate Director, Division  of
Monetary Affairs,  Board of  Governors
Ms.  Low, Open Market  Secretariat Assistant,

Division of  Monetary Affairs,  Board of
Governors

Messrs.  Bennett,  Davis,  Dewald, Rosenblum, and

Vander Wilt,  Senior Vice Presidents,  Federal
Reserve Banks  of New York, Kansas  City,
St.  Louis,  Dallas,  and Chicago  respectively

Messrs.  McNees, Meyer,  and Sniderman, Vice

Presidents,  Federal  Reserve  Banks  of  Boston,
Philadelphia,  and Cleveland respectively

Ms.  Meulendyke,  Assistant Vice President,  Federal

Reserve  Bank of New York

Mr. Weber,  Senior  Research  Officer,  Federal  Reserve

Bank of  Minneapolis

Transcript  of  Federal  Open Market  Committee Meeting  of
August  16,  1994

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Before we  get  under way today,  I want  to

welcome Governor Janet  Yellen who  is  attending her  first Committee
meeting.

MS.  YELLEN.  Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  She was  exposed to  her  first  Board

meeting yesterday.  You  survived that,  and  I wish you well  today.

MS.  YELLEN.  Thank you;  it's  good  to be  here.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Cathy Minehan  is  at  her  first meeting as

President  of  the  Boston Bank and we  congratulate you.

MS.  MINEHAN.  Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Finally, while  Bill  Conrad  has  been here

before,  this  is  the  first  time  he  is  representing the Chicago  Bank.
So  I have many announcements--more  than  usual  for  this  organization.
Let's  start by having somebody move  to  approve  the minutes  of  the  July
5-6  meeting.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.  So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Is  there  a second?

MR. KELLEY.  Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Without  objection.  Peter  Fisher, would

you take  us  through the  foreign  operations  Desk report?

MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  [Statement--See  Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  On  that 

there
are  two  ongoing  thoughts  that  are  supposed  to  be  insights  into what
happened.  First is  the notion  that  the moves  on  the part  of  those  two
central  banks were suggestive  of  the  fact  that  declines  in European
rates  had come  to  an end.  The  other  is  that  because  the public
debt/GDP ratio  in both  countries  is  exceptionally high, the  rise  in
interest rates  was  suggestive  of  the  fact  that  the deficit  might be
more of  a problem.  To  which of  those  two,  if  any, do you  subscribe  to
explain this  phenomenon, which scares  every central banker  I know?

MR. FISHER.  I think  the market's  immediate reaction  was more
the  first  of  the two you mentioned.  I think that  the extremity of  the
reaction, if  I can  distinguish the  fact  of  the  reaction from  the
extent of  the move once  it  got  going, was more  of  a gnawing anxiety
about  the  general  fiscal  condition of  Europe--of  all  the  European
countries put  together.  But untangling  those  two  anxieties  in  a
relatively short  time  is  quite a problem.  I would point out,  if
you'll  forgive me, Mr.  Chairman,  that  the very technical  aspects  of
the  announcements were not  handled as  elegantly as  they might  have
been.  The  Italian announcement  came with  60  seconds  left  in  trading
on LIFFE  futures.  There were many people  in  London with very bloody
fingers  trying to  cut back their positions.  That  certainly

8/16/94

contributed to  the  very extreme  reaction on  that day.  Clearly, those
two  countries  are  the  outliers  on  the  fiscal  side  in  Europe.  No  one
in  Europe had been anxious  about a general  backup  in  short-term rates
beyond the  fact  that  everyone  expected the  UK  to  begin raising rates
sometime soon.  As  the market  digests what happened and distinguishes
the  stronger countries  from  the weaker  countries,  there may be some
improvement, but  I wouldn't  expect  that very soon.  The markets may
have  a hard time  digesting and untangling whatever  it  is  the
Bundesbank does  on  Thursday.  I think  that  there  is  likely to  be a
period of  continued gnawing in  European bond markets  for  several days
to  come.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Further questions  for  Peter?

MR. BLINDER.  I have  one,  Peter;  it's  sort  of  in two  parts,
but  they are part of  the  same  question.  Markets  tend to  latch on  to
things  in  faddish  ways.  Something was  almost  implicit  in what you
said, and  I want  to  see  if you want to make  it  explicit--it's about
the  fad that  dollar/yen dances  to  the  U.S./Japan  trade talks  or
events,  that  is,  to  monthly announcements  of  the  trade  figures  or  to
the  talks.  It  was  almost  implicit  in what you said that  the market
seems  to  be getting  off  that  fad.  Did you mean to  say that?  And  then
the  second part  is  related to  the  looming date,  September 30th.

MR. FISHER.  I think  the market  is  faddish;  I'll  agree with

you on  that.  I think  there  is  an  opportunity  for  the market  to be
less  anxious  about  the  trade  talks.  I'm of  the  school  in  interpreting
the  market's reaction  to  trade talk  announcements  that believes  the
market  is  biased in  its  reactions.  When  the  announcements  tend to  be
explicit,  mundane,  and mechanical,  however strongly  articulated, e.g.
"we are  imposing a 60-day deadline,"  the  foreign  exchange market,
dollar/yen, can  shake  that  off  fairly easily.  What  is  harder  to
interpret  is  what happens  when the  announcements  come  in  a setting or
context  that  the  overall  Japan/U.S.  relationship or  the  overall
economic  relationship  including exchange  rates and trade  flows  is  at
stake,  and that's  what  is  being argued  about here  or  that's why this
announcement  is being made.  That  then  tends  to  undermine  the
confidence  in dollar/yen and the  confidence  that  the  Administration
would  stick to  a stronger dollar rhetoric.  So  I think  that  there  is  a
nuance that  the market  is  really very quick at picking up  on, whether
the  announcements  are  couched  in  this  broad overall  relationship or
whether they  are couched in  the  specifics  of  the  trade announcement  at
hand.  I think that  on reflection,  the  end of  July announcement by the
U.S. side was  seen  in  the  mechanical  context.  The  market  reacted
negatively actually  to  the  Japanese announcement  that  they would walk
away on  September  30th  if  sanctions were  imposed.  Now, that
announcement  fell  on what probably  is  the  thinnest  foreign exchange
market  in the  world, which  is New Zealand when Australia  is  on  holiday
in early August.  [Laughter]  The big reaction we  got was  clearly
related to  the fact  that  no  one was  trading  there.  Some  people  stayed
in New York Sunday  afternoon  to  sell  into it  and  see what was  there.
I think everyone  then realized  that was  60  days  away and 60  days  is
eternity  for  the  foreign exchange markets,  so we will worry about  that
in  the period to  September.  I will  say regarding  the period to
September, what has  made me more anxious  than  anything  is  seeing a
number  of  members  of  Congress  write a letter to  the Administration
saying they hoped  the Administration would be  tough in  the  trade
talks.  I think  the  foreign  exchange market  could very easily  focus  on

8/16/94

a date, but  that  is  the  sort of  thing  the  exchange market  can get
riled up  about.  If  there were  even a modest  shift in  a few members  of
Congress choosing to run  on  a trade  issue  rather  than  a health  care
issue,  that  could get  the  foreign  exchange market very engrossed  in
the  run-up  to  that  date.  I think that  could be  difficult.

MR. BLINDER.  Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Any further  questions  for  Peter?  If

not, Joan Lovett will  you carry us  through domestic  operations?

MS.  LOVETT.  Thank you, Mr.  Chairman.  [Statement--See

Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Questions  for Joan?  If  not, would

somebody like  to move  to  ratify  the actions  of  the  Desk since  the  last
meeting?

SPEAKER(?).  So move.

SPEAKER(?).  Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Without  objection.  Let  us  move on  to

the  economic  situation  and Mike  Prell.

MR. PRELL.  Thank  you, Mr.  Chairman.  [Statement--See

Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  In  looking  at  the  divergence between  the

permits  and the  starts  in  this morning's  release,  as  you know,  it
could possibly be  that  we had a significant  increase  in non-permit
single-family  starts.  Do we have  those data  yet?

MR. PRELL.  No,  I don't have  information on that.  It's very

clear  the ratio  of  starts  to  permits  for  the  single-family sector is
extended well beyond the  norm.  Given  the better  statistical
reliability of  the permits  series,  I think that  this  argues pretty
strongly  for  starts  likely to have  been less  robust  than  this  report
suggests.  But  we had a  level  of  single-family  starts  for  this  quarter
in  the  forecast  that would still be  below any  reasonable adjustment,  I
think, of  that  single-family  starts  rate.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Any further questions  for Mike  or,  I

might  say  for  that matter,  for  Ted Truman who has  no  formal  remarks  to
make?  President  Parry.

MR. PARRY.  Mike,  in  the  Greenbook forecast  inventory

investment  comes  down to  more traditional  levels.  And I think as  a
result  the  inventory/sales ratios,  if  I remember  them from Part  II  of
the  Greenbook, also  come  down.  Would you  comment  on  the risks  to  the
assumptions  about  inventory  investment because it  seems  to me  possible
at  least  that we  could see more inventory building  in  the  forecast
period  than  is  incorporated  in what may be  a conservative  forecast.

MR. PRELL.  I think  it's  a reasonably balanced  forecast,

given my  suspicion that  inventory investment  in  the  second quarter may
have been overstated.  But  I wouldn't want  to make  too big a point  of
that.  The  May  figures  held up  very well;  they were  raised in  the

8/16/94

-4-

revised  figures.  To  date,  there hasn't  been any evidence  there.  But
we have,  in essence,  carried through  a slightly higher  level  of  the
inventory/sales ratio,  that  having been achieved  in  the  second
quarter.  We  do  not  have a  significant movement;  the  ratio begins  to
trail  off  very slightly in  the  latter part  of  1995.  In  a sense,  at
that point we are  beginning to  get  a  little  improvement  in  final  sales
and we begin  to  see  the hint  of  a  restoration of what we  think  is  the
secular downward  trend  in the  overall  ratio.  We have anticipated in
this  forecast  that  the  adjustment  in  stock  levels  relative  to  sales
trends  is  going  to  occur  in the  distribution sector, particularly
retailing.  We have  allowed in  effect  for  a  substantial degree  of
manufacturing  inventory  accumulation, which  is  the  area  where we  might
have anticipated  the upside  risk to  have  existed because of  the
tightening  in  supplies  and  some of  the  pressures on prices  of
materials  and  so  on.  Certainly, no  inventory  forecast  is  without  its
risks,  but  I think  in  this  case  the balance  is  not distinctly  on  one
side  or  the  other.  We  really are  not uncomfortable in  that  respect.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE.  I'm a little puzzled by  the projected levels  of

consumption  expenditures and am  trying  to  reconcile  them with the
relatively high  continued levels  of housing  starts projected in  the
Greenbook as  well  as  the  further increase  in  light  motor vehicle  sales
to  the  highest  level  since  1988.  That  just  doesn't  seem consistent  to
me.

MR. PRELL.  A  compound question here,  I think.

MR. LAWARE.  A confounded  question, I guess.

MR. PRELL.  No.

MR. LAWARE.  I'm confounded  at any  rate.

MR. PRELL.  Let  me  try to  be  helpful with a  few, brief

comments.  I think if  we had  to  do  the  single-family housing
construction forecast  again  today, we would still  have  in  essence  the
kind of pattern we have, with some  further  erosion of  single-family
housing construction  in the  near  term and  then  some  firming  over the
course  of  1995--the  levels  in  the  two  years being pretty comparable
and quite  decent  by historical  standards.  A  fairly high  level  of
existing home  sales  is  also  likely  over  that  period.  We  have  seen
very strong  sales  of  appliances  and  furniture.  Even  through July,  the
retail  sales  report  shows  considerable  strength  there.  We would
expect  to  see  some  ebbing  of  that  strength and  some deceleration  in
non-motor vehicle  consumer durables outlays  over  the  coming quarters.
At  the  same  time, we  think we've  reached a rather  low  level  relative
to  the plausible  trend in motor vehicle  sales,  in  good part  because  of
the  shortage  of  some  of  the more popular models.  We  see  a  substantial
ramping up of  production  going  on currently and we  are  anticipating
that  sales  will move up  significantly in  the  next  few months,  and then
we have a  slight upcreep  during  1995  with  the  continued moderate
growth of  income  and employment.  Our  sense  is  that  there probably  is
still  some  element  of  pent-up demand  in  the motor vehicles  sector,
just  looking  at what  has  happened  to  the  stock of  cars  relative  to  the
number of  households  and  the aging  in the  stock  and so  on.  Our
forecast  for next  year,  at  just a  little  over  15  million  for  light

8/16/94

vehicle  sales,  is  certainly not high  by the  standards  that we  see  in
private  forecasts  and certainly not  relative  to  the  hopes  of  the
automobile  industry.  I think  they will  have  the  capacity  to  supply
that many cars  and  this  is  not  an  extraordinarily high  level  of
durables  expenditure  overall  relative  to  income  or GDP.  In  fact,  it's
rather moderate  in  that  sense.  So  I think there  is  a reasonable
rationale  for  this  path.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Stern.

MR. STERN.  I have  a  couple  of  questions, Mike.  The  first

one has  to  do  with  the price  forecast.  How much  of  that  is  empirical
as  opposed  to  judgment?  I ask because  some preliminary work we've
done  suggests  that  if  you  look  at  capacity measures  versus  measures of
price  or wage  inflation,  they look pretty good into  the early  1980s
but  then  the  relationship seems  to  deteriorate rather  significantly.
I'm  curious  what you see  going  on  there.

MR. PRELL.  Well,  we have  at  least  59  varieties  of,  or  is  it

57,  I don't know,  [Laughter]--57 varieties.  The  number  has  crept  up
over  the years,  of  econometric models.  So,  we probably  can encompass
a pretty wide range  of  outcomes,  given  the  conditioning assumptions of
the  degree  of  slack in  labor  and product markets,  the  acceleration or
deceleration in  activity,  the  signs we have  seen  of  materials' cost
rising,  the  implications  of  exchange rate  changes  for  import prices,
and so  on.  Our models have  not  done  that poorly  in capturing  the
general  trend of  things.  Our analysis  is  that  we  are  generally  in  the
ball park  of  the natural  rate,  I think our  forecast  looks  quite
plausible.  We have  sort  of  a  stabilization  of  the  core  inflation
rate.  One  could say  that  there might be  some  offsetting influences
here  of  abatement of  the  speed effects  and  the pressures  on materials
prices  that we've  had recently and  some  of  the  shifts  in  the  influence
of  the  exchange  rate.  I think  this  is  not  hard to  justify  at  all  in
terms  of  a pretty wide  variety of  econometric models,  but  a
significant element  of  judgment  has  gone  into  this.  As  I indicated,
we  simply  do perceive  a leveling out  of  things  that  have  occurred  in
the  last  several  months,  the  last  few quarters.  We  foresee a
generally stable  labor market  and level  of  industrial  capacity
utilization  if  the economy  slackens  as  we have forecast.  And so  the
broad macro  conditions  are  sort  of  stable  in  this  picture.

MR.  STERN.  My second  question--as  I understand the  forecast,

you have  long-term interest  rates  coming  down next year,  is  that
right?  [Mr.  Prell:  Yes.]  How much precedent  is  there  for  a decline
in  long  rates  like  that  in  circumstances  where you have  stable short-
term rates  and a continuing  expansion?  Obviously, we had  some periods
in  the  1980s when  long-term rates  came down  in  the middle  of  the
expansion but  short-term rates  were  declining through at  least  some  of
that period as  I recall.  So  I'm  trying to  look  for history and my
memory  isn't  that  good about  all  that.

MR. PRELL.  I think you probably cited  one period  in which we

could find  it  in  the  1980s,  but  I'd have  to  reexamine  that  record.
I'm not  sure what  precedent one  would  look for:  What we are
anticipating in  this  forecast  is  a moderation of  economic  expansion
that  extends  this  cyclical upswing with  inflation not  picking up at
all.  We  think that  the  implied real  rates of  interest,  given  the kind
of  inflation expectations  that  presumably could prevail  in  1995  with

8/16/94

the  continuation of  3 percent  inflation, are  fairly  ample by
historical  standards.  Even with  the nominal  rate decline  we have,
these real  rates might  be regarded as  generous by historical
standards.  Some might  say it  poses  the  possibility of  a downside
risk.  We  think that  there  is  probably still  an  element  of  extra
liquidity premium in  the market--some  trepidation on  the  part of
investors.  People who  had been  throwing money into  bond mutual  funds
with abandon  until  a  few months  ago  are perhaps  a  little more cautious
now.  I think we  can get  a  combination of  some  reduction  in  the
inflation premium and  some reduction  in  the  liquidity premium  that  is
probably still  embedded  in  the  long  rates.  The  yield curve would
still  have  an upward slope  of  some significance and  certainly wouldn't
look  strange  in that  regard.

MR. KOHN.  Of  course, we  did have a period  in the  second  half

of  1988  and  early  1989  in which  short-term  rates were moving up
smartly and  long-term  rates  were doing nothing.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN.  Mike,  I'm  interested  in your confidence  levels

for  various parts  of  the  forecast.  Where  are  the  surprises  likely  to
be?  If  one  starts  a year ago,  in  your  assessment  in August  and
September as  to the  year ahead,  at  that  point  one  of  the  things  you
talked  about  was  a middling expansion  and maintenance  of  the  low
interest  rates necessary  to  support  it.  You were more  optimistic
about long  rates  coming down  than was  the  marketplace.  Your  forecast
for  growth wasn't  that much different  in real  terms  than  the  Blue  Chip
or  others, but  you had more confidence  on  inflation and  long rates.
What's  happened  since  is  that  we had a  lot  more real  growth, a  lot
more  employment growth, and a much different  structure of  interest
rates, yet  your  inflation  forecast has  come  out very  close.  What
happened to  inflation  in between has been very close  to  what  you were
saying  a year  ago  it  was going  to  be even  though  the  other
circumstances  associated with  that  inflation  didn't  obtain.  If  you
now project  out  a year  from now, what  in your  thinking  is  the  most
likely vulnerability of  the  forecast and where  do you  think the
surprises  are going  to be--on  the real  side  or  the  inflation  side?

MR.  PRELL.  I suppose  I should have  thought  ahead to  this
kind of  question;  it  comes up  frequently.  I don't  really have  any
clearcut  answer  jumping  into my mind at  this  point.  I think  there  are
risks  that  one  could  identify in  every sector  and  I could  identify
them as having potential  on both  the upside  and downside.  So  I don't
think there  is  any key  number here.  On  the  inflation--sort  of  the
Phillips curve--side  of  things  given  the  outlook path,  we certainly
are  somewhat  at  sea  still  about what  the  unemployment  rate truly  is
right now.  There  is  still,  because  of  the  change  of  surveys,  an
unusual  degree  of  uncertainty about  the  seasonal  [unintelligible]
labor  force participation would change  radically  from where  it  is  now.
We  noted that  we  tried to  come  to  grips  with the  news  that  we've  seen
recently, but  that  news  involves  a lot  of  interpretation.  And  so even
given an  output path,  the  degree  of  labor market  slack that  that
implies  is  uncertain.  Looking back  at  the  recent  experience  and maybe
leaning  toward a slight  degree  of  pessimism, one  could argue  that
things  really began to  firm--the  end  of  the  deceleration in wages,  the
lack of  evident  further  deceleration  in  core CPI--earlier  this year,
before we  got  the  drop  in unemployment  that  we've  seen recently.  This

8/16/94

might  suggest  that  more pessimistic  views  of where  the NAIRU  is,  such
as  those  embodied in  the  famous  Kansas  City Fed  estimates,  might be
correct and that  one  could  see  some pressure  emerging  fairly promptly
that we  don't have  in  our  forecast.

On the  other hand, as  I said,  the  range  of  estimates we could

come  up with  in this  regard certainly  embodies NAIRUs  that  would be
below what  we perceive  the  current  level  of  unemployment to  be  and
thus  might give  us  a little more  room to  run.  We've got  a sustained
strong  investment pattern.  We  think that  makes  sense, but  it  is  on
the  strong  side perhaps  of  what  some models  would  suggest.  There  is
uncertainty about  inventories,  and certainly  in  the near  term,  if
there were  enthusiasm  about building  stocks because  of  concerns  about
supplies and price  increases,  that  could  give  some  impetus.  We are
continuing to  see  the  evolution of  the  recoveries abroad,  and in  that
kind of  dynamic  one  could be  off  the  mark in gauging just  what  impetus
we are  going  to  get  one  way or  the other  there.  Given  our  own
experience  in the United  States  and maybe  once  things  settle  down, one
could see  a sequence  of  surprises  in a positive  direction.  On
housing, as  we  saw this  morning, we've been  surprised;  and so we  could
be right  or wrong  there.  I don't  feel  that  this  is,  on balance,  far
out  of  line with  the Blue  Chip consensus  in  the  sense  that  they have
more growth  and more  inflation.  They have  higher  nominal  short-term
interest rates,  I think, ultimately perhaps.  But  again,  that  is  also
consistent with more  inflation.  So  there  is  not  a glaring
inconsistency  of  our  view with  a lot  of  the private  forecasts.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor Blinder.

MR.  BLINDER.  Mike,  I have  just  a  simple question  about  the

news  since  the  last  Greenbook.  You mentioned  that  June and July
payroll  employment  came  in  stronger  than you  expected.  Do you happen
to  recall what was  built  into  the previous Greenbook for June  and
July?

MR. PRELL.  My recollection is  that we were  anticipating  that

the  increase  in  the  latest  month would have  been 50,000  or so  less.

MR. BLINDER.  July?

MR.  PRELL.  Right.

MR. BLINDER.  Including the  30,000  rise  in  the bias
adjustment?  If  I'm not  mistaken,  the bias  adjustment  changed from Q2
to  Q3.

MR. PRELL.  Without  an explicit  view about  the bias

adjustment.  I think  the bigger  surprise was  in June where we  got a
whopping  increase  in  employment,  and we  were, as  I recall,
anticipating  something again more  in  the 200,000  area.  So  I think, we
have had a  substantial upside  surprise  for  those  two months.

MR. BLINDER.  Say, more  than  150,000  jobs  or  something?

MR.  PRELL.  I think  that  is  the  order of  magnitude.

MR. BLINDER.  Okay,  thanks.

8/16/94

-8-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Any  further questions  for Mike  or  Ted?

If  not,  would somebody  like  to  start  the  round table?

MR. BROADDUS.  Mr.  Chairman, the  reports  we have been getting

on  the  District  suggest  that  overall  economic  activity in  our region
is  still  growing at  a healthy pace.  My personal  sense is  that  there
may have  been some  moderation  in  the rate  of  expansion  in  our  region
from earlier  this  year,  but  not much and  there may not have been any
at  all  in  some  areas.  Some parts of  the  District, particularly
central  and western North Carolina  and northwestern South  Carolina  can
only be described  as  booming in my view.  Moreover, some  of  the  recent
commentary we are  getting suggests  that  the northern part  of  the
District  and  the West Virginia  economy, which had  been  lagging behind
the  Carolinas  earlier  in  the  expansion, are  now catching up.  At  our
board meeting  last  week, directors  from both Maryland and West
Virginia gave particularly bullish reports  on  conditions  in  their
respective  state economies.  In  this  regard,  I might  say  that  the
adverse  effects of  cutbacks  in defense  spending, which of  course  are
concentrated primarily in  the northern part  of  the  District, while  not
negligible by any means,  seem  to have been somewhat  less  severe  than
might have  been expected  earlier.  Residential  construction  is  off
somewhat  in the District as  elsewhere,  although there are  still  areas
of very  robust  growth in housing,  again  especially in North Carolina.
Offsetting at  least  some  of  the  softening we are  seeing  in  residential
activity,  there  is  a  real  surge in  commercial  real  estate  activity.
Leasing  is  strong  and in  many District  markets vacancy rates  are down
and  there  are  a number of  sizable  new construction projects  under way.
Elsewhere,  activity  in manufacturing, retail,  and the  services  sector
continues  to  expand, according  to  the  reports we  have,  although  again
perhaps  at  a  somewhat more moderate pace  than  a few  months ago.  On
the baseball  front,  we have  bad news and  good news  in  our  District.
The  bad news  is  that  somebody has  estimated that  the  state  of Maryland
will  lose  about  $3 million in business  for  every Orioles  game  that  is
not  played.  The  good news  is  that  the  Richmond  Braves  are  still
playing. And  if  anybody needs  tickets,  let me know  and I'll  see  what  I
can  do!

Nationally,  it  seems  to us  that  the  economy is  still  quite
strong and we don't  think either  the  apparent  softening  in  consumer
spending  in the  second quarter  or  the  recent  slowing  in residential
construction poses  a  significant  threat  to  the  expansion at  this
point,  given what we know now.  Deceleration in housing--I  guess  there
is  some question  now with the  data  this  morning  as  to  how much
deceleration  is  actually going  on,  but  clearly there  is  some  and  that
is  not  unusual  I would argue  for  this  stage of  the  business  cycle  and
probably reflects  the  satisfaction  of  pent-up demand  to  some  degree as
well  as  the  increase  in  mortgage  rates.  And the  slowing  in growth  of
real  consumer  spending, after  all,  follows  three  consecutive  quarters
of very  robust  growth  in consumer outlays;  and  it  seems  clear now, as
Mike  Prell  said,  that at  least  some  of  this  weakness  reflects  supply
constraints,  especially with respect  to  domestic  automobiles.
Moreover,  the  latest  reports  on  consumer  sentiment  suggest  that
consumers  are not  backing off  in any big way.  As  Mike  said, the
continued  strong  gains  in jobs  presumably are  going  to  support  growth
in  income  and spending  in  the  period ahead.

Against  this  background, the  Greenbook  forecast  certainly

seems  reasonable  to  us.  Our  guess  is  that  nominal  GDP may grow

8/16/94

somewhat more rapidly  in  the  second half  of  this  year than  the  4.7
percent  annual  rate  of  increase  that  the  staff  is projecting.  Looking
ahead  to  1995,  the  key number  as  far as  I'm concerned  is  the  staff
forecast  of a 3 percent  inflation rate next year.  As we  all  know that
forecast  is predicated  on  the  assumption that  the  Committee will move
short-term  interest  rates up  on  an order  of magnitude  of perhaps  a
point by  early next  year.  I think the  staff is  right  in assuming  that
some  additional  restraint  of  this  order  is  going  to be necessary to
contain  inflation going  forward, and personally  I think it's  important
to  begin  that process  now.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Economic activity

in  the  Sixth District  is  expanding moderately and we  continue  to  out-
perform  the nation as  a whole.  The contacts  that we have  had since
the  last  meeting indicate  that  their businesses  really are  doing  quite
well and  there  is  very clearly  an attitude  of  optimism both among the
business people and  the  consumers  that we have  talked to.  I think
this optimism is  borne out  and  confirmed by the numbers.  For example,
retail  sales rebounded  in both June  and July and  they are  expected to
remain healthy.  Apparel, which  had been weak for awhile,  has  been
especially strong and again  is  expected to  remain so.  On  the  other
side,  sales  of  durables  are beginning  to  moderate.  We have not heard
of any unexpected  inventory buildup  in  the  retail area.  As  a matter
of  fact,  some retailers are  telling us  that they plan  to  add to  their
inventory stock.  On the manufacturing side,  we did have a tapering
off  over  the  summer, but  this  appears  to  be  seasonal  in nature.  The
contacts  in our  survey have  indicated  some optimism about  orders as
well as  production  six months  from now.  Inventories  here also  appear
to be  in  line with  the desires  of  manufacturers, and several  contacts
plan increases  in  their  stocks  of  materials  over  the next  several
months.  In  the  energy sector we  are  seeing better activity,
particularly in  Louisiana.  The rig count  was up  from 127  to  136  in
the month of  May.  We  did have  some  tapering  off  also  in  single-family
housing, but  this  has  been affected by unusually wet weather.  We  do
think that  there will  be  a continued deceleration  in  this  area.  We
have had some unexpected strength in  multifamily housing  in  the
District.  There has  been a lot  of  in-migration to  the Southeast,  and
rental markets  have  tightened in many areas  and rents  are  rising.  On
the  commercial  side,  absorption  is  reducing  inventories  of  space  and
effective lease  costs  are moving up.  Tourism remains  a strong point
in  the  local  economy.

Since the  last meeting, Mr. Chairman, I've  spoken to  several

groups  of  business people  around the  District  and there  are two  themes
that  seem to  emerge  from those  meetings.  The  first  is  that most  of
them  are  reporting some  input  price pressures and,  for  the  first  time
in  a long time,  I've  heard that  now to  some extent  they are  able  to
pass  those price  increases through.  The  second theme  is  that  they are
experiencing  labor  shortages, not  only  for  skilled people but  for
semi-skilled and unskilled.  In  our District  at least,  it's  across  the
board and  some  firms  are  actually paying  signup bonuses  even for
unskilled people.  I thought  that  only applied  to baseball  and
football players,  but  in  fact  clerks  are  getting them as  well!  As  an
aside,  their  problem with  labor  is  exacerbated by the  fact  that as
many as  50  percent  of  the applicants  fail  the drug  test  that  the  firms

8/16/94

-10-

are  giving.  That  is  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  firms  have notices
up  on  the premises  that  they will  test  for drugs--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  That  suggests  that  the  literacy rate

isn't  very high!

MR. FORRESTAL.  This may be  unique to  our District,  I don't

know;  but  certainly  it's  been reported  almost  universally among  the
people  that  I've  talked  to.  It  hasn't  translated  so  far  into a  lot  of
wage  increases,  but  I'm  sure  that  will  come.  Just  a word on  the
floods:  The damages  from the  floods  in  south Georgia and  a few parts
of  Florida and Alabama appear  to  be  on  the  order  of magnitude of  about
$750  million, that  is  about  $250 million  less  than was  originally
thought.  The  estimate  assumes  rebuilding and  replacing all  damaged
property and  infrastructure  but  it  does  not  include  an allowance  for
lost  business  activity.  Most of  the  losses were  in  the  agricultural
area.  The  flooding, of  course,  was  extensive  and  it  created many
hardships  for  the people  involved, but  the  economic  impacts were  quite
limited because  of  the  sparse populations  in  the  areas  affected.

With respect  to  the national  economy,  I think  that  things  are
moving  along  at  a  fairly reasonable  rate.  Our  forecast  hasn't  changed
very much since  the  last  meeting.  We  continue to  differ with the
Greenbook  on  two  counts.  Except  for  the very near  term, we have
somewhat  stronger  growth  for  the  forecast  horizon than  does  the
Greenbook.  And our  inflation  forecast  in  line with the  GDP  forecast
is  somewhat higher  as  well.  We see  inflation  creeping up by the  end
of  1995  to  the  3-1/2 percent  level.  In general,  as  I just  indicated,
Mr.  Chairman,  I'm really quite pleased with the  outlook.  Of  course,
our  forecast  also  assumes  some  tightening of  policy as  well.  If  we
can  emerge  from  this  current  expansion with a somewhat  lower cyclical
peak  in  the  inflation rate  and we  can successfully avert  a recession,
I'd  be  quite  satisfied.  Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Parry.

MR. PRELL.  Mr.  Chairman, may  I simply improve upon my answer

to  Governor  Blinder?  In  the  latest  data,  there were  upward revisions
to  April  and May payrolls  from what we were aware  of  at  the  time  of
the  June Greenbook, a  total  of  about  100,000.  The  increment  to what
we were  expecting  in June  and July  is  about  150,000.  So  the  total
increment we have had  is  considerably larger than  what  I suggested.
But  the  June-July increment  is  about  150,000.

MR. BLINDER.  Thanks.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Parry.

MR.  PARRY.  Mr.  Chairman,  trends  in  the  Twelfth District

economy are  little  changed since  our  last  meeting.  Employment  has
grown  1 percent during  the past year with strong  gains  in many parts
of  the  region offset by  flat  conditions  in California.  Idaho, Nevada,
and Utah remain  the  three  fastest  growing states  in the  nation  in
terms  of  employment.  Moreover, Arizona  and  the  Pacific Northwest
states  are  reporting year-over-year  employment  gains  ranging from  2 to
4 percent.

8/16/94

-11-

Unfortunately, California's  economy still  shows  few signs  of

growth.  Employment  in the  state has  risen  only  .1 percent on an
annualized basis  since  December, and July's  level was  off  .5 percent
from  a year earlier.  Moreover,  the  change  from a declining economy  in
1993  to  a flat  economy  in 1994  has  followed a pattern that  does  not
suggest  an  imminent rebound.  The  flattening is  due more  to  a
cessation  of  large  employment  losses  in areas  such as  construction,
wholesale  trade,  and local  government  rather  than  to  rising  strength
in other  industries.  In  fact,  there  is  only one  sector,  business
services,  that  has  shown consistent growth.  Meanwhile, defense-
related industries,  banking, and  communications continue  to  experience
substantial  job  losses.

As  I'm  sure  you  know, we  are  at  the  current  time  suffering

from many fires  throughout  the  District.  It's  a  little early to
estimate what  the  impacts  are  likely  to  be.  I don't  think  there will
be major  impacts  in  dollar  terms,  but  we are  just  entering the  fire
season, so  it  is  something to  keep  a watch on.

Turning  to  the  national economy, our  outlook differs  somewhat
from  the Greenbook for  the  latter half  of  this year.  We actually have
a little more of  a slowdown  than was  incorporated  in the  Greenbook  for
the  second half  because  of  the  effects  of  the  tightening moves  so far,
and also as  a result  of a decline  in  the  amount of  inventory
investment.  However  at present  levels  of short-term interest  rates,
we  clearly would see  a strong bounceback  in real  GDP  growth next  year.

Even with  slower growth  in  the near  term,  I have  significant
concerns  about  the  longer-term inflation  outlook.  Although estimates
of  slack are  subject,  as  we all  know,  to  considerable uncertainty, it
seems  likely that most  if  not  all  of  the  unused capacity in  labor and
product  markets  has  been used up.  That  point  certainly was  emphasized
in  the Greenbook.  Given  the present  stance of  policy, we  are  running
a substantial  risk  that  the  future  trend  of  inflation will  be  in  an
upward direction.  Inflation accelerates  in  1995  in  the Blue  Chip
consensus  and  in both the  structural  and vector  auto-regressive  models
used by our  staff.  In  our  structural model,  a significant rise  in  the
funds  rate  in  1996  is  required through  the nominal  income  policy rule
that  is  built  into  our  structural model.  Thank you.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG.  Mr.  Chairman, the  Tenth District  continues  to
grow at  a very healthy pace.  Construction activity remains  strong,
although perhaps  somewhat  slower  than  the boom environment we  saw just
a  few months  ago.  Manufacturing continues  to  improve,  especially  in
durable goods,  and we have  seen  continued employment  growth  there.
Oil  activity appears  to be  strengthening  due  to  the  firming  in prices;
that  is  no  surprise.  The  agricultural  sector will be  okay, as  record
yields  in  a couple  of  the  crops will  be  offsetting  the  lower prices
that  are  expected.  And the  cattle market  has  strengthened as  well.
From what we  see,  our  economy in the  region  should continue  to  be
strong going  forward.

I want  to  share with you some  data and anecdotal  information

that  we  have on  bank activity  in our  District.  We  have  seen  some
increased  interest  in  the  use  of  the  discount window in  the  last
several  weeks.  For  all  District  banks,  loan-to-deposit  ratios have

8/16/94

-12-

increased  from  about  56 percent  in March  to  an  estimate of  about  65
percent  in  June.  At banks  that  inquired about borrowing,  loan-to-
deposit  ratios  have  increased  from  around  60  percent  to  almost  75
percent.  So we are  seeing some  liquidity  interest  there.  This
reflects  loan  growth of  about  14  percent  in our District.  The reason
given  by banks  for  this  growth  is very strong  loan demand across  the
board, not  just  in agriculture.  It's  interesting  that  this  also  is
true  of our  larger banks;  some  of  the  smaller banks  that  have  come  and
asked us  about borrowing have  indicated  that  their upstream banks  have
been  less willing  to  lend to  them because  of  their own liquidity needs
associated with outside  lending, which  is  reflected  in  their  increase
in  loan-to-deposit  ratios  as  well.  This  is  supported  to  some  extent
by  the  fact that  deposit growth  in  our banks,  on which  they rely
heavily, has  grown at  about  half  the  rate  of  that  for  loans.  Also,
both  the  larger and  smaller banks  around  the  District  report  that  they
have  eased  their credit  standards,  that  the  loan demand is  there,  and
that  the banks want  to  make  loans.  We  see  some heavy competition
throughout  the  District  for  loans.  So  the  banking environment  has
changed,  I think rather dramatically, in  the  last  two years.

On the  national  front,  we  like  others,  see GDP growth going
forward above  its potential  if we  leave policy unchanged and we  also
see  the  inflation rate  pushing up well  above  3 percent next  year.  So
basically, we are  in  agreement  with the  staff's  forecast  and see  some
increasing pressures  in  the  future.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President Minehan.

MS.  MINEHAN.  Mr.  Chairman, the  New England economy continues

to  grow.  June employment  was  about 2 percent above  the  year-earlier
level,  and  the  regional  unemployment rate  is  about  the  same  as  the
national  average,  with  rates  in  several  states well  below  the  national
figure.  Looking  at  the  region,  there are  big differences  state  to
state.  Massachusetts  and New Hampshire  are  growing  above national
rates  while  Connecticut  bumps  along not  growing much at  all,  at  least
in  terms  of  employment.  Job  growth has  been concentrated in  the
services  industry, especially business  services.  Construction  and
wholesale/retail  trade  also have been  expanding reasonably  strongly.
Services  jobs  are commonly characterized in highly pejorative  terms,
at  least  in  the  First District.  And this  pattern of  recovery has  left
many consumers  and businesses  skeptical  that  the  recovery  is  for  real.
Even more  sophisticated observers  of  the  regional  economy who
recognize  the  high quality of many services  jobs  find  themselves
frustrated at  their  inability to  determine what  is  driving  the
expansion  of  these services  industries.  In  constrast  to historical
experience, manufacturing employment  in New England has  fallen during
this  recovery.  In  the  last  few months,  however,  the  job decline  seems
to have  ended and  our  informal  conversations  with regional
manufacturers have had  an  increasingly positive  tone.  Firms  are
seeing some  materials  cost pressures  and,  for  the  first  time  in a  long
while,  some companies  are  passing these  price  increases  along.  Retail
sales  are  fairly  strong,  though  the  environment  is  highly promotional
and margins are  flat.  Inventories  are said to  be  lean.  Our  little
contribution to  the  inventory story here  is  that  one  major catalog
dealer  just  ran out  of  the  items  that  everybody wanted this  summer.
This  really puts  them  in quite  an embarrassing position  since  they
sell  themselves  largely on  their ability to  deliver  things  in  a
certain  short period of  time.  The one  area  that  is  showing  signs  of

8/16/94

-13-

slowing  is  housing.  Contacts  report  that  sales  agreements have  fallen
during  June and July  in response  to  higher  interest  rates.  Statistics
on  sales  and  construction still  look  quite good, but  of  course  they
reflect  decisions  that  were made  some months  ago.

On the  subject  of  the  national  economy, based on  the  strength

of  the  employment  data over  the  last  several  weeks, we  think that  the
economy may well  be  stronger  in  the near  term than  the  Greenbook
forecast.  We would  expect  to  see  some  overshooting of  even our
estimate  of  the  NAIRU in  the  short  run  as  a result  of  that,  and we
would expect  also  to see  the GDP numbers  for  the  second quarter  at  4
percent  or better when  they are  finally revised.  That  could mean
stronger  third-quarter  numbers.  Over  the  longer  term, we  have  a
little different view than  the Greenbook  forecast,  particularly since
the  Greenbook  incorporates  a degree  of  tightening that we  are  not
quite  comfortable with.  We are  interested, Mike,  in  whether you  ran
any numbers  on what  a somewhat  slower rate  of  tightening might produce
next year  in  the way of  inflation and GDP  growth.  I am  looking,  for
example,  at  the  DRI  forecasts,  which tend  to  have  less monetary
tightening, somewhat  similar  if  not  lower GDP growth, and  just  about
the  same  inflation numbers built  into  them.

MR. PRELL.  I think DRI  is  perhaps  in  the  lower part  of  the

spectrum right now.

MS.  MINEHAN.  Yes.

MR.  PRELL.  I think they have about  a half  percentage point

increase  in the  funds  rate  in  the second half  of  this  year and nothing
after  that.

MS.  MINEHAN.  Yes,  they actually have  rates  backing  off,  I

think.

MR. PRELL.  Right,  I think they  have  some  modest  easing next

year  and bond yields  come  down a bit  more  than in  our  forecast,  and
yet  they have somewhat  weaker  growth  over  the next  six  quarters.  In
terms  of  what  a more gradual  rate  increase would produce  if  one  used
our quarterly model,  the distinctions,  as  I hinted in  my remarks,
would be modest.

MS.  MINEHAN.  Too  short  of  a period  of  time  perhaps?

MR. PRELL.  Well, we  are  talking  about  rather  small

differences.  A  1 percentage point  change  in  the  funds  rate  done
immediately according  to  our  quarterly model will  only  take  several
tenths  off  GDP growth by the  second half  of  1995.  And  it  only means  a
couple of  tenths or  so  on  the CPI.  So,  if  you  simply select  a more
gradual  rise,  the differences  are  going  to be  even  smaller.  I guess
what  we are  suggesting  is  that,  in  our  judgment,  the  tilt  begins to  be
most  likely in  an upward  direction  in  terms  of  inflation right  now,
that  is,  given  that we  feel  we  are  essentially at  full  employment.

MS.  MINEHAN.  Yes,  and  I think we  would agree with  that.

MR. PRELL.  Faster growth will mean some  additional

tightening  and  the probability at  least  of  an upward  tilt,  but  only
very gradually;  it's  a question of  degree.

8/16/94

-14-

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Okay,  President  Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.  Thank you, Mr.  Chairman.  The Philadelphia

District  economy continues  to  grow modestly, although  still  less  than
the nation  as  a whole.  Retailing, bank  lending, and manufacturing
reflect  this  general  assessment.  Employment  growth  in  fact  has
strengthened some  in  the  District.  The perception, however,  is  still
one  that  jobs  are  hard to  get,  and high profile  layoffs  are a major
contributor  to  this  perception.  There  is  a  fairly widespread feeling
that  the  second half will  be  slower  than  the  first.  There  is  also
some  anxiety about  how much  slower.  There  is  in  addition  some  of  the
skepticism  that  Cathy has picked up  about  the  durability of  the
expansion.  Our  survey of  manufacturing  is  picking up  stronger price
pressures, particularly  in  the  metals  area.  More  generally, however,
wage and price pressures  remain  largely  contained with most  firms
still  emphasizing  cost containment  to  stay competitive.

The  national  economy, while  slowing,  in my judgment  is  still
growing  solidly.  The  growth in  employment plus  strength  in  equipment
spending and a  stronger outlook  for  exports  are  major pluses.
Negatives  or question marks  are  in construction  and inventories.  On
balance, while  slower-paced growth  is  likely, the  risks do  seem to  be
more on  the  up  side  than  the  down side.  Likewise  for  future
inflation,  the risks  also  seem  to  be more  on  the  up  side  than  the  down
side.  The  capacity utilization relationships, I  think, point  toward a
skewed upside  risk  for  inflation,  and also  the  signs  in  the pipeline--
commodity prices,  prices paid, prices  received--and the  attitude  in
some  industries  that  one  can indeed pass  along  some  cost  increases,  I
think, are  blinking  caution at  this point.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President Melzer.

MR. MELZER.  With  respect  to  the  national economy,  I think

the view  that  GDP might  slow  to  a sustainable  pace without  further
timely Fed action has  been resolved in  the  negative.  Employment
growth continues  to  be  strong, retail  sales  held up well  in  the  second
quarter, and  inventories  remain low  relative  to  sales.  At  the  same
time,  there  is  increasing evidence  of  inflation not  only in  the  narrow
areas  that  Ed mentioned, but  I think in  the  broader measures  of wages
and prices  as  well.  For example,  the  implicit  GDP deflator  rose  by
about 2.8  percent  at  an annual  rate  in the  first  half  of  1994  compared
to  1.2  percent  in  the  last  half  of  1993,  which  is  a marked  increase
indeed.  Looking ahead,  for what  it's  worth, the  Greenbook expects  the
CPI  to  rise  at  a  4 percent  rate  in  the  third quarter  and the
employment  cost  index at  a 4-1/2  percent  rate, albeit  there  are  some
special  factors  affecting  the  latter  index.  Such  increases,  should
they materialize, will not  go  unnoticed  in  the  current  environment
where  there  are  increasing concerns  about  price pressures.
Accordingly, as  I have  felt  for  some  time,  the  risks  are  clearly on
the  side  of  rising  inflation.  I would  also note  that  the  recent
increases  in bank credit  are  striking, with business  and  consumer
loans  up  at  annual  rates  in July of  17  and 23  percent  respectively,
and  that  is  a trend  that  has  been building  for  some  time.  Growth  of
the  broad aggregates has  picked up as  well,  suggesting money and
credit  conditions  that  are  quite consistent with  rising  demand  and
inflation.

8/16/94

-15-

With respect  to  the  District,  activity continues  to  expand at

a solid pace,  albeit more  slowly than nationally  in  contrast to
earlier in  the  expansion when we were  outpacing  the nation.  A
significant  sector evidencing weakness  recently has been
transportation equipment.  However,  following their annual  two-week
shutdowns during July, the District's major auto plants have resumed
production at  or above  June levels.  While production  is  slated to
slow again later  in  the year,  this  is  attributed to  model  changeovers
or plant  refurbishings  and modernizations.  Recent declines  in  sales,
according  to  industry  sources,  result  from exceedingly low  inventories
in  certain models,  not  from  slowing  demand.  It  seems  to me  that  the
pricing behavior of  auto companies  confirms  this view.  Housing
activity  remains  at  relatively high  levels  in  the District,  with many
areas  reporting  shortages  of housing  for  sale  and rising prices.
Commercial  real  estate activity continues  to  improve.  In Memphis,  for
example,  the  office vacancy rate  is  at a 6-year  low, and  industrial
construction is  headed toward a 10-year peak.  Crops are generally  in
good condition  throughout  the  District, with  record or near-record
cotton and rice  crops  in some  District  states.  Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER.  The Eleventh District  economy is  essentially

unchanged from my last  few reports.  The tone  in  our directors'
meetings  is  essentially unchanged.  The  tone of  our Beigebook
respondents  is  slightly stronger  this  time  than  it  has been recently.
Price pressures  in  the District  seem to be concentrated in
construction-related materials,  paper and packaging products,  and very
little price  pressure  is  noticeable  in retail  stores.

On important national  issues,  our  economists  tell me  that we

are at  full  employment,  that  the  inventory buildup  is  largely
voluntary, that  the slow growth in  the monetary aggregates  that we
have been having is  largely benign,  and that  the  risk  in  the  forecast
is  on the  upside rather  than the  down  side both  for  real growth  and
for  inflation.  On  the weakness  in  retail  sales  that we have  had in
the  past  few months,  I might  mention that one  national  retailer based
in  Dallas reports  that  in  the  last  few weeks, particularly in  the pre-
school  season, their  sales  have been excellent;  they have been  above
expectations.  They also  report  that price  increases  are  hard to  come
by.  I give you an  early warning, at  a couple of  our board meetings,
our  banker directors, who all  tend to  be  representatives  of  smaller
banks  in  our  District--[Laughter].  Well,  it's  a long story, and
hopefully  the  story  is  not  repeating, but what  they are  reporting is
that competition for  loans  is  getting very aggressive  and the  large
banks  are  so  aggressive on pricing and credit  standards,  that  they
wonder  if  they aren't making  some  loans  that  should not be made.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Are they  just wondering  or do  they know

for  sure?

SPEAKER(?).  Bet  on  it.

MS. MINEHAN.  We have had  the  same  reports  in  the First

District.  It  seems  odd that  bankers  should be  telling  the media  that
they are making  loans  that  they shouldn't be making.

8/16/94

-16-

MR. BOEHNE.  But  it's  a bank down the  street;  they are not

doing  it;  it's  a bank down the  street.

MS. MINEHAN.  No,  they even are  saying  that  they are  leaning

over backwards  because of  the  competition.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Listen,  any banker who doesn't  make  some
loans  he  should not have made  is  not doing  his  job.  The  only trick  is
to  figure  out  which of  those  that he  has made  are  in  that  category.

MR. LAWARE.  Present  company excepted please!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Doubtless.

MS.  PHILLIPS.  Diversify.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President Stern.

MR. STERN.  The Ninth District  economy continues  to  be
robust.  The  strength remains  broadly based whether you  look at
manufacturing, construction,  natural  resources,  or  to get  the demand
side,  consumer  spending and  so  forth.  Both the  objective measures  of
activity  and the  anecdotal  evidence,  I think,  are  consistent with the
kind of  performance we  saw in  the national  economy  in  the  first half
and  suggest  to  me  that we will  see  pretty good  strength  continuing  in
the  second half  of  this  year as  well.  Jobs  are plentiful  in many,
many areas  both geographically and across  different  industries  and
skills.  I'm  struck by--business people  are usually anxious  to  share
their problems when  they  come across  a Federal Reserve  official,  but
they haven't had  a  lot of  problems  to  share  apparently.  There  are  two
exceptions  to  this  generally positive picture.  One  is  that  some  of
the wheat producing  areas have  a problem with too  much moisture  and
that may affect  things there  and may back up  into  the  condition  of
some of  their  lenders  as  well.  And home  sales  have  slowed a bit,
particularly in  the  Twin Cities,  but  that  has  to  be put  in  the context
of  having come  off  two very  strong years  of home  sales  in  the
metropolitan area.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Do you expect  problems  in  the  spring

wheat  crop  to  be  serious?

MR. STERN.  In parts  of North  Dakota and Minnesota where  they

have  had a fair  amount of  moisture, yes.  It's  going  to  affect  both
yield and quality.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Does  that  spill  over into  Saskatchewan,

do  you know?

MR. STERN.  I don't  know.  With  regard  to  the  national

economy, the  incoming data  haven't  affected my view of  things  from  the
last  meeting.  I think we  do have continued strong  growth  in demand.
In  the  second half,  I see  the  economy probably  growing a bit  slower
than  it  did  in  the  first  half,  but  I'm not  expecting  a  lot  of  slowing
based on what  I can  see  going on  here.  As  I hinted earlier,  I'm
uncertain what  this  means  for  inflation because the  relationships
between capacity and price  or wage pressures  don't  seem  to  me to  be as
robust  as  they were in  the  early  1980s.  In  those  circumstances,  I
tend  to  fall  back on  a few  things that  I think  I do  know having  to  do

8/16/94

-17-

with what we  might  expect  for  labor  force  growth and  for  hours worked
per employee.  When  I go  through  that  kind of arithmetic  in my head,  I
come  to  the  conclusion that we will  have  to  be  lucky  to avoid a
building  of  inflationary pressures  here  if  I'm  right  about  the
strength of  demand.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I noticed in  the

Greenbook projection a  substantial  decline  in the  rate  of  growth  in
domestic  final  sales relat ve  to  GDP, and  I think  that  will  come  true.
I have distributed a  table  that  I've  based on  something I've been
playing with  for a number years  since  I didn't  know what was
happening:  It  involves  distinguishing NIPA personal  income  from  the
money that  households  actually have  to spend.  It's  based on  a  fairly
accurate  theory that  you can avoid  taxes  nowadays, but  to  do  so  you
can't  spend the money.  [Laughter]  To  show  the  adjustment--I'm going
down the  chart,  line  by line--wages basically pass  through to  cash
flow.  Interest  does,  if  you  receive  it,  but most household  interest-
bearing assets are  actually held  in  such  things  as  401Ks  and never
accrue  in a cash  form directly  to  the  household.  And so  the
adjustment  here  is  that  I  take  both  taxable  and  tax-exempt  interest,
which obviously does  flow  through  to  the household, as  a share  of
total NIPA interest.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  What  are  you doing with imputed

interest?

MR. LINDSEY.  With imputed  interest?  Imputed  interest is  not

cash  flow.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  No,  I understand that,  but  it's  in  the

NIPA.

MR.  LINDSEY.  But  it  is  in  the NIPA,  that  is  correct--in

proprietary income.  The  same  thing would be  true  for dividends.  It's
a  little challenging because  a  lot  of  what NIPA considers  to  be
proprietary income  actually may take  the  form of  business-type
consumption.  And so  what  I do  again  is  to  take  the  share  that  the
taxpayers actually  report as  the  share  of  total  NIPA-based proprietary
income.  With transfers,  I'd  like  to  thank  the  Research Division here.
I learned a  lot  about medical  transfer payments  which  turn out  to  be a
substantial  portion of  transfers.  I'm  taking  those out  because  if
Medicare reimburses your doctor  or  if  your  insurance  company
reimburses your  doctor,  you really  don't  see  the  check, so  that  is
taken out  of  transfers.  The  same  thing  is  true with other  labor
income which  is  paid  into  pension plans  or health plans.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  There  are  also directors'  fees  in  that

line  which should be  in  the  cash  flow.

MR. LINDSEY.  It probably would feed  through  to  cash flow and

I'm willing  to  stipulate  an  adjustment  several  points  to  the  right  of
the  decimal point  for  that.

1. A  copy of  the  table  discussed by Mr.  Lindsey  is  appended  to  this

transcript.

8/16/94

-18-

MR. KELLEY.  It  disappears  in  the rounding.

MR. LINDSEY.  Especially  for Federal  Reserve  directors, which

may not  even show up  as  an  asterisk!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Barely.

MR. LINDSEY.  Rent  and  farm  income--most  of  this  number  is

actually  income on  owner-occupied houses.  I always  reassure  Susan
that we have  a higher  income  than  we thought  because we  live  rent  free
in  the  house,  and  she  just  laughs  at  me because we  can't  spend  the
money  and indeed  I believe her  when  it  comes  to  assessing  our
household  cash  flow.  The  other point  on  this  is  farm  income.  Farmers
generally have no  income.  It's  amazing that  the  industry  still  exists
given how much they  report  on  their  tax returns.  The  government would
regularly make money  in a budgetary sense by making  the  farm sector
tax  exempt.  But  the  easiest  thing to  do  for  this  purpose, as  far  as
I'm  concerned, is  just  to  zero  it  out.  I take  out  social  insurance
contributions  and personal  taxes,  and what's  left  is  the  difference
between disposable personal  income,  on  a NIPA basis,  and disposable
personal  cash flow.  You'll  note  that  one  is  substantially below the
other.  I  then compared that  to personal  consumption  expenditures.
And, indeed, looking  at  NIPA we might  take  a rather  sanguine view of
the household position because  in  fact  during  the  last year, which was
a very strong year  for household employment,  income actually grew
faster  than  expenditures.  But  if  you compare  it  to  cash flow,  and
here  I think it's  important  to  take out  the  third-party medical
payments  that pay for part  of medical personal consumption
expenditures,  the number  to  compare would be  205.2  in  spending versus
155.1  in  cash  flow.  And it  suggests  that  in  fact  the  increase  in
household spending was much more  than  the  increase  in  the  actual  cash
that  they are  seeing.

Now, households  could do  this  for a  long period  of  time.

Where  I see  this  as  of  concern  is  that  it  can't  go  on  forever.  The
difference between cash  flow and  income,  in fact,  I  think  is
consistent with  the  double-digit rates of  growth we have been seeing
in installment  credit.  The question  is  why are households  doing this
to themselves.  I think  the Michigan survey had good reasons  for  it.
We created for  other good reasons  a great  buying opportunity in the
last  year  for houses  and cars.  The  survey  asked people why,  for
example,  now is  a good time  to  buy cars.  Well,  back in July of  1993,
38  percent  said it  was because prices  are  low, and  that percentage  has
fallen  to 28  percent, meaning prices  are  not  seen as  good  today as
they were a year ago.  On  the  other hand, a year ago  7 percent  of
respondents  said now is  the  time  to  beat  price  increases.  That has
doubled  to  14  percent  currently.  Another reason  to  buy now was  the
expectation  that  interest  rates would go up,  and that  number has
similarly increased.  So  households  a year  ago  or  in  the  last  year
thought now is  a good  time  to buy cars  because prices  were  low and
were going  to  go up,  and  interest  rates  were  low and were  going  to  go
up.  I don't  consider  that  a good indicator  for  the  future.  The  same
thing was  true with houses,  but  even  stronger.  The argument  that
prices  are  low  for houses  has  fallen  from  33  percent  to  19  percent  in
a year.  The  expectation, on  the  other hand, that  now is  a good time
to  borrow  in advance  of  rising  interest  rates has  risen  from 6 percent
a year ago  to  21  percent  currently.  For houses  as  well,  consumers
have been  spending money they don't have  because we have had a bargain

8/16/94

-19-

basement  sale  for  the  last  year.  That  is  not  going  to continue no
matter what we do  today.  Similarly,  I think businesses  have been
having a good time  in  the  last  year.  If  you  look at  the  difference
between cash  flow  for businesses  and plant  and equipment  expenditures,
it's  been running with cash  flows  substantially above plant  and
equipment  expenditures  since  about  1992.  At  the  same  time,  there have
been record-setting net  increases  in nonfinancial  equities and bonds
outstanding.

All  that  put  together suggests  that  there  are  a  lot  of

expectations  of  inflation  in the  household sector;  there  is  a
substantial accumulation  of  cash, which presumably can  feed inflation
in the  business  sector.  The question  is whether  or not  it  will  come
to pass.  So  I  think we are  in a very bad dilemma.  I think nominal
GDP  is  growing  too  fast;  I think the  mix is  going to  worsen;  I think
the  consumer is  going to  spend less;  and we  are  going to  have  less
real  growth.  But  at  the  same  time,  I believe we  are  going  to  see
accelerating inflation and  that  means  the  good  times are  over and we
have to  stop  celebrating  and we have  to  make a  tough decision.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  First Vice  President  Conrad.

MR. CONRAD.  Thank you.  The pace  of  business  expansion  in

the  Seventh District,  I think,  is  a bit more  subdued than  earlier  this
year,  but  we  feel  that  considerable momentum remains  when  the  supply
shortage  in  the auto  sector  is  taken into  account.  In  looking at  the
auto picture,  the July seasonally adjusted annual  rate  of  sales  was
about  13.7  million units.  That was  down from May and June,  but  it was
considerably  above June  1993--by about  7 percent.  That  continued to
reflect  the  strength  in  light  truck sales  and also,  I think, benefited
from a boost  in  imports.  We  agree with  the  assessment  that  the weak
sales  are  largely due  to  supply shortages  and not  to  a decline  in
overall  demand.  When we  talk to  the  auto  companies,  their build plans
will  likely only stabilize  the  supply  situation.  Third-quarter
production, which was planned  at  2.7 million units,  actually  is
beginning  to  seem a little  out  of  reach based on what  we see  in  terms
of  start-up  delays.  We  think  that,  reasonably, production could be
about  50  to  100  thousand units  below that  estimate.  If  sales  do
approach  the  15  million unit  annual  rate,  which analysts are
forecasting,  inventories will  probably remain below  the  55  days  that
exists now and could be  more  in  line  with a 40-day supply  for  some  of
the more popular models.  On  the price  front  as  far as  autos  are
concerned, the  announced price  increases  from  the  Big Three  are  in  the
1-1/2  to  3 percent  range;  that  is  about  $250  to  $500  per vehicle.  But
if  you look at  a weighted-average price  with respect  to  the  more
popular models,  3 percent seems  to  be  at  the  low  end  of  the  range  and
it may be  a  3 to  4 percent  range.  If  you  look at  that  in  combination
with the  reduction in  incentives, which  have been  reduced by as  much
as  40  percent, price pressures  have most  assuredly increased in  the
motor vehicles  area.

Not  all  segments  appear to  be  as  strong as  autos.  Reports

from District retailers  suggest  that  little has  changed  from the
second quarter when  growth slowed  somewhat.  In  talking  to  our  largest
retailer,  they looked at  second-quarter  sales  as  a small  setback, but
they  expect what  they  saw  as  a boring,  slow, middle-of-the-road upward
trend  to  continue.  We  don't  sense  any concern about  retail
inventories  at  this  point  in  time,  but  as  has  been mentioned by

8/16/94

-20-

others,  intense  competition  continues  to  hold down price  increases  in
this  sector.  On the  manufacturing front,  steel  shipments have  slowed
a little,  and that mostly seems  to be  coming  out  of  some  of  the plants
in  Michigan.  In  Chicago and northern  Indiana production and shipments
are  holding up well.  Shipments  of  major home  appliances, which have
been  strong, are  expected to  post  only a modest year-over-year gain
for  the  second half,  and  that would represent a small  decline  from
first-half  shipments  on  a seasonally adjusted basis.  Heavy truck
production,  after operating  flat  out  for  the  last  two years,  is
expected to  decline  by a modest  amount  in  the  third and  fourth
quarters.  There  are  some  slots  or  openings  for  truck production that
could be  accommodated in  that  quarter,  although  overall  utilization of
the  stock continues  to be high  and rates paid by shippers  continue  to
increase.  The housing  sector  is pretty much as  others have  reported.
We have  seen a small  uptick  in multifamily construction.  In  the  labor
markets,  unemployment rates  around  the  District  continued to  trend
downward during the  second quarter  and remain below the  national
average.  A major  temporary help firm  reported paying  higher wages  to
attract  better qualified workers.  Another  firm suggested the  same
result,  but also  indicated  that, because  of  competition,  they were
unable to  pass on  higher wages  to  their  customers.  On  the ag  side,
District  crop  estimates  for  corn  and soybeans confirm  the  prospects
for  a large harvest  this  fall.  Corn yields  are  likely to  be  the
second highest  ever  and  soybeans will probably set  a new record.  This
prospect has weighed heavily on  corn and soybean prices.

As  for  the  national  outlook,  our GDP  forecast  is  a bit

stronger  than  the  Board staff  has suggested.  Employment  remains
strong.  There  appears  to  be  little  slack, and we view the risk  as
tilted to  the up  side as  far  as  the  national  economic  picture  is
concerned.  Thank you.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Jordan.

MR. JORDAN.  We contacted some  of  the  retail  operations

said they had only a very small

headquartered or  having  significant operations  in  the Fourth  District
and asked  them about  inventory  situations.  Basically,  the  pattern was
that  everything  is  okay. 
rise  in  their national  operation  inventories  and  it  was  all
intentional;  they  felt  they  entered the  third quarter on plan.
had  a very  large  increase because  they  said they were operating  too
far below desired  inventories,  and  they now feel  that  they are  only
slightly below.  They entered  the  second  quarter 11  percent below
where  they wanted  to be,  and after  a very  large  buildup and good
sales,  their  inventories  are  only slightly below where  they want them
to  be. 
but  they didn't  get  as  much  as  they wanted because  sales  growth turned
out  to be  stronger  than  they had expected--in the  double-digit range.

said that  they wanted to have  a big  inventory buildup,

had a more modest  increase  in  inventories,  about  4 percent,

and  feel  that  they are  comfortable.  So,  we got  no  negative  stories
from the  retail  side on  inventories.  The  steel  sector  is  quite
strong.  They put  through a 5 percent price  increase at  the  beginning
of  July  and it  has  held.  They are  now looking  for a  further  3 percent
increase  in the  first  quarter.  They  are  operating basically with a
90-day delivery  schedule  and running at  capacity.  Nonresidential
construction  is  picking up  and that  is  helping  to push up  steel  demand
as  well.  Companies  are  saying that  those construction managers  that
are  able  to  compete  in  the  dollar-based foreign market,  mainly Latin

8/16/94

-21-

America and Asia, are  getting  significant increases  in  construction
contract  awards,  and that  is  helping  exports  also,  especially capital
goods.  Overall,  capital  goods  and machine  tools  are quite good, both
domestically and  exports.  Residential  construction is  characterized
as  having  leveled off  in most of  the  District, but  at  good levels  of
activity.

The bankers  talk  about big  increases  in C&I  loans--double-

digit  increases.  Some  of  that  is  inventory  financing;  some of  it  is
business  expansion;  but  they also  report  that  consumer  and mortgage
lending has dropped  sharply.  Smaller  banking companies increasingly
talk about  being  loaned out, and  the bigger banks  are happy to  hear
the  small banks  say that.  As  Bob Forrestal reported  for  the
Southeast, we had an  advisory council meeting a couple weeks ago
involving  a variety of  companies  from all  over  the  District  and  the
same  kind of  stories  was  coming from all  of  them about  the difficulty
of  hiring unskilled or  semi-skilled workers.  Companies  that  provide
temporary workers  said  they have  a lot of  available positions  that
nobody applies  for.  On  the  other hand, upper-end positions--one
company  said  that  they were  looking  for  a new chief  financial officer,
and  they got  300  applicants.  They also were  looking for  truck drivers
and warehouse workers  and got virtually no  applicants;  maybe  the
financial  types  ought  to  drive trucks.  High-tech  employment continues
to  be reported up, offset by healthcare  employment which continues  to
decline  in  the major metropolitan areas.

Regarding  the Greenbook  and the Blue  Chip  forecast,  the  Blue
Chip  is  higher  for the  next year, as  it  typically  is,  for nominal  GDP,
real  GDP,  inflation, and  interest rates.  All  I can say  is  that  I hope
they are wrong on  some parts  of  their  forecasts and  I hope  the
Greenbook  is  wrong.  I am still  troubled by  the  idea that  increased
employment  or  increased output causes  inflation.  I think  if you went
back a year  ago  and took most of  the  forecasts,  whether it  is  the
Greenbook  or  the Blue  Chip  or the Wall  Street Journal  forecast,  and  if
they had  forecast  the  job growth and output  growth that we  have  had,
they would have  said we were going  to have  a lot  more  inflationary
pressure than we  have  seen.  This  idea  that we  need to  see a slowdown
in  the  growth of  output  and jobs  in  order to  avoid price increases--I
am very skeptical of  that.

When we look at  the  relationship between the narrower
monetary aggregates and  the  opportunity costs--the Board staff
occasionally gives us  a chart  on this  using M1  and we can  do  the same
thing with monetary base measures  and so  on--a year ago we were  in  a
situation where  the historical  relationship was holding up very well.
Looking ahead, we had four possibilities:  the  historical relationship
that  simply stopped  functioning;  a 25  percent drop  in  intermediate-
and long-term  interest  rates--that didn't happen;  the other  two
possibilities  were a sharp  acceleration  in nominal  GDP growth or  a
sharp  drop  in narrow money growth.  We had actually a combination of
those.  The historical  relation  today still  holds;  there  is  simply
nothing that  has  broken down.  Now we  have a very sharp deceleration
in reserve growth,  the monetary base, and M1,  and with the  kind  of
interest  rate increases  we  already have  had  let  alone  any further
increases,  that  leaves me with a feeling  that we  may be closer  to  our
idea  of  neutral  than some  of  the  other  comments  that  I'm hearing would
imply.  I think  that  the  question of  whether we have moved early  and
substantially isn't  as  easy  to  answer as  one might  think.  I happen  to

8/16/94

-22-

think  that  the National  Bureau's  timing of  July, 1990  as  the  cyclical
peak was  simply wrong, and  that without  the  Gulf War, we might not
even have had what  qualifies  in  the usual  sense as  a contraction  or
recession.  Much of  the  last  three years,  four years  now, has  been a
period of,  first,  the Gulf  War  and then  this restructuring phenomenon.
Then  coming off  a level  of  3 percent  federal  funds with  the  kind of
inflation  that we are  experiencing,  a 125  basis point  increase  is
substantial  in what  in a different way  of  thinking  is  an early phase
of  the  cycle.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor  Phillips.

MS.  PHILLIPS.  With  respect to  the real  economy,  I may be  in
a position  similar  to  Jerry Jordan's.  It  does  seem to  me  that we are
moving into  cycle maturity.  In many ways,  the  economy's  performance
is  about as  good as  it  gets;  the  economy seems  to  be hitting on all
fours.  The  growth in  the  last  four quarters  has been  above potential.
We have had upward revisions  for  the  last  two  quarters,  and this  is
despite  an earthquake,  blizzards, and now  floods  and fire.  So we have
had plenty of natural  disasters.  We are  at  low unemployment, perhaps
at  the NAIRU  if  it  really exists.  If  it  exists, we are  there.  With
respect  to  inflation, the  recent  experience  clearly has been  good.  If
growth is  close to  potential,  then it's  feasible  for  us  to  stay within
a 3 percent  CPI.

I thought  I might  talk a little  about  the  financial markets;

they haven't  been mentioned quite as  much  today.  The markets have
been buffeted  significantly this  year.  The  stock market,  I'd have  to
say at  this  point,  is  showing a great deal  of  resilience.  We  clearly
are off  the  January highs,  but we  are not  in  the  state of  fragility
that we  experienced earlier  in  the year.  There  has been significant
portfolio  adjustment,  so  I think that people  are  lined up on  both
sides  of  the  market now.  We  are not seeing  everybody lined up on  one
side of  the market, which I think was  the  situation  at  the beginning
of  the year.  The bond market has withstood considerable volatility,
and  I think one of  the  significant things  there  is  that we  haven't had
any major  accidents.  I think  that a number  of  the players  have
learned how to  operate  in some  of  these  changed environments.
Currency markets  also  have withstood significant volatility, although
I'm not  sure  that  all  the  players have  learned as  much as  there might
be  to  learn  in  the  currency area.  Banks  are aggressively  financing
the  expansion.

There  are  some  signs  that  the  expansion could  continue  for

quite  a while.  In  spite  of  the  recent runups  in  inventories, we are
still hearing  that businesses went  into  this  last  quarter in  a planned
position, and many are talking about  adding to  inventories.  We are
seeing  continued strength in business  investment.  The  order books  are
showing considerable  depth.  We  are  finally getting enough  confidence
in  the business  sector  to  see  significant  additions  to payroll.  Even
on  the  construction side,  although we  are seeing  some  slowdown  in
housing, nonresidential is  taking up some  of  the  slack.  Earnings are
holding up  significantly and  that,  of  course,  is  helping  to  keep  the
stock market  fairly  resilient.  We may  even start  to  see  exports
contribute a little more  to  GDP growth.  On the  household side,  I do
agree  that  expenditures are  likely to  level  off  somewhat.  Even so,  we
are  seeing  credit use  up, and with employment  up,  that  is  likely to
keep  consumption  levels respectable  or  at  least  close to potential.

8/16/94

-23-

It  seems  to  me that  the  risks  at  this  point  are  on  the up  side.  We
could be  understating the  strength  in  the  economy.  I agree  that  there
are  still  some  downside risks  and  they certainly  exist  in  some parts
of  the  country, but  they appear  to  be  outweighted by the upside  risks.

The pundits,  kibitzers,  and Fed watchers  seem to  suggest  that

the  Fed really doesn't  need to  worry about  inflation because  it's
mild--3  percent--and it's  not  increasing, although many of  the
forecasters  are now at  least  starting  to  show some  increase beyond
1994.  But  all  that  means  is  that  the  Fed  is  either  at  the  curve  or
maybe ahead  of  the  curve.  There  are,  I think,  some worrisome  signs  on
the  inflation  front.  We have  heard a  lot  of  stories  around the  table
today  about businesses now being able  to  pass  on price  increases.  We
have seen  strong  increases  in the producer price  index for
intermediate materials  for  the  last  four  quarters.  The  core  CPI  for
the  second quarter actually  edged up  to  3.1  percent,  although the
overall  CPI  has  been  flat  thus  far  in 1994.  So  at  best, we  are
stalled out  on  inflation and we  are  starting to  see  oil  price
increases work their  way into  the  system.  I continue  to  suggest  that
a  3 percent  level  of  inflation, even  if  you make  the  adjustments for
the  errors  in CPI  measurement,  still  does  constitute a  form of  tax  and
something that we  should continue  to  be  concerned  about.  I think  that
one  of  the  reasons  that  we have been  able  to  see  inflation stall  out
at  this point  is  productivity increases.  This has been  one  of  the
major  factors  that  has  kept wage  increases  from  infecting the CPI,  but
that  depends  on  a continuation of  this  supposed new trajectory for
productivity increases  that  we have seen  in  the  1990s.  So,  if  the
productivity increases  are  not  continued,  that  will be  another
pressure  that we will  start  to  see  on  inflation.  In  sum, I think that
the  economy is  doing quite well.  We have a  chance  for  this  to  be a
continued expansion but  it  is  putting pressure  on  inflation.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor Blinder.

MR. BLINDER.  I'd  like  to  pick two  nits with  the Greenbook.

One  is  a  small  nit,  one  is  big  as  nits go,  I guess.  [Laughter]
Still,  I think  it  is  a nit  in  the  sense  that  the basic  outlook of  the
Greenbook, subject  to  a qualification  I'll  come  to,  seems  about  right.
The  first,  which really is  a nit, has  to  do with  inventories,
especially retail  inventories.  I think  there  is  a hazard--although
I'm  somewhat  reassured by some  of  the  comments  I heard  around the
table,  especially  from Cleveland--that  the  retail part of  this
inventory buildup  is potentially dangerous.  Perhaps  I overstated;
this  is  a cause  for  concern not  for  panic.  I don't  think  it's  going
to  snap  back up  in  any huge way, but  let  me  just  read you  two  phrases
that  capture  what  I mean.  This  one  is  from  the Greenbook, page  4 and
it  says  "there is  no  evidence  of  an  inventory overhang  at  this  time."
This  one  is  from  the  DRI  report  that  came out  about  two  days  ago  and
it  says:  "the  sharp  inventory accumulation of  all  goods  in  the second
quarter creates  an  inventory overhang."  It's  not  so  much an
illustration  that one  organization knows a  lot  more  than  the  other,
although  I guess  if  I had  to put  all  my chips  on  one  table,  I'd bet
with Mike  Prell  over  Roger Brinner.  It  is  meant  to  illustrate  that
reasonable  people can  look at  these  data and have different  views.  If
you decompose  the  inventory buildup  over the  last  three  months,  March
to  June,  60  percent  or  so  is  at  the  retail  level  on  the Board's
adjusted  current  cost  basis,  which happens  to  be  the  way the handout
reached me  two  days  ago;  I could have  computed  this  another way  as

8/16/94

-24-

well.  The number was  $42  billion  at  an annual  rate  compared to  an
average  in  the  three previous  quarters  of  $14  billion, and  the  $42
billion is  the biggest  number  in a  long  time.  When I see  a number
that  big on  quite weak sales  growth--negative  overall  on  retail  sales
over  that period and 0.3  percent on  average per month  if  you take  out
autos,  which  are  a special  case--and with the  inventory/sales  ratios
creeping  up not  down,  I'm  a little  less  sanguine  than  the  Greenbook
about  the  amount  of  forward momentum  in  the very near  term.  Now, as  I
said,  it's  not  a very big  deal.  I'm not  talking  about a  qualitative
change  in  outlook, only a quantitative change, but  it  is  potentially
in  the  negative direction.

My much bigger nit  to  pick came  in  the  second paragraph of

the  first page  of  the Greenbook where  it  says  "labor and capital
resources  currently appear  to  be quite  fully employed."  I would have
preferred to  say  "not quite  fully employed, though  close,"  I picked
the  words  carefully,  "not quite  fully employed, surely  close."  We are
unfortunately at  one  of  those points  in  time  where even though we  know
we don't  know these  things with precision and cannot  fine-tune  the
economy, we  have to  make a decision  on  that  because we are very  close
to  capacity;  there  is  very little  doubt about  that.  It  matters,  in
this  context,  whether you  are  close on  the  down side  or  close  on  the
up  side,  even  though it  is  hard to  tell  the  difference.  The view in
the  Greenbook--"quite  fully employed"--colors  a lot  of  what  comes
next.  It  is  reflected  in particular in  the NAIRU estimate, which  in
the  Greenbook  forecast  is  implicitly, on  the  new measure,  6.3  or  6.2
percent,  something like  that.  You  could subtract  .2 percent  for  the
change  in measurement, which is  the  Board staff's  current  estimate of
this  very elusive number  and a number  that  keeps  on  shrinking.  You
will  remember  the BLS  thought  it  would be  .6 percent back in January.
I think reasonable people  couldn't  rule  out  zero  at  this point, but  .2
percent  seems  a reasonable  estimate right now based  on what we  know.
If  you  take  that  .2 percent off,  to  convert  to  the  old basis,  which is
not  only the way  I think but  the  way the  econometric  evidence  speaks,
that  translates  to  an  old basis NAIRU of  6.1  or  6.0  percent  implicit
in the  Greenbook  forecast.  To  me,  that  is  at  the  high  end of  the
reasonable  range.  I don't want  to  say  it  is  an unreasonable  estimate;
it  is  a reasonable estimate  but  definitely at  the high  end.  My
reading  of  the  evidence  is  that  a better estimate  of  the  NAIRU on  the
old basis  would be  something closer  to  5.6,  5.7,  5.8  percent.  I
repeat  again,  these  kinds  of discrepancies  only matter when you are
really  close  to  the  NAIRU.  A  year and a half  ago,  it  didn't much
matter which  of  those  numbers  you  thought was  more accurate.  I'd just
like  to  say I don't  think 6.3  percent unemployment  should be  the
FOMC's  aspiration  level.  I have a  strong  feeling  that we  ought  to  be
shooting  for  a lower  unemployment rate  than  that.  We had a  lower
unemployment  rate  than  that  for  the  last  three  months,  not
incidentally.  As  I said, this  colors what  is  in  the  Greenbook
because, commensurately with  that,  the  average  growth  rate over  the
next  five  quarters,  that  is  the  last  quarter of  this  year and all  of
1995,  is  between 2.1  and  2.2  percent  in  the  Greenbook forecast--which,
again,  I would have  thought  is  slower  than we would really like  to
produce.  It  is  not  slow if  you  think we actually have  had a small
overshoot and we  need  to  nudge  the  economy back down,  because  2.1  or
2.2  percent  is  a nice  small  amount  lower  than,  say,  2-1/2  percent
which would nudge  the  economy down a  little.  My  feeling  is  that  that
is  not  quite  the  appropriate policy given where  I think  the  NAIRU is.

8/16/94

-25-

However, while  in  some  sense this  is  a  "fundamental"  difference,  I
characterized  it  as  a big  nit.

The Greenbook  forecast  is  not  at  all  unreasonable given  the

staff  assumptions  about monetary policy  from here  to  January, that  is,
another  100  basis  points  on the  funds  rate  built  into  the  forecast.  I
looked  at what  the  econometric models,  the  Board's  and others,  say
about what  100  basis points  are  good  for,  given  the normal  historic
reaction of  long  rates  to  short rates.  Now, as  I think Mike
mentioned, with the  first  125  basis points we had much more  than  the
normal  reaction of  long  rates to  short  rates.  I  think all  of us  hope,
and at  least  most of  us believe,  that  we  have a good chance  in the
next  ratcheting up  of  short  rates  to  get  less  than the  normal
reaction.  But  just  taking the  normal  historical reaction,  100 basis
points  of  further  tightening  on  fed  funds would, after about  a year,
knock  .7 percent  off  of  GDP, and after  two  years about  1-1/3  percent.
So  on growth rates,  something  in  the  range of  .6 to  .7 per year  for
the  next  two  years would be  taken  out  by that  amount  of  tightening.
If  you  add that  back in  to  2.1,  you're playing with a number  that
looks  like  2.7  or 2.8  percent  on current  policy, and  that  seems  quite
reasonable.  So,  I think the  staff  forecast  is  consistent  with the
policy  that  is  built  in,  which  I've  already indicated I think produces
growth that  is  too  slow.  I was going  to  say too  slow  for my  taste,
but  I should  say too  slow  for  the  economy's best  interests.  I think--
and  I'm  taking  this more  from  the Greenbook of  six weeks  ago,  where  if
I remember  it was  quite  explicit while  it  was  more implicit  in  this
Greenbook--that  this  comes  from a very literal,  for my taste  too
literal,  interpretation of  not  wanting  to  let  inflation accelerate.
We  don't want  to  let  inflation  accelerate.  That  doesn't  necessarily
mean we have  to  stand against  a  10  or  20  basis point  increase  in
inflation, especially given the  unwinding of  a variety of  factors
including the  speed effect  that Mike mentioned.  If  you  look  at  the
core  CPI numbers  in  this  Greenbook, it  is  3.1  percent  in  1993--this  is
fourth-to-fourth--3.1  percent  in  1994,  and 3.1 percent  in  1995.  It  is
a quite  literal holding  of  the  line  exactly where we  are,  and the
staff  estimate  is  that  it  would take about  100  basis points  more on
the  fed  funds  rate to  do  that.  I don't  think we  have  to  interpret
this  quite as  literally as  all  that,  and  this  is  a reason  that  I think
we should be  aspiring  to  a bit  higher  growth  than  is  in  the Greenbook.
Thank you, Mr.  Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor  Kelley.

MR. KELLEY.  Thank you, Mr.  Chairman.  I think  this  has  been

a good session  in getting  most  of  the  factors  out  on the  table,  and
I'll  try  to  be  brief.  First  of  all,  I still  have  some  question  in my
mind as  to  just  how much danger we  are  in here  as  to  inflation  being
in  sort  of  a scary take-off  zone.  I think there  are  still  some
important  factors  that  are holding  it  in  check.  I would particularly
note  that  the  forecast  for unit  labor  costs  is  still  very  low.  Even
out  through  1995  it  never gets  much  above 2 percent, which  should be a
big deterrent.  In  that  regard, even  though my bullish  forecast  on
productivity has  got  a little  egg  on  its  face  from  the most recent
numbers,  I'm  still  optimistic  that  productivity is  going  to  continue
to  increase at  a significant  secular rate.  Certainly,  I think  it's
fair  to  say  that we  haven't  seen much in  the way of  an increased
thrust  in  compensation, construction probably being an  exception  to
that.  Secondly,  foreign  inflation and  its  influences  continue  to  be

8/16/94

-26-

low.  Inflation  is  low in  the  countries  that  basically have high costs
because  they  still  have  big production gaps  that  are apparently going
to  stay in  place  for  the  indefinite  future.  Those  countries  that have
higher  inflation  tend to  have very low cost  structures  in  the  first
place,  so  they ought  to  be  able  to  keep the  pressure  off  prices.  So
I'm not  sure how much  imminent danger we  really are  in,  that  there  is
more  than  just  a troughing  or perhaps an upcreep  in prospect.  But  for
all  of  that  having been said,  it  is  clear  that  we  are  either at  or
very, very near capacity, however that  is  defined, and  there  is  a  lot
of  momentum present  that  shows  every prospect  of  carrying  us past
that.  As  a consequence,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  risks  are clearly  on
the  up side both  for  activity and  inflation.  I'm put  to mind  of an
old  saying of my mother's  who used to  like  to  say to her  children,  "a
stitch  in  time  saves  nine."

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Vice Chairman.

VICE  CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me

speak briefly about  the  economy in  the  Second District;  it  continued
to  expand over  the past month, but  we are  seeing  some weak  spots,
especially in  the  state of  New York.  Payroll  employment  declined at
an  annual rate  of  1 percent  in  June in New York State  and  2 percent  in
New York City.  There were  some rather  large  declines in manufacturing
jobs  in many areas  throughout New York State.  Continuing
announcements  by manufacturers  of  additional  cuts  suggest weakness  in
New York State manufacturing employment  for  some  time  to  come.  The
latest  announcements,  each referring  to worldwide  staff,  were a  10
percent  cut  at Bausch  and Lomb and  further paring at  IBM and  a major
pharmaceutical  company.  Trading  losses  and dampened bond market
activities  spurred  layoffs  in  fixed income  departments  at  three major
securities  firms  and additional  cuts  appear  likely.  Multiple  mergers
and acquisitions within the  thrift  industry also  are  taking their
tolls  on  the  job  count.  In contrast, New Jersey added  another 10,000
jobs  in June,  and  I'm not  sure  what  the  split  is  between  Ed Boehne's
District  and mine,  but  that  is  an  annualized gain of  2.9  percent.
Manufacturing  employment has  been  stable  for  the  past  three months,
and  small  job  gains accrued  in most  other sectors  of  the  economy.  So
we now have  an unemployment rate  that has  fallen  to  6.4  percent  in New
Jersey, just  above  the  national  figure,  an unemployment rate  in New
York  State of  7.1 percent  and  in the  City 8.8  percent.  One  of  the
things  that  I've been  learning  as  I have been traveling  around New
York State  is  that  there  is  a growing malaise  in  the  business
community, a belief  that  New York  State  is  not  a particularly good
place  to  run  a business.  That  has  led  to  some  of  the moves  to
Connecticut  and to New Jersey by  the  financial  industry.

What  I think  is  a somewhat  greater  concern, but  I don't  know
enough  about yet,  is  that  in the  tier  of  the  State between Albany and
Buffalo where  there had been a rather  successful  transition  from
making carpets  and clothing  to  rather  more computerized activities
like  check  clearing both by  the  Fed and  by the major New York banks,
one  of  the major attractions  of  that part  of  New York State  was  the
quality of  life.  If  you  don't mind a  lot  of  snow, it  has  kind of  an
idyllic  climate,  a beautiful  countryside,  and a very  fine  lifestyle.
That  has  changed or  is  in  the process  of  changing  largely as  a  result
of people doing what would appear  to  be good  things,  and  that  is
putting correction  facilities  and prisons  in  that part  of  the  state.
However, the  families  of  the  prisoners  and  the kids  in the  correction

8/16/94

-27-

units  also move  into  the  community and  it  has  transferred  something  of
an  inner city to  unlikely places  like Rome, Utica, Rochester,  and
Syracuse.  That  is  switching  off  the businessmen  from thinking  that
this  is  a particularly  friendly place  to  situate  themselves  in order
to grow, and  they don't  have to  go particularly  far because  they are
seeing Pennsylvania, which  isn't  too  far away,  as having  a somewhat
friendlier environment.  I think if  there are  two  states  in  the
country where  you wouldn't wish to  have  a malaise,  they would be
California and New York, or at  least  those  would be  two  of  the  three
candidates  with Texas probably.  We  are  going to  have  to  continue  to
watch what's happening  in the  State of New York because  the  trend is
not  a very happy one.

On  the  national  level,  our  staff  forecast  is  so  close to  the
Greenbook  that  it  is  something  of a rounding error  even  to  talk  about
it.  Our  staff  forecast  is  somewhat more  benevolent on  inflation  in
the  second half  of  this year,  but that  appears  to be more  than
anything else  that  the  Greenbook is  somewhat more  concerned about
increasing energy prices  than we  are.  So,  for  example,  next year we
have  real  GDP growing at  2.1  percent  and the  Greenbook  is  exactly  in
the  same place.  The main  difference  is  that we don't  think  it's going
to  take quite as  much  official action:  We have  the  same macro  results
with  a funds  rate of  5-1/4  percent whereas  the  Greenbook, as  you know,
has  a funds  rate  of  5-1/2  percent.  We have  the CPI  at 2.9  percent and
the  Greenbook has  it  at  3.0  percent.  In  looking  at  these  forecasts
myself,  I'm somewhat more  optimistic  than either  the  Greenbook or my
own  staff,  and I think the  difference  largely is  that  I am really very
strongly convinced that  by historical  reference this  FOMC  is well
ahead of  past experience  in taking appropriate monetary policy
actions.  If we  continue to  do  the right  things, perhaps  even
including  today, at  some stage  that  is  going  to become more apparent
to  the practitioners  in  the  economy, and  I think  that  we have  a pretty
good shot  at  that.  If  that  is  true,  although  the numbers  would not be
great,  the  significance  I think would be  substantial.  I think we
could get  somewhat better economic growth of  the  kind that Alan
Blinder was  talking about  at  a somewhat  lower  rate of  inflation.  I
recognize  that that  would be  a very happy outcome  and one  always  has
to  try to  abstract  one's wishes  from one's  analysis,  but I do  think
that  there  is  a significant possibility  that we could  achieve  that.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Thank you.  Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE.  Mr. Chairman,  the  learned comments  of  our

colleagues  have been so  encompassing  that  they leave me with  little
additional wisdom  to  share with the  Committee.  My personal view is
that  the economy may be  more  robust than  the Greenbook  forecast would
imply.  I continue to  believe  that consumer  uncertainties about  job
security and about what  government  is  up  to  tend  to be  a damping
influence  and a counter  to  runaway growth.  However,  I think  the
current brisk  rate of  growth  argues  for  some further  braking from
policy.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor Yellen.

MS. YELLEN.  Two  issues are  of  importance  to me  in  assessing
the  current  economic  situation.  First,  how much momentum is  there  in
the expansion  and second how much slack  is  in  the  economy, how close
is  it  to  potential  output?  With respect  to  the  issue  of momentum,  I

8/16/94

-28-

find myself  largely  in agreement with  the  staff  analysis presented in
the Greenbook.  Real  growth is  slowing, but  I do  think there  remains
enough momentum to keep aggregate  demand growing at  a rate  somewhat  in
excess of  the  growth  rate  of  potential  output long  enough  to push the
economy  above potential  in  the  absence  of  some  further monetary
restraint.  My own  estimate  of  the  degree of momentum  in demand has
increased over the  last  few months.  Most  important  in my  thinking,
the decline  in the  value  of  the  dollar and upward revisions  in
estimates  concerning the  strength of  foreign economies will  be
reducing  the drag on demand that  stems  from net  exports.  In  line with
the  staff  forecast,  I also  expect  the  declining dollar to  feed through
to  some mild upward pressure  on  import  prices.  Now that  the economy
is  close  to  potential, higher import prices  should create a bit more
scope for American producers  of  import  substitutes  to  raise  their  own
prices.  I don't want  to  overemphasize  the  impact of  the  dollar
decline  on  aggregate demand and prices,  but at  the margin,  especially
in the  context  of  an  economy  that  is  nearing potential,  this  seems
like a source of momentum.  And I see  these  international  factors  as
offsetting to  some  extent  the moderating  influence  of higher  interest
rates  on housing  and consumer durables  spending.  The  strength of new
orders  for  durable goods and  the  strong profit projections  suggest
continuing strength  in investment,  and the  staff  analysis  convinces  me
that  there  are risks  that  the  slowdown  in demand  could be
insufficient,  absent some  further  tightening to prevent  overheating.

With respect  to  the  issue  of how close  the  economy is  to

potential,  I confess  uncertainty here.  Nevertheless, on  the basis  of
both econometric  and anecdotal  evidence,  it  seems  to  me  that  output
has  not yet passed potential,  although we are  approaching  it.  I don't
yet  see  strong enough indications  of  tightness  in  labor markets,  or
enough signs  of  increasing wage pressure,  or sufficient  indication of
a pickup in  the  growth of unit  labor costs  to  conclude that  we have
ventured beyond potential.  Capacity utilization is  high by historical
standards, but  investment  also  is  adding  to  capacity at  a rapid rate.
I see  only  scattered evidence  of  lengthening  lags  in  filling  orders.
On balance,  I'd  say my sense  is  that  the  economy could  stay where  it
is  in  terms  of  unemployment  or  even shave a few tenths more  off  the
unemployment  rate without risking  significantly a pickup  in  inflation.
This  inclines me toward the  feeling  that  there  should be  some
tightening  of policy  to  reduce momentum, but  somewhat  less  than  the
Greenbook  assumes.  The  Greenbook  forecasts  for  real  growth in  1995
are  somewhat  too  low  in my  opinion to  end up with an  economy  in  1995
that  is  operating near enough  to potential.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Thank you.  I assume coffee  is  there?

MR. BERNARD.  Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Let's recess  for  our usual  coffee break.

[Coffee break]

MR. KOHN.  [Statement--See Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Questions  for  Don?

MR. JORDAN.  Don,  I interpret  the  recommendations  you make

vis-a-vis  the  arguments  that  go with it  as  implying disagreement with

8/16/94

-29-

the  Greenbook.  The  reason  I say that  is  because  if you  accept  the
Greenbook  projections--the output  and  the  inflation numbers  through
1995--the  objectives  of  the  Committee and the  logic  that  we are at  or
close to  capacity and  the  NAIRU and that  a 5-1/4  percent  funds rate  is
neutral  in the  sense  of maintaining  the  inflation  rate  let alone
bringing  it  down,  that would lead you  to  recommend  100  basis points
today, and you don't do  that.

MR. KOHN.  First  of  all,  I think  the  function  of  the Bluebook

is  somewhat different  from that  of  the  Greenbook, at  least  I conceive
it  as  such,  and  that  is  to  take  the  alternatives  that  I think  the
Committee will be  seriously considering  and  say what we think  the
short-  to  intermediate-term consequences  of choosing  those
alternatives will  be in  financial  markets  and to  a lesser  extent  in
the  economy and give  the  Committee pros  and cons  on  each of  the
alternatives.  The  latter are  then amplified in my briefing to  give
you some  things  to  think about  leading up to your  decisions.  It  is
true  that one  alternative might  be  to  take  the  funds  rate up  100  basis
points  right now.  I didn't  see  that  as  a viable  alternative.  I'm not
sure,  given the  uncertainties,  that  even  the Greenbook would be  in
favor of  something that  large  right  away,  surprising the markets by as
much as  that.  But  I can see  your argument;  it's  like  the  argument  of
last  February.  If you think you have  to  go  a percentage point and
you're reasonably confident  in  that,  the  longer you take  to do  it,  the
more uncertainty  there  could be  in  the market  and the  less  likely you
might  be  to  get your  outcome.  But  it  just  didn't seem  to us  to  be one
of  the  alternatives  that  the  Committee would be  considering seriously.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Any other  questions  for Don?  If  not,

let  me get  started.  Let me  just  say first  that after  listening to  the
roundtable discussion  and  looking  at  the  usual  long sets  of  figures,
what  I come  away with  is  that despite  the  longevity of  this  recovery,
there  really are  few signs  of  aging.  There  are marginal  evidences  of
imbalances, marginal  evidences  of  pressures, but  in  general  it  still
looks  as  though this  recovery has a considerable set  of  momentums
associated with it.  First  of  all,  profit margins  are  still  rising and
indeed,  they are  coming in  above expectations.  That  is  an
extraordinarily rare characteristic  for  the  latter stages  of  a
business expansion.  Inventory/sales ratios  are  low, especially if  one
strips  out  the  trade markups  to produce  constant  dollar  factory values
of  inventory/sales  ratios.  Those ratios have been coming down very
dramatically as  the  "just-in-time" processes  have accumulated at  a
fairly substantial  pace.  I suspect  that  we  finally hit bottom in  the
spring with  "just-in-time."  That  is,  the  room for  further declines  in
inventory/sales ratios  has become very significantly  limited and, as  a
consequence  of  that,  the process of  going to  zero  change means  a boom
in inventory  investment.

Unquestionably an  important concern here  is whether  we  are

looking only at  the  end of  "just-in-time" or  looking  at  inventory
investment  that  is  substantially unintended and  that  could back up  as
the  DRI  overhang analysis  suggests.  First  of all,  we  do know  that  a
substantial  part  of  the  inventory change,  especially in  the  trade
area,  is  imported goods.  Internal  estimates by Board staff  indicate
that  imported goods  accounted for  roughly  1/3  of  the  inventory change
in April  and May.  This  obviously means  that  to  the  extent  the  added
inventories  came  from imports,  to  the  extent  that  there  is  any
unintended inventory accumulation there,  it  is  the  imports and the

8/16/94

-30-

foreign producers  that get  backed up, not  domestic.  Secondly, if
there were a significant  element  of  unintended inventory accumulation
here,  we really would expect  to begin  to see  it  in  the new orders
series.  A goodly  chunk of  the  inventory  accumulation is  clearly very
directly  intended inventory accumulation, because a lot  of  it  is  in
capital  goods  areas  where  the order patterns  have been very strong.
But  from anecdotal  evidence on  orders  and the  actual detailed Commerce
Department data on  orders,  it  is  very difficult  to make  the case  that
there  is  any  significant  element of  unintended inventory accumulation
in  these numbers.  I think there  is  some evidence on  the  basis  of
inventory numbers  that orders  for  furniture  did back up a little, but
it  is  really at  the margin  and very little evidence  suggests  that we
have  a particular problem  there.  We  also  are not  seeing evidence  in
the  inventory structure  of  any serious  difficulty even  on  the  other
side.  It's  true  that  there  has been slowing down  in deliveries,  but
lead  times  on new orders have  shown very little  evidence of  rising,
especially in the  production materials area.  And so  it  is  suggestive
that we neither have an  exceptionally  tight  inventory situation  or  a
loose  one.  That  seems  consistent with a middle  stage  of  the business
cycle, one  that  is  neither negative nor particularly positive.

I do  think we  are getting some  slowdown in  the rate  of

growth, but  the  crucial question  is  from where?  We  tend  to  look at
the  gross  domestic product as  the  measure of  what  the  economy  is  doing
and there  is  some  serious  question  in  the  last  two  or  three  quarters
whether  or not  that  is  low-balling  the  rate  of  growth.  As we
discussed previously,  looking at  gross domestic  income,  which  is
conceptually equivalent and  leaving aside  the  issue  of very weak data
for  the  second quarter,  the  growth in  gross domestic  income was
several  tenths  above  the  growth  in gross domestic  product  in  the
fourth quarter and  the  first  quarter.  Disaggregating the  gross
domestic product  into  the value  of  industrial production and  "all
other" and  substituting the  industrial  production index  for the  value
of  industrial production as  a conceptually equivalent measure  of
aggregate  growth,  again we get  stronger  growth than  is  in  the  GDP
numbers.  What  this  is  indicating  is  that we have  to  be  a little
careful  about  these measurements.  For example,  I find utterly
noncredible  the probability that,  in  the real  world, productivity
declined  in  the  second quarter.  The reason  I say this  is  that  if  you
get  an  expansion in the  economy, leaving aside  its nature, and you  get
rising profit margins,  you begin to  wonder where  the profit  margin
rise  is  coming  from.  It  clearly  is not  through  increases  in prices.
The  question basically is  how to  reconcile  this  situation  in which we
get  this  huge  increase  in work hours  and therefore  in  compensation of
employees  against a slowed GDP  that  suggests,  other  things equal,  that
margins are  declining, not  opening up.  I am merely saying that  I am a
little  suspicious  of  the GDP  figures,  although  I grant  that  the
underlying work hour  figures  themselves  may be  exaggerated in the
second quarter.  But  it  is  very hard to  reconcile  the  anecdotal
evidence and the  basic  data with which we  deal  to believe  those
productivity  data, and  that  is  one more  reason at  least  to wonder
about  some  of  the GDP  figures.

In  the  current period,  there  is  very little  doubt  that we are

not  getting a significant  amount  of  deterioration.  I think it  is
certainly the  case  for  the  interest-sensitive  sectors--residential
construction  and to  whatever  extent we  can say that  weakness  in motor
vehicle  sales  is  other  than  shortages.  I think there  was  a very

8/16/94

-31-

persuasive case  put  forward by Mike  Prell's  associates  at  a Board
meeting the  other day that  a very large part of  the  decline  in motor
vehicle  sales  is  the  result of  shortages  and not  a basic weakness  in
demand.  Nonetheless,  I think one  must  argue  that there  is  a slowing
down  in that particular  area, and  it  is  being offset, probably not
fully, by expansions  in  the  capital  goods  markets,  which I suspect  may
again be underestimated in  the GDP  sense  in constant  dollar  terms
because  the  communications  equipment prices  just do not  look
realistic,  as  a number of people  are beginning to  conclude.  This
suggests  that real producers  durable  equipment  is  probably rising at  a
faster pace.  It may also  imply,  I might  say parenthetically, that  the
capacity measures may also  be affected on  the  up  side.  However,  I
think we  are  getting  clear evidence  of  improving world economic  growth
vis-a-vis  our earlier  views,  which suggests  that  the  export markets
are  moving and doubtless  the  exchange  rate will  have  some  impact  there
as  well.  The drag from nonresidential  construction  is  clearly at  an
end.  The  indications  that values of  commercial  real  estate are
beginning to  stabilize  and are  beginning to  move up  in certain local
areas  are  consistent with  the  beginning  of  a turn  in  office and other
commercial  construction.  We  are  running  through  the backlogs  of  very
major  deterioration in  the  nonresidential building area,  and  I think
that  sector will  cease  to  exert weakening pressures.  Very currently,
we  are  seeing  initial  claims  for unemployment insurance  that  are quite
low,  and that  suggests  that  the  labor markets  are  doing rather well.
Growth in employment  seems  quite significant.  Not only are  orders
strong but  there  is  impressive  evidence  that  unfilled orders  are
accelerating  on  the up side both in  current  and constant  dollars.  A
statistic we  don't  talk about  very often, but  it  is  not irrelevant
because it  is  a leading  indicator, is  the  extraordinary rise  in  net
business  formation, which BEA  shows as  a fairly sharp  upswing--again
something not  consistent with a late  stage  of  the business  cycle.  So
it  strikes me that,  as  Don Kohn puts  it,  with  the  reverse head winds
coming  in the bank credit  data,  loan data,  and the  like,  it  is
beginning to  get  a little nervous-making,  I must  say.  This  stuff  is
really beginning  to move.

All  in  all,  it  is  very difficult  to get  around the  general

notion  that,  even  though  there  is  some  evidence of  a slowdown  in  the
rate  of  growth, it  still  appears  to be  coming in  at a somewhat  higher
level  than I suspect we are  used to  looking at,  if  all we  are  looking
at  is  the  gross  domestic product  figures  themselves.  Also,  there  is
an underlying momentum here  that  suggests  there  are  a couple of  big
legs  left  in  this business  cycle.

I think one has  to  conclude,  as  far as policy  is  concerned,

that  another upward notch  in  rates  is  clearly called for at  some
point.  Therefore,  the question we have  to  ask ourselves,  which is  not
inconsistent with what  Jerry Jordan was raising,  is  if we  believe
that, why not now?  I think  the question  really gets  to  a notion of
what we  expect we will  ultimately have to  do.  I frankly don't  know
whether or not  the  staff's estimate of  a 100  basis point  increase  is
the right  number.  I do  know that  there  is  a not  insignificant
probability that  50  basis points may be  enough  if we do  it  now.  I
don't know what  the  probability  is but  if  somebody said,  is  it  .1, I'd
say  it's  a lot higher  than that.  Is  the probability greater  than  50
percent?  I doubt  it.  I think  it's  a third, maybe 40  percent, but who
knows.  I do  think  that  if we move  50  basis  points now, the
probability that  we will not have  to move  before  the  end of  the  year

8/16/94

-32-

probably is  greater than  50  percent.  One  of  the  reasons  I say that  is
that  implicit  in the  100  basis  points that  they have  in  the  Greenbook
is  the  fact  that  long-term rates  are  coming down and we are  getting a
new sort  of  dynamic  in the  system coming  from residential
construction.  In  that context,  we need an upward adjustment  of  short-
term rates  because the  shape  of  the yield function  is beginning  to
move closer  to  normality.  I'm not  sure  about where  long-term rates
are  in  that particular context.  But  I do  know that  as  we  look at  the
situation now, unlike where we were  in  the  early  stages  of  our
tightening moves,  where  remember I was  terribly concerned--maybe
overly concerned but  I doubt  it--that  if  we did more  than  25  basis
points we were risking the  stability of  the  system.  With  the May
move,  I think we  clearly demonstrated that  the  bubble  for all
practical  purposes had been defused, and that we needn't worry about
larger  increases  at  this  stage.  With the passage of  time,  I think the
moving  of  securities  from weaker hands  to  stronger hands  has  now made
it  far  less  likely that a 50  basis point move  at  this point would
shake the  markets  in any significant  way, if  at  all.

I'm a little  concerned  that 25  basis points  would merely
raise the  issue  of when the  other  shoe  is  going  to  drop.  I am a
little nervous  about  raising  the  rate more  than  50  basis  points
because  frankly I'm not  sure we need it.  If  we don't need it,  there
is  no point  in doing it  and it's  an  element  of  risk  that  I don't  think
we need to  take.  My own view--I'm being  a little  more detailed than  I
usually am so  I hope people will  excuse me in  this  respect--is  that
it's  very important  if  we were  to  do  50  basis points,  that we  not give
the  impression  that  somehow we  anticipate major accelerations  and this
is  just  the beginning of  a long  series  of  50 basis  point  increases.
If  the markets believe that,  then  I think we have a very serious
potential  of  creating  a major negative market  reaction.  I think we
have  to  be very careful  to  avoid giving  that impression.  The only
realistic way we  can avoid  that  is  to  issue  some  type of  statement
with any move  that we make  that  implies  that we  are  in the  process  of
reassessing where we will  go--in other words,  our intention  to  hold
for a while without  tying  our hands, which we  cannot do.

After  talking to my colleagues  on  the  Board of  Governors,  I

think there  is  a sentiment on  the  part of  the Board  to raise  the
discount rate  50  basis  points  in line with what  a number of  the
Reserve Banks  are requesting.  I think  implicit  in  that,  in  the view
of  the  Board, is  to  request  this  Committee  to  allow all  of  the
increase  to  pass  through.  Also,  I might  add, implicit  in  that general
policy view is  our adoption of  symmetric  instructions  to  the  Desk.
The more  I think about  that as  a potential  sort  of  policy package,  the
less  I like  all  of  the other  alternatives.  I started  off  at  either no
change and asymmetry  or 50  basis  points with  symmetry on  the  grounds
that  25  basis points  struck me  as  risking the  other  shoe  dropping
syndrome.  But  I must say,  the  more I listened to  this group  and your
comments  on  the  elements  involved and  such  things  as  the  housing
starts  figures  this morning--incidentally, Mike,  the adjusted permits
if we  add back the  nonpermit  issuing areas are  down only  .8, not  1.7.

MR. PRELL.  I just  got  these  numbers  at  the break  and I think

the picture  in  the  adjusted permits  and the  single-family  starts  is
really one  of  rough  stability  in the  past three months.

8/16/94

-33-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  In other words,  if  we had a very weak

residential  construction area or  a weak motor vehicles  area, I would
say we might want  to pause and do nothing.  But  I think  the  evidence
is  increasingly convincing that we probably need to do  50  basis
points.  I must  admit  that  I was  going  to  start  out more  even-handed  -
-on the  one hand, on  the  other hand,  if you will--but  I convinced
myself  to  steer  away from  that.  [Laughter]  So with  those  apologies,
I open up the  discussion.  Bob.

MR. FORRESTAL.  Mr. Chairman,  I think your  conclusion about

this  expansion having  life  in it  is  exactly right.  I certainly agree
that all  the numbers  and  the  anecdotal  information  that  we have  seen
and heard this  morning would  indicate  that the  momentum  is  still
there.  As  a matter of  fact,  in our  forecast, we built  in  a 50  to  75
basis point  rate  increase  and we produced a 1995  GDP  of  2.6  percent,
which I think is  a desirable  kind of  deceleration in the  economy to
appropriate  levels  much nearer  to potential.  On  the  other  side,  if  we
look at  what  is  happening with  inflation, what  is  likely to  happen, we
have  strong consumer demand,  strong loan  demand, and the  economy is
very close  to  capacity.  We  have higher oil  prices  that  are  likely  to
remain  at current  levels  unless Iraq gets  back  into the picture,  a
weak dollar, and  the beginnings  of  labor  shortages.  All of  these
developments,  I think, make  a very compelling case  that we  have  to
move.  I think the  sooner we  move the better.  I certainly support  the
notion  of  50  basis  points because,  like you,  I think 25  basis  points
really is  not going to  have  the desired  effect,  and  it's  going to
cause uncertainty in  the markets.  I also  am pleased that  the  Board is
considering  a discount  rate  increase because  I think the  combined
policy actions  will have very desirable  effects.  So,  I'm completely
supportive of  what  you are  suggesting.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG.  Mr.  Chairman, I, too,  agree with your policy
recommendation.  Given my comments earlier,  I think  that  it  is  the
appropriate action to  take.  I also  agree that  if  we only did 25  basis
points,  it would create uncertainty rather  than what  I think we  can
accomplish with this  move.  So  I agree.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor Blinder.

MR. BLINDER.  I'm also  supportive of  the package  that you

outlined.  I just  want  to  take two minutes  to  emphasize  that  it  really
is  a package.  If  we  are  going to make  this  kind of  policy credible,
it has  to be with a symmetric directive.  It has  to  be with a
statement  that  indicates  as  clearly as  we  can state  within the  limits
of  Fedspeak that  our oars are  out  of  the water.  That does not mean
that we have thrown  the  oars  overboard;  we  still have  the  oars,
[Laughter]  but we  have pulled  them out  of  the  water.  I think  that was
implicit  in what  the Chairman said,  and I think it  is  important.  So  I
wanted  to  emphasize  it.  I think, as  he  did,  that  the  choice comes
down to  zero  or  50  basis points  for  the  reasons  that  everybody has  now
indicated.  The  crucial  thing  for us,  one  of  the reasons  I eliminated
25  basis  points,  is  that  that  is  likely to  engender  the  belief  that we
are  starting up a staircase--not  just another  shoe  to drop,  but maybe
Imelda Marcos'  closet.  [Laughter]  By the  same  token  if we move  50
basis  points,  it  is  crucial--that  is  why I come back to  a statement--
not  to  engender a belief  that we are  starting up  a shorter  staircase

8/16/94

-34-

but  one with  risers of  50  basis  points.  Like the  Chairman,  I think
there is  at  least  a fighting chance  that  50  basis points  would be
enough.  So with such a strong statement,  I not  only support  but
support  enthusiastically the  suggestion of  the  Chairman.  Without  it,
I would not.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Jordan.

MR. JORDAN.  I came  in on the  fence between  "B" and  "D."  I

never did like  "C" for  the  reasons  that  you described.  I'm not  at  all
convinced that  the  100 basis  points  is  ultimately necessary.  My staff
is more  convinced, I guess along with  the Board's  staff,  than  I am,
and I think going 50  basis  points now with the  kind of package you  are
talking about  reduces  the probability that  ultimately we will have  to
go  the  full  100  basis points.  And so  for  that reason  I support  the  50
basis points.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS.  I enthusiastically support  your proposal, Mr.

Chairman--all  the various  elements  of  it.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Parry.

MR. PARRY.  I also  enthusiastically support  the  complete

package.  As  I indicated  in my earlier go-around  comments,  I think  the
chances  of  inflation accelerating significantly next  year  and beyond
are  great if  we do  not move.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Melzer.

MR. MELZER.  Alan, I came  in  favoring alternative  D coupled

with at  least  an  increase  of  50  basis points  in  the  discount rate.  So
I, too,  support  what you have recommended.  Just  a couple of comments
on how aggressively  to move,  though there  seems  to  be  support  for your
recommendation:  I think that  both to  contain emerging inflationary
pressures  and to demonstrate our  resolve with respect to price
stability  in the  long run,  we have to  move  aggressively now.  I share
your concerns  about  the potential  of  "the other  shoe dropping"
syndrome with respect  to  doing  only 25  basis points.  I think, as
people have said earlier,  temporizing now  just makes  our job  tougher
later.  With respect  to  credibility, I think there  is  evidence  in
financial  markets  that we have  a ways  to  go before we really do  have
credibility with respect  to  our longer-run  inflation  intentions.

With respect  to  the  statement,  the  only concern  I would raise

and hope you  take  into account  in  drafting  it  is  to  make  sure you
incorporate what you said  about  not  tying our hands.  We really  can't
know today what could transpire,  and we have  to  have flexibility  to
evaluate  incoming data and move  further  if  necessary.  If  financial
markets  really concluded that we basically were  "out to  lunch"  for  the
rest  of  the year,  we could  set  in motion speculative  forces  that
actually accelerate  the  need  to move  again.  So  it's got  to  be done
carefully;  I trust  your  judgment on  how to  do  that, but  it  is  tricky.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President Minehan.

8/16/94

-35-

MS. MINEHAN.  There  is  not  much  I can  add  to what  I think has

been  a shared  sense  that  there is  some risk right now, mostly on  the
up  side,  and  that we need to  deal with that  risk.  We  agree  further
tightening  is necessary.  We would go with the  50  basis points;  we
would  follow  it  up with a  discount rate  increase.  We are  getting  into
the  area  of  nuances  here.  I think our belief  on  the  nuance  side  is  a
little  closer  to Governor Blinder's  than perhaps  to  President
Melzer's,  that whatever  the  nuances  are  in  this  statement,  they ought
to  be  in  the  form  of  sort  of wait  and see  if  anything more  is
necessary--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Let me  read a  suggestion that hopefully

captures  what  is  involved here  so  that nobody  is  blindsided  on this.
The  potential  statement  would read:  "The Federal  Reserve will  continue
to  monitor economic  and  financial  developments  to  gauge the
appropriate  stance  of  policy.  But  these  actions  are  expected  to be
sufficient  at  least  for a  time  to meet  the  objective of  sustained
noninflationary growth."  That  is  as good a crafting as  I think  can be
done  to  capture what  it  is  we  are  trying  to  do and yet  not  tie our
hands,  because  tying our hands  would be  a terrible mistake,  and I
don't  think it's  credible  in any event.

MS. MINEHAN.  I would  fully agree with  that  and I would be  in

favor of  that wording.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE.  I support  your recommendation, Mr.  Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor Phillips.

MS.  PHILLIPS.  I also  support  the package.  If  we were  to

delay, I think  it  would be  a roll  of  the dice,  because  I don't  think
there  would be  any new information that  would be  coming  in over  the
near term  that would make a difference.  The  economy  is  moving  fast
enough  that  I think we  are  in  "drive,"  not  "neutral,"  right now.
There  is  a chance that  a 50  basis point move  could sideline us  for  a
while and  it  may in  fact be enough.  I don't  think we  know.  I think
that  your wording does  capture that.  There  is  a possibility of  being
sidelined, that  our  next move may be next  spring  and may even be an
easing move.  I just  don't  think we  know.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY.  I support  your proposal,  Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President Stern.

MR. STERN.  I certainly support  the  recommendation and, as

several  people have  already commented,  I think the  statement  and any
other  discussion  that  occurs  in the  next weeks are  very important.
The  facts  of  the  matter  are  that  we don't  know what  is  going  to come
down the  road, and  if  and when we may have  to move next.  I think we
ought  to  make  that clear  to  the markets, and  I believe  the  statement
does  a pretty good  job of  that--that  this  is  not  a permanent position.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor Kelley.

8/16/94

-36-

MR.  KELLEY.  I  support  your proposal, Mr.  Chairman,  for  all

of  the  reasons  that  have  been expressed.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Vice  Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.  Mr.  Chairman,  I  support  the  package

very  fully.  This may well  be  all  we  have to  do  in  the  adjustment  of
policy that  began the  fourth of  February.  We  may have  to  tighten some
more  next year, but we  have  seen  that  the  effect  of  monetary policy
since February  4th, because  of  the  steepness  of  the yield curve, has
been  somewhat  greater  than  it  was  in previous  periods.  If  that
continues,  we could very well get  into next  year and  decide, as
Governor Phillips  has  just  suggested,  that  the next  policy move  should
be  an easing  of  policy.  I  think a  very  forthright  statement,  like  the
one  that  you have read  to  us,  is  most  important.  A  nuance  that  I  feel
about  it  is  that  it  is  an  indication of  self  confidence  on your  part
and  the  Committee's  that  such  a  statement  be made.  A  self-confident
Federal  Reserve  that  is  seen as  doing its  job well gains  the  kind of
credibility  that makes people  think when  the next move  is  appropriate
we will  take  it,  whether  that  is  up  or  down.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.  I  support  the  package.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor Yellen.

MS.  YELLEN.  Mr.  Chairman, I  support  your proposal  and

believe  there  is  a  good chance  that  a  50  basis  point  increase  in  the
funds  rate now will  be  sufficient  in  the  absence  of  significant news.
And I  like  the  proposed  statement  that you  read.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER.  I  support your proposal.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  First  Vice President  Conrad.

MR. CONRAD.  We would support  the  recommendation,  Mr.

Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President Melzer.

MR. MELZER.  I  just  had a  comment  on  the  language;  I  don't

know if  this  is  the  right  time  to  make  it.  Have  you  gotten
everybody's view?  I  shouldn't  come back  in  unless  you've  gotten
everyone.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Yes,  I  think  so.

MR. MELZER.  I  think the  "at  least  for  a  time"  does  it  in

terms  of  the  flexibility, Alan.  If  I  heard  it  right,  you  said
"consistent at  least  for a  time  with  the  Committee's  goals  of"--what
was  that--noninflationary?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  "Noninflationary growth."

MR. MELZER.

"Noninflationary growth?"

8/16/94

-37-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  "Sustained noninflationary growth."

MR. MELZER.  The  only question  I have  is whether  it  is

possible  that  somebody could then  conclude that  the  roughly 3 percent
inflation we are  seeing now is  consistent  in  the mind of  the  Committee
with zero  inflation?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  I would think not.  Noninflationary to

me means noninflationary;  3 percent  is  not noninflationary.

MR. MELZER.  Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  We are  talking about  objectives, we are

not  talking--

MR. MELZER.  I understand.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Okay, read the  directive.

MR. BERNARD.  With the discount  rate phrase?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Yes.

MR. BERNARD.  I'm  reading  from page  14  in  the Bluebook:  "In
the  implementation of  policy for  the  immediate  future,  the  Committee
seeks  to  increase  somewhat  the  existing degree of pressure  on reserve
positions,  taking account  of a possible  increase  in  the  discount rate.
In  the  context  of  the Committee's  long-run objectives  for price
stability and  sustainable economic growth,  and giving  careful
consideration  to  economic,  financial,  and monetary developments,
slightly greater  reserve  restraint or  slightly lesser reserve
restraint would be  acceptable  in  the  intermeeting period.  The
contemplated reserve conditions  are  expected to  be  consistent with
modest  growth  in M2  and M3  over coming  months."

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Call  the  roll.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan 
Vice Chairman McDonough 
Governor Blinder 
President  Broaddus 
President  Forrestal 
President  Jordan 
Governor Kelley 
Governor LaWare 
Governor Lindsey 
President  Parry 
Governor Phillips 
Governor Yellen 

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Thank you very much and  our next meeting

is--

MR. BERNARD.  The  27th.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  September  27th.

8/16/94 

-38-

MR. KOHN.  I think, Mr Chairman, we would plan on  releasing

the  statement around  2:15  p.m. as  we have  been doing.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Yes,  but  we  first need a Board meeting.

MR. KOHN.  Yes,  after  the Board meeting.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  May I suggest  that  the Board members

join me  in  the  other  room?

END OF  MEETING




==== GREENBOOK | 1994-08-16_fomc19940816gbpt119940812.txt ====

Prefatory Note 

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 

available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain. 

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 

gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.    

1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Strictly  Confidential  (FR)  Clas 

II  FOMC

August  12,  1994

SUMMARY  AND  OUTLOOK

Prepared  for the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee
By  the  staff  of the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System

DOMESTIC  NONFINANCIAL  DEVELOPMENTS

Overview

Recent  indications  of  sustained  strength  in  hiring  suggest  that

the  economy  is  continuing  to  grow at  a  fairly  good  clip  this

quarter 

Despite  the  buildup  of  inventories  during the  second

quarter  aggregate  stocks  do  not  appear  to  have  been  out  of kilter

with  sales  trends  as  of mid-year 

And,  outside  of  the  single-family

housing market,  it  is  not  clear  that  the  rise in  interest  rates  has

thus  far  placed  a heavy drag  on  the  growth of final  demand.  Rising

labor  income and  favorable  sentiment  continue  to  buoy  consumer

spending, while business  outlays  for  plant  and  equipment  remain on  a

steep  uptrend.

We think  it  likely that  real  GDP  growth  in the  current  quarter

will  be  somewhat  less  rapid  than  it  was  during  the  first  half of  the

year--our  point-estimate being  2.8  percent.  Nonetheless, it  remains

our  judgment  that  greater financial  restraint  probably will  be

necessary  to prevent  a buildup  of inflationary  pressures  over  the

coming year 

On the  demand  side,  improving activity  abroad  and the

depreciation  of  the  dollar this  year  are  likely to  translate  into  a

firming  of U.S.  net  exports.  In  that context,  the  trend of domestic

spending will  have to  decelerate  appreciably further  to  avoid

excessive  pressure  on  labor  and  capital  resources,  which  currently

appear  to  be  quite  fully  employed.  Our  forecast, based  on the

assumption  of a considerable  further  increase  in the federal  funds

rate,  is  for  output  growth to  average  less  than  2-1/4  percent  over

the  next  five  quarters, yielding an  unemployment  rate  in  the

neighborhood  of  6-1/4  percent  and  a slight  decline  in  factory

utilization  rates.  In  these  circumstances,  we  expect  consumer

prices  to  increase  roughly 3 percent  in  both 1994  and  1995.

Key  Assumptions

I-2

Although  there  are  signs  that  higher  interest  rates  are

exerting  some  restraint  on  spending  currently, that  restraint

appears  to  us  mild  relative  to  what  may  be  needed  to  hold  aggregate

demand  to  a sustainable  path--especially  in  light  of  the  easing  of

credit  availability that  has  been  under way,  most  obviously  at

commercial  banks.  Our  forecast  assumes  that  the federal  funds  rate

will  rise  the  same  amount  by  early  1995  as  in  the  last  Greenbook,

just  starting a little  bit  later.  We  expect that  this  appreciable

increase  in  short-term  rates  will  produce  a mild  firming  of  bond

yields,  but  only  temporarily:  Long  rates  should move  significantly

below  current  levels  in  1995,  as  it  becomes  evident  that monetary

tightening has  been  sufficient  to moderate  aggregate demand and  to

avert  any  sustained  pickup  in  inflation.

The  rise  in  short-term interest  rates  this  year  is  expected  to

contribute  to  continuing increases  in  the  velocity of  the broad

monetary  aggregates  in  1994  and  1995.  Investors  are  viewing mutual

funds  with  some  greater  caution,  and  the  growth  of  M2  is  projected

to  track somewhat  more  closely  its  traditional  relationships  to

income  and  opportunity  costs.  Slower nominal  GDP  expansion in the

second half of  1994  and  in  1995  is  also  expected  to  restrain money

growth,  and  as  a result,  M2  and  M3  are  likely to  come  in  a little

above  the lower  ends  of their  1994  target  ranges  and  to  expand

slightly  faster next  year 

Total  debt  of domestic  nonfinancial

sectors  is  expected to  grow at  about  a 5 percent  rate through  1995

We have not  made  substantive  changes  to  our fiscal  policy

assumptions  for  this  projection.  We  continue to  assume that  the

broad  contours  of  fiscal  policy will  be  dictated by OBRA-19931

1  The  odds  of  sweeping health  care  legislation  coming out  of the

current  congressional  debate  do  not  appear  high, but  it  is  unlikely
that  any  package  that  was  passed would  have major  budgetary impacts
in  the  near  term.

I-3

As  a result,  fiscal  policy is  expected to  exert  a moderate  amount  of

restraint  on  economic  activity through  the  projection  period.  The

unified  budget  deficit  is  expected  to  total  $206  billion  in FY1994

and  $197  billion in FY1995.  Technical  information  on  tax and

spending  rates  from the the  Administration's Mid-Session  Review and

the  effects  of  changes  to  our  economic  assumptions  had  little

effect,  in  the  aggregate,  on  these  deficit  estimates.

The trade-weighted foreign  exchange  value  of  the  dollar  has

been  about  unchanged  on balance  in terms  of  other  G-10  currencies

since  our  last  Greenbook  projection;  we  are  anticipating no  major

changes  from the  current  level  through  the  end  of  1995.  Our

forecast  of  economic  activity  abroad  is  slightly stronger than

before.  We  project  that  the  export-weighted growth  of  foreign  GDP

will  accelerate  a bit  to  3-1/2  percent  this  year  and  continue to

grow at  that  rate  in  1995.  During the  intermeeting period,  concern

about  potential supply disruptions  in Nigeria  resulted  in  a

temporary  spurt  in  oil  prices.  These  concerns  appear  to  have

abated,  and we  expect the  price  of WTI  to  remain around the  $18.50

per barrel  that  was  assumed in the June  Greenbook and  to hold  there

through  1995.

Recent  Domestic  Economic  Indicators

While  the  new Census  survey of  households  continued to  show  a

puzzling  weakness  in employment  growth in  July, other  indicators

have  pointed to  sustained  strength in  hiring.  In  the  establishment

survey,  nonfarm payrolls  rose  260,000  last  month, after  gaining

nearly  360,000  in June,  and  low levels  of filings  for unemployment

insurance  suggest  further  sizable  increases  in  jobs  since the  July

survey week.  Aggregate  hours  for  private  production workers

retraced  their June  decline  last month  and  appear  to  be  on track for

at  least  a moderate  increase  this  quarter.  The  6.1  percent

I-4

unemployment  rate  in July,  though  up  a touch  from June,  was  below

the  second-quarter  average.

Consumer  spending  appears  to  be  growing moderately 

The  latest

report  on  retail  sales  showed  a  considerable  upward  revision  to

outlays  in  the  second  quarter- -perhaps raising  real  PCE  growth  from

the  1.2  percent  annual  rate  in BEA's  advance  estimate  to  about

2 percent 

The  advance  estimate  of non-auto  retail  sales  for  July

indicated  a nominal  gain  of  0.4  percent,  suggesting a  level  of  real

expenditure  somewhat  above  the  second-quarter  average.  Meanwhile,

sales  of  light  motor  vehicles  have  slipped  during  the  past  two

months;  however,  all  indications  are  that the  decline  has  been

aggravated  appreciably  by  the  inability  of manufacturers  to  produce

enough  of  the most  popular models,  a problem that  will  be  somewhat

alleviated  in  the  next  several months.  The  strong  gains  in

employment  in  recent months  have boosted  labor  income,  and  surveys

show consumer  sentiment  holding  up well  in the  face  of concerns

about  rising  interest  rates.

In the  business  sector,  the  June  report  on inventories  in

manufacturing  and  trade was  in  line with the  assumptions underlying

BEA's  advance  estimate that  real  nonfarm stocks  rose  $50  billion

during  the  second  quarter.  The  spurt  in  stocks  appears  to  have  been

essentially  a catch-up  after the  surge  in sales  in prior  months,  and

there  is  no  evidence  of  an inventory  overhang  at  this  time,

Inventory-sales  ratios  appear  generally to  be within their  recent

ranges.  Even  so.  the  return  to  more  sustainable  rates  of

accumulation is  expected  to  subtract  about  1-1/4  percentage  points

from current-quarter GDP  growth.  With  regard to  fixed  investment,

new orders  and  backlogs  for  nondefense  capital  goods  continued to

trend  upward  strongly  in  June,  boding well  for  the  volume  of

I-5

shipments  in  the  short  run,  and  permits  data  point  to  further

increases  in  nonresidential  construction.

All  signs  are  that  activity  in the  single-family housing  sector

is  weakening under  the weight  of  higher mortgage  rates.  Starts  fell

appreciably  in June,  and home  sales  declined.  In  the multifamily

sector  starts  plunged  in  June  after  soaring  in May;  on balance,  the

indications  are that  apartment markets  have firmed  in  enough locales

to  support  a moderate  uptrend  in building.  All  told,  the  incoming

information has  led  us  to  steepen  the near-term decline  of

residential  investment in  this forecast

On the  inflation front,  despite  a continuing climb  in

industrial materials prices,  broader wage  and  price trends  have

remained  fairly stable.  The Employment  Cost  Indexes  for  the second

quarter  showed  a marked step-up  in the  pace  of wage and  salary

increases,  after  a sharp  slowing  in the first  quarter:  benefit  costs

increased  just  a touch  faster than the  relatively moderate

3-1/2  percent  pace  in the  previous  period.  Overall  compensation

rose  at  a 3.7  percent  annual  rate;  given  the short-run  variation in

the  series,  this  datum can reasonably be  characterized  as  in  line

SUMMARY OF  THE  NEAR-TERM OUTLOOK
(Percent change,  at  annual  rates,  except  as  noted)

Real  GDP 

Previous 

Civilian unemployment  rate 1  

Previous 

CPI  inflation 
Previous 

1993 
Q4 

6.3 
7.0 

6.5 
6.5 

3.1 
3.1 

Q1 

3.3 
3.0 

6.6 
6.6 

1.9 
1.9 

1994
Q2 

3.7 
3.5 

6.2 
6.3 

2.8 
2.7 

Q3

2.8
2.9

6.2
6.3

4.0
3.7

1  Values  for  1993  are  from the old  CPS.

with  the  3-1/2  percent  per  annum trend  since  1992.  In  July, the

narrower  index of  average hourly  earnings  jumped  0.4 percent,  but

I-6

the  twelve-month  change,  at  2.7  percent,  was  still  within  the  range

of  the  past  couple  of  years.  The  CPI  increased  0.3  percent  in  July,

boosted  by  sizable  increases  in  food  and  energy prices.  Excluding

food  and  energy,  the  CPI  rose  0.2  percent,  holding  the  twelve-month

increase  at  2.9  percent.

The  Outlook  for  the Economy

The  general  contours  of the  projection have  changed  little

from the June  Greenbook.  Real  GDP  growth  is  projected to  slow

appreciably in  the near  term  and  to  average  a little more  than

2 percent  over  the four  quarters  of  1995.  Much of  the  deceleration

in  final  demand is  attributable  to  the  softening in major  investment

sectors  that  have  propelled  demand  in the  past  year:  residential

construction,  producers'  durable  equipment,  and  consumer  durables.

The  unemployment rate  is  expected to  edge  back up  to  about

6-1/4  percent--a  figure well within  the  range  of alternative

estimates  of  the NAIRU  developed  by the Board  staff and  other

analysts.  With little  or  no  slack  left  in  the  economy, the

"exogenous  shocks"  of higher  oil  prices  and  higher  non-oil  import

prices  show  through  in  overall  inflation  during  the projection

period.

SUMMARY OF  STAFF  PROJECTIONS  FOR 1994-95 1
(Percent change,  at  annual  rates,  except  as  noted)

1993 

1994 

1995

Real  GDP 

Previous 

Civilian  unemployment  rate 2  

Previous 

3.1 
3.1 

6.5 
6.5 

3.5 
3.2 

6.2 
6.3 

2.6 
2.6 

6.2 
6.3 

2.1
2.2

6.3
6.4

1.  Percent  changes  are  from  final  quarter  of  previous  period  to

final  quarter  of  period  indicated.

2.  Average  level  in  the  final  quarter  of  period  indicated,

percent.  The  value  for  1993  is  from the  old  CPS.

I-7

Consumer  spending.  After  increasing  at  an  average  rate  of  more

than 3 percent  (on our  estimate)  during  the  first  two  quarters  of

the  year,  growth  of real  personal  consumption expenditures  is

expected  to  slow to  2-1/2  percent  during the  second half  and

2 percent  in  1995 

This  deceleration is  expected to  be  associated

with  a modest upturn  in the  personal  saving rate.  The  saving  rate

typically  falls  during early  stages  of business  cycle  expansions,  as

reduced  job  risks,  low interest  rates,  and  rapidly  rising  real

incomes  support  increased purchases  of durable  goods,  some  of which

may  have  been  deferred during the  recession.  This  stage  of the

cycle  is  now behind us.  Borrowing costs  are  rising,  and  labor

income  is  projected  to  grow more slowly.  The  financial wealth

position  of  consumers  has  been  weakened a bit  by the decline  in  the

bond  and  stock  markets--and the  forecast  implies  some further

erosion  of  asset  values.  And  consumers  have had  ample time  and

resources  (partly from equity withdrawn  in  several  recent  waves  of

mortgage  refinancing)  to  work down  their  pent-up  demands.

The  slackening in  consumption  growth is  expected to  be most

marked  in the  durable  goods  category.  Real  outlays  for durables

increased  9 percent during  1993  and  are  expected  to  decelerate to

4-3/4  percent  this  year  and  to  3 percent  over  1995.  The  slowdown in

housing  activity  is  expected  to  contribute to  the  damping  of  sales

of furniture  and  appliances,  which have  remained  robust to  this

point.  Motor  vehicle  purchases are  expected to  pick up  over  the

remainder  of  the year,  as  supply  constraints  ease.  But we  do  not

foresee  a return  of  sales  to  the pace  of this  past  winter.  Light

vehicle  sales,  which ran  at  almost  a 15-1/2 million unit  annual  rate

in  the  first  quarter, before  sliding to  a little  over  a 14  million

rate  in the  past  couple of months,  are  projected to  total  just  over

15  million  in  calendar  1995--scarcely a bad  year  historically

I-8

Residential  investment,  Recent  indicators  suggest that  the

rise  in  mortgage  interest  rates  is  inducing  a  greater  slowing  in

residential  construction  activity  than we  had  expected.  We  now

project  single-family  housing  starts  to  bottom out  at  a  1.05  million

unit  annual  rate  at  the  end  of this  year,  40,000  units  below our

June  Greenbook  projection.  With  the  projected  decline  in mortgage

rates  next  year  however,  single-family  starts  are  expected  to turn

up  moderately.  Single-family  construction  is  projected  to  remain

far  above  the  depressed  levels  of  the  early  1990s,  owing to  the

pent-up  demand  for  homeownership  and  the  fact  that--even  for

fixed-rate  loans--cash-flow affordability remains  extremely good  by

the  standards  of  the  past  two  decades.  (Of course,  many buyers

recently have muted the  effects  of higher  rates  by  opting  for

adjustable-rate loans  that  reduce  cash  flow  requirements  for  at

least  the  early years  of  the  mortgage.)

High apartment  vacancy  rates  and  low real  rental  rates  continue

to  exert  a restraining  influence on  the  multifamily segment  of the

housing market.  Nevertheless,  tighter market  conditions  in  some

locales  and  an  easing  of  financial  constraints  on  developers  are

expected to  support  a  gradual  uptrend  in multifamily  starts  over  the

forecast period.

Business  fixed  investment.  Real  BFI  is  projected  to  advance

at  an  11-1/2  percent  annual  rate  over  the  second half of  this  year

based  on current  trends  in  orders  and  building permits.  However,

some  deceleration--albeit  to  a still  considerable 7-1/2  percent

pace--is  expected  for  1995.  This  reflects  the  increase  in  financing

costs,  growing  dependence on  external  funds,  and  the  projected

slowing  in  sales  growth.

The  slowing  of  investment  growth  occurs primarily  in the

equipment  category.  However,  we  anticipate  that  spending  on

I-9

computing  and  communications  equipment will  continue  to  rise

steeply 

Rapid  technological  innovation  and  declining prices will

make  spending  on these types  of  equipment  attractive  to  many

businesses  even  as  output  growth  wanes.

We  also  expect  investment  in  nonresidential  structures  to  hold

up  well,  rising at  a 7-1/4 percent  annual  rate  in  the  second  half  of

1994  and  6-1/4  percent  in  1995 

Construction of  "other"  commercial

buildings--notably  stores  for  some  of  the  rapidly  growing  retail

chains--is  projected to pace  the  advance, but  moderate  advances  are

anticipated for most  other  categories  as  well.  The market  for

office  space has  begun to  firm, and  there are  already  signs  of  an

upturn--from a deeply  depressed level--in  this  sector.  Credit to

finance  commercial  and  industrial  construction  is  more  readily

available  from depository  institutions  and REIT  investment  also  is

helping  to  support  construction  activity.

Business  inventories.  After  a substantial  downshift  in  the

pace of  accumulation this  quarter,  we  anticipate that  inventory

investment  will  slow  gradually  over the  remainder  of  the projection

period.  The aggregate  inventory-sales  ratio  appears to  have  risen a

touch recently,  and our forecast  implies  rough  stability in this

ratio  through  1995.  Although there  is  a risk that  desired  stocking

levels  could  rise  further as  firms  seek to  meet  customer demands  and

avoid  production disruptions  in the  context  of deteriorating  vendor

performance and  lengthening  lead  times, the  underlying trend  toward

lean inventory  systems  is  likely to  limit  any movement  in that

direction.

Government  purchases.  Real  federal  purchases  declined at  a

7-1/2  percent  annual  rate  during the  first  half  of  1994,  and  the

descent  should  slow to  only 3/4  percent  for  the  remainder of  the

year.  We  project  a near-term pause  in  the ongoing  retrenchment  in

I-10

defense  spending  because  spending  cuts  budgeted  for  1994  were

largely  realized  by  the sharp  falloff  of  spending  earlier  this  year

and  employee  buyouts  during the  second  quarter  have  placed

nondefense  purchases  well  within the  limits  implied  by  the  OBRA-1993

spending  caps.  A decline  of  4-1/4  percent  is  projected  for  total

real  purchases  during  1995,  entirely  accounted  for  by  further  cuts

in defense.

Real  state  and  local  purchases  are  projected  to  increase  at

about  a 2-1/2  percent  annual  rate  over  the  entire  projection  period.

Demands  are strong for  public  services  owing to  a growing  school  age

population  and  increased  concerns  about  public  safety,  and  there  is

a need  to  repair decaying  infrastructure;  however, purchases  will

continue to  be  restrained by  the  sector's  still  large deficit  and

the  desire  among many governments  to  let  any  improvement  in finances

show up  in  lower  taxes.

Net  exports.  After  two  years  of  a sharply  deteriorating

external balance,  real  net  exports  of  goods  and  services  are

expected  to  be  about  unchanged  over the  next  six  quarters.  With

economic  conditions  abroad  improving  and recent  declines  in  the

value of  the dollar enhancing  the  competitiveness  of U.S.  produced

goods,  the  growth  of real  exports  is  projected to  increase  to  around

7-3/4  percent  average  annual  rate,  over the  projection period.  The

growth  of  real  imports  is  projected  to  decline  from the  double-digit

pace  of  the  last  few  quarters to  6-1/4  percent  over the  next  year

and  a half,  reflecting the  slowdown  in  U.S.  output  growth  and  the

effect  of recent  declines  in the value  of the  dollar  on  the price  of

imports.  (A discussion of these  developments is  contained  in the

International  Developments  section.)

Labor markets.  Employment  growth  is  projected  to  moderate  over

coming  quarters.  The drop-off  in  payroll  growth  is  less marked than

I-11

that  of  output,  however,  for two  reasons.  First,  the  larger

cyclical  gains  in  productivity  are  likely behind us.  Second,  it

seems  unlikely  that  average  workweeks will  rise  from  recent  levels

on  a sustained  basis.

We  have  continued  to be  surprised  by the weakness  in  labor

force  growth.  The  participation  rate  inched  up to  66.3  percent  in

July but  remains  well  below  rates  seen  earlier  this year 

The

shortfall  in participation rates  in  recent  years  relative  to  the

trends  of the  1980s  has been  fairly widespread across  various

demographic  classifications.  In  particular  the earlier  steady

uptrend  among  adult women  has  slowed  noticeably.  We had  thought  for

some  time that  these phenomena were  largely  of  a cyclical  nature,

but  their  persistence  suggests  that  the explanation may  be more

secular 

Labor  force  participation, after  advancing  sharply  for

more  than two  decades,  may be  on  a slower trend  growth  path.

STAFF LABOR MARKET PROJECTIONS
(Percent, end-quarter average,  except  as  noted)

Nonfarm payroll  employment 

Previous 

Output  per hour,  nonfarm business2  

Previous 

Civilian  participation rate 

Previous 

Civilian unemployment  rate 

Previous 

1993 

2.0 
2.0 

1.9 
1 7 

66.2 
66.2 

6.5 
6.5 

1994 

H1 

H2

2.9 
2.7 

.9 
1 

2.4 
1 7 

.8 
1 7 

66.5 
66.6 

66.5 
66.9 

6.4 
6.4 

6.2 
6.3 

1995

1.3
1.4

1.3
1.1

66.8
67,2

6.3
6.4

1  Percent  change  from  final  quarter  of  previous  period to  final

quarter  of period  indicated.

2  Average  for  indicated  period.

Accordingly, we have  reduced  our  estimate  of the trend  rate  of

growth  in the  participation  rate  for the  1990s to  less  than

0.1  percent  per  year.  However,  the  rate  rises  somewhat  more  rapidly

I-12

than  this  over  the  projection  period  because we  expect  the  gap

between  the  current  rate  and  our  estimate  of  the  trend  level  to

narrow.

With  output  and  employment  growth  about  the  same  in  this

forecast  as  in  the  last,  the  lower  trajectory of  labor  force

participation  is  mirrored  in  a 0.1  percentage  point  reduction  in  the

unemployment  rate  path  from  the previous  projection.  We  do  not

interpret  this  as  implying any greater  tightness  in the  labor

market,  however, because  we  have  once  again  lowered  our  estimate  of

the  degree  to  which the new  CPS  has  elevated  the measured

unemployment rate  relative to  that  produced by  the  old  survey--from

about  1/3  percentage  point  to  0.2  percentage  point.  Technically, we

have lowered  our  estimate  of  the NAIRU  by roughly the  same  amount  as

the projected  unemployment  rate.

Wages  and  prices.  With  the  labor market  in  reasonable  balance

and  prices  rising  at  about  the  same  pace  as  in  recent  years,  there

appears  to  be  little  reason  to  anticipate much  acceleration or

deceleration  of  compensation  rates  in the near  term.  The  ECI  is

projected to  continue  increasing  at  about  a 3-1/2  percent  rate

through  next year,  with  increases  in  benefit  costs  remaining more

rapid  than  increments  to  wages.  Firms  undoubtedly will maintain

their  efforts to  trim health  insurance  expenses,  but  pension  funding

costs  are  expected to  continue  increasing  rapidly.  (Indeed, two

large  cash  payments by General  Motors to  its  pension plan  show up  as

bulges  in  the  growth of  compensation in  the third  quarters  of  1994

and  1995.) 

Combined with an  assumed  cyclically  adjusted  trend

growth  of  productivity  of  close  to  1-1/2  percent  per year,  the

compensation forecast  translates  into  increases  in trend  unit  labor

costs  of  around 2 percent  per year.

I-13

CPI  inflation  is  expected  to  average  about  3-3/4  percent  in  the

second  half  of  this  year  up  considerably  from  the  average  pace  of

recent  quarters 

Food  and  energy  prices  registered  little  change  in

the  first  half  of  1994  and  have  turned  up  sharply  this  quarter:

SUMMARY OF  STAFF  INFLATION  PROJECTIONS
(Percent  change,  Q4  to  Q4,  except  as  noted)

Consumer  price  index 

Previous 

Excluding  food  and  energy 

Previous 

ECI  for  compensation  of

private  industry  workers 

Previous 

1 

December to  December

1993 

1994 

1995

2.7 
2.7 

3 1 
3 1 

3.6 
3.6 

3.1 
3.0 

3.1 
3.1 

3.4 
3.4 

3.0
3  1

3 1
3.3

3.5
3  5

the  food  price  surge  is  expected  to  abate  soon,  but  the  pass-through

of  higher  crude  oil  costs  to  retail  energy  prices  is  likely  to

continue  through year-end 

The  rise  in  the  cost  of  energy  and

petroleum-based  materials will  also  have  a modest  effect  on  the  core

CPI.  In  addition,  the  recent  depreciation  of  the  dollar  is  likely

to  result  in an  acceleration  of non-oil  import  prices,  which will

put  some  additional  pressure  on  materials  costs  and  finished  goods

prices--thereby  affecting core  CPI  inflation.  After  the  adjustment

to  these  one-time  shocks,  the  core  inflation  rate  returns  close  to

the  recent  trend,  running  at  just  above  3 percent  in  1995;  the

overall  CPI  runs  a shade  lower  because  of the  anticipated  favorable

behavior  of  food  and  energy prices.

Strictly Confidential  (FR)
Class  II 

FOMC

STAFF  PROJECTIONS  OF  CHANGES  IN  GDP,  PRICES,  AND  UNEMPLOYMENT

(Percent,  annual  rate)

Interval 

6/29/94 

8/12/94 

6/29/94 

8/12/94 

6/29/94 

8/12/94 

6/29/94 

8/12/94 

6/29/94 

8/12/94

3.2 
5.5 
5.6 
5.9 
4.8 

7.4 
5.7 
4.6 
9.2 

4.4 
4.3 
4.4 
8.4 

6.6 
6.9 

4.3 
6.4 

5.8 
5.0 

4.7 
4.5 

3.2 
5.2 
5.4 
5. 
4.6 

7.1 
5.2 
4.9 
8.6 

4.4 
4.2 
3.8 
7.7 

6.1
6.7

4.3 
5.7 

6.4 
4.6 

4.4 
4.4 

-.7 
2.6 
3.0 
3.7 
2.4 

3.5 
2.8 
3.4 
5.7 

.8 
1.9 
2.9 
7.0 

3.2 
4.6 

1.3 
4.9 

3.2
2.6

2.1
2.3

-.6 
2.3 
3.1 
3.7 
2.3 

3.1 
2.4 
3.5 
5.7 

1.2 
2.4 
2.7 
6.3 

2.8
4.6

1.8 
4.5 

3.5 
2.6 

2.0 
2.3 

4.1 
3.3 
3.1 
2.7 
2.9 

4.2 
3.4 
2.5 
3.1 

4.3 
2.8 
2.1 
2.3 

3.9 
2.8 

3.4 
2.2 

2.8
2.8

3.1
2.7

4.0 
3.2 
3.0 
2.7 
2.9 

3.9 
3.3 
2.7 
2.8 

4.2 
2.4 
2.0 
2.4 

4.3 
3.0 
3.0 
2.7 
3.3 

2.6 
3.5 
2.9 
3.5 

2.8 
3.1 
2.0 
3.1 

4.3 
3.0 
3.0 
2.7 
3.2 

2.6 
3.5 
2.9 
3.5 

2.8 
3.1 
2.0 
3.1 

6.7 
7.4 
6.8 
6.4 
6.4 

7.3 
7.5 
7.5 
7.3 

7.0 
7.0 
6.7 
6.5 

6.7
7.4
6.8
6.3
6.3

7.3
7.5
7.5
7.3

7.0
7.0
6.7
6.5

3.5 
2.8 

3.3 
2.2 

3.0 
2.8 

3.0 
3.2 

3.1
2.4

2.4
3.6

3.0 
3.2 

3.1 
2.4 

.5
-.2

-.3 
-. 5 

-.3
-. 5

ANNUAL

19912 
19922 
19932 
1994 
1995 

QUARTERLY

1992  Q12 
Q22 
Q32 
Q42 

1993  Q12 
Q22 
Q32 
Q42 

1994  Q12
Q22
Q3
Q4

1995 

Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4

TWO-QUARTER

3

1992  Q22
Q42

1993  Q22
Q42

1994  Q22
Q4

1995  Q2

Q4

FOUR-QUARTER

4

1991  Q42
1992  Q42
1993  Q42
1994  Q4
1995  Q4

1.  For  all  urban  consumers.
2.  Actual.
in  pnatag  points.
3.  percent  change  from  two  quarters  earlier 
4.  Percent  change  from  four  quarters  earlier;  for  unemloymen  rate,  change  in  percntage points.

for  unIMloyment  rate,  chang 

Strictly  Confidential 
Class  II FOMC 

(FR) 

REAL  GROSS  DOMESTIC  PRODUCT  AND  RELATED  ITEMS,  ANNUAL  VALUES
(Seasonally  adjusted  annual  rate) 

August  12,  1994

Projected

Item 

Unit1 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995

EXPENDITURES

Nominal  GDP 
Real  GDP 

Real  GDP 
Gross  domestic  purchases 
Final  sales 
Private  dom,  final  purch. 

Personal  cons.  expend. 

Durables 
Nondurables 
Services 

Business  fixed  invest. 

Producers'  dur.  equip. 
Nonres.  structures 

Res,  structures 

Exports 
Imports 

Government  purchases 

Federal 

Defense 

State  and  local 

Nonfarm 
Net  exports 

Nominal  GDP 

EMPLOYMENT  AND  PRODUCTION

Change 

in  bus.  invent. 

Bill.  87$ 

Bill.  S 
Bill. 87$ 

4539.9 
4540.0 

4900.4 
4718.6 

5250.8 
4838.0 

5546.1 
4897.3 

5724.8 
4867.6 

6020.2 
4979.3 

6343.3 
5134.5 

6713.0 
5323.4 

7025.0
5445.6

% change 

4.5 
3.9 
2.7 
1.9 

2.1 
-2.6 
1.4 
3.7 

3.0 
2.4 
4.4 
-3.1 

12.6 
4.7 

3.3 
3.7 
4.5 
2.9 

3.3 
2.5 
4.2 
4.2 

4.2 
8.5 
3.2 
3.7 

5.5 
9.1 
-1.2 

.9 

13.5 
3.6 

.2 
-3.4 
-3.2 
2.9 

1.6 
.9 
1.5 
.5 

1.2 
-. 5 
1.2 
1.7 

-. 4 
-1.7 
2.3 
-7.7 

11.3 
2.6 

2.0 
-. 6 
-1.5 
4.0 

.2 
-. 4 
1.2 
-. 1 

.7 

-. 8 
-. 1 
1.7 

.7 
2.9 
-3.9 
-15.2 

6.7 
.4 

3.3 
2.8 
1.5 
3.6 

.3 
-. 1 
-.4 
-. 8 

.0 

-1.3 
-1.6 
1.2 

-6.2 
-3.2 
-12.4 

.7 

8.1 
4.0 

-. 8 
-3.2 
-7.0 
.8 

3.7 
4.1 
3.8 
5.1 

4.2 
9.6 
3.2 
3.5 

6.7 
11.0 
-3.4 
17.0 

5.0 
8.6 

.7 
.8 
-1.3 
.6 

3.1 
3.9 
3.0 
5.0 

3.0 
9.0 
1.3 
2.5 

16.0 
21.3 
1.6 
8.1 

5.8 
12.4 

-1.0 
-6.9 
-9.0 
3.0 

3.0 
3.5 
2.6 
3,8 

2.7 
4.7 
1.9 
2.7 

11.1 
13.1 
4.6 

.3 

5.9 
8.7 

-. 6 
-4.2 
-5.7 
1.6 

2.1
2.1
2.3
2.8

2.0
2.9
1.5
2.0

7.6
8.0
6.2
1.2

7.5
6.9

-. 1

-4.2
-6.4
2.3

26.3 
32.7 
-143.0 

19.9 
26.9 
-104.0 

29.8 
29.9 
-73.7 

5.7 
3.2 
-54.7 

-1.1 
-1.3 
-19.5 

2.5 
-2.0 
-32.3 

15.3 
18.5 
-73.9 

38.2 
33.0 
-108.8 

27.5
24.3
-109.1

% change 

8.0 

7.7 

6.0 

4.7 

3.5 

6.4 

5.0 

5.5 

4.4

Nonfarm  payroll  employ.  Millions 
Unemployment  rate 

% 

102.0 
6.2 

105.2 
5.5 

107.9 
5.3 

109.4 
5.5 

108.3 
6.7 

108.6 
7.4 

110.5 
6.8 

113.3 
6.3 

Industrial  prod. 
Capacity  util.  rate-mig. 

index 

% change 
% 

6.3 
81.6 

3.2 
83.6 

-. 1 
83.1 

-. 2 
81.1 

-. 3 
77.8 

Housing  starts 
Light  Motor  Vehicle Sales 

Auto  sales  in  U.S. 

North  American  prod. 
Other 

INCOME  AND  SAVING

Millions 

1.62 
14.84 
10.24 
7.07 
3.18 

1.49 
15,43 
10.63 
7.54 
3.10 

1.38 
14.53 
9-91 
7.08 
2.83 

1.19 
13.  5 
9.50 
6.90 
2.60 

1.01 
12.31 
8.39 
6.14 
2.25 

3.2 
78.6 

1.20 
12  80 
8.35 
6.26 
2.10 

4.2 
80.6 

1.29 
13.89 
8.72 
6.75 
1.97 

4.9 
82.9 

1.36 
15.00 
9.24 
7.29 
1.95 

115.2
6.3

2.7
82.7

1.35
15.13
9.16
7.35
1.81

Nominal  GNP 
Nominal  GNP 
Nominal  personal  income 
Real  disposable  income 
Personal  saving  rate 

Bill.  $ 
s change 

% 

4544.5 
8.1 
7.4 
2.1 
4.3 

4908.2 
7.8 
7.1 
3.2 
4.4 

5266.8 
6.1 
6.5 
1.1 
4.0 

5567.8 
4.9 
6.5 
1.1 
4.2 

5740.8 
3.2 
3.7 
.9 
5.0 

6025.8 
6.1 
8.1 
5.0 
5.5 

6347.8 
5.0 
2.8 
.5 
4.1 

6710.1 
5.5 
5.8 
2.9 
3.9 

7015.5
4.3
5.4
2.4
4.2

Corp.  profits,  IVAaCCAdj  % change 

Profit  share  of  GP 

% 

29.7 
7.0 

10.2 
7.4 

-6.3 
6.9 

2.3 
6.8 

8.8 
6.8 

9-6 
6.7 

23.4 
7.7 

6.0 
8.2 

1.2
8.1

Federal  surpl./def. 
State/local  surpl./def. 
Ex.  social  ins.  funds 

Bill. 

$ 

-151.8 
40.1 
-14.7 

-136.6 
38.4 
-18.4 

-122.3 

44.8 
-17.5 

-163.5 
25.1 
-35.6 

-202.9 
17.0 
-46.5 

-282.7 
24.8 
-41.6 

-241.4 
26.3 
-40,0 

-155.5 
27.8 
-37.8 

-166.8
36.2
-28.3

4  change 

PRICES  AND  COSTS

GDP  implicit  deflator 
GDP  fixed-wt.  price  index 
Gross  domestic  purchases
fixed-wt.  price  index 

CPI 

Ex.  food  and  energy 

ECI,  hourly  compensation

2  

Nonfarm  business sector

Output  per  hour 
Compensation  per  hour 
Unit  labor  cost 

3.4 
3.4 

3.9 
4.5 
4.3 

3.3 

1.9 
3.9 
1.9 

4.2 
4.2 

4.1 
4.3 
4.5 

4.8 

.5 
3.8 
3.3 

4.3 
4.4 

4.4 
4.6 
4.4 

4.9 

-1.4 
3.1 
4.6 

4.5 
4.6 

5.2 
6.3 
5.3 

4.6 

,4 
6.2 
5.7 

3.3 
3.6 

2.9 
3.0 
4.4 

4.4 

2.3 
4.7 
2.3 

2.6 
3.2 

3.2 
3.1 
3.5 

3.5 

3.2 
5.2 
1.9 

1.8 
2.8 

2.5 
2.7 
3.1 

3.6 

1.9 
2.5 
.6 

2.4 
2.9 

3.0 
3.1 
3.1 

3.4 

.8 
3.5 
2.7 

2.2
2.9

2.8
3.0
3.1

3.5

1.3
3.6
2.3

1.  Percent  changes  are  frcm  fourth  quartr  to  fourth  quarter.

2.  Private-indurtry  workers.

Strictly Confidential  (FR) 

Class  II 

FOMC 

REAL GROSS  DOMESTIC  PRODUCT AND RELATED  ITEMS,  QUARTERLY VALUES

(Seasonally adjusted, annual  rate  except  as  noted) 

August  12,  1994

1993 

1994 

1995

Projected

Item 

Units 

03 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4

EXPENDITURES

Nominal  GDP 
Real  GDP 

6359.2  6478.1  6574.7  6683.6  6756.4  6837.1  6914.0  6986.8  7061.2  7138.1
Bill.  $ 
Bill.  87$  5139.4  5218.0  5261.1  5309.2  5346.6  5376.6  5401.8  5430.2  5459.4  5491.1

Real  GDP 
Gross  domestic  purchases 
Final  sales 
Private  dom. final  purch. 

% change 

Personal  cons.  expend. 

Durables 
Nondurables 
Services 

Business  fixed invest. 

Producers'  dur.  equip. 
Nonres.  structures 

Res.  structures 

Exports 
Imports 

Government  purchases 

Federal 

Defense 

State  and  local 

Change  in  bus.  invent. 

Bill.  87$ 

Nonfarm 
Net  exports 

Nominal GDP 

EMPLOYMENT  AND  PRODUCTION

2.7 
4.0 
3.2 
5.3 

3.9 
7.7 
2.8 
3.6 

12.2 
16.2 
.5 
9.4 

-3.2 
7.4 

1.1 
-3.0 
-9.2 
3.7 

13.0 
20.9 
-86.3 

6.3 
5.8 
6.4 
7.4 

4.0 
15.5 
2.4 
2.0 

21.1 
27.5 
3.3 
28.2 

21.7 
16.0 

.1 
-5.0 
-3.6 
2.9 

3.3 
5.0 
2.2 
5.8 

4.7 
8.8 
3.8 
4.0 

10.9 
18.6 
-11.8 
10.0 

-3.5 
9.5 

-4.9 
-10.3 
-16.0 
-1.4 

3.7 
4.4 
1.5 
2.8 

1.2 
.8 
.7 

1.6 

10.0 
7.7 
18.4 
7.0 

11.1 
15.1 

.5 
-4.8 
-3.8 
2.0 

2.8 
2.6 
4.0 
3.9 

2.8 
5.2 
.9 

3.2 

2.3 
1.9 
2.8 
2.8 

2.4 
3.9 
2.3 
2.0 

13.1 
15.0 
7.3 
-4.0 

10.3 
11.3 
7.1 
-10.3 

9.5 
6.5 

2.5 
1.2 
.9 
3.2 

7.0 
4.0 

.7 
-2.6 
-3.0 
2.6 

1.9 
2.0 
2.1 
2.8 

2.2 
2.8 
2.0 
2.2 

8.0 
8.5 
6.1 
-3.9 

7.1 
6.9 

-.5 

-4.6 
-7.1 
1.9 

2.1 
2.1 
2.3 
2.7 

1.8 
2.6 
1.3 
1.9 

7.9 
8.3 
6.7 
1.2 

7.3 
6.2 

2.2 
2.2 
2.3 
2.8 

1.9 
3.0 
1.4 
1.9 

7.4 
7.8 
6.1 
2.9 

7.6 
7.2 

2.3
2.3
2.5
2.9

2.0
3.3
1.4
2.0

7.2
7.5
6.0
4.8

8.1
7.2

.1 

.2 

-4.1 
-6.4 
2.2 

-4.4 
-6.6 
2.2 

.3

-3.8
-5.7
2.6

10.8 
10.7 

24.7
22.4
-82.2  -104.0  -113.4  -110.7  -107.0  -108.4  -108.3  -109.5  -110.0

27.0 
24.8 

25.4 
22.1 

40.2 
33.2 

54.0 
50.0 

28.1 
24.6 

33.3 
26.5 

30.1 
25.3 

% change 

3.8 

7.7 

6.1 

6.8 

4.4 

4.9 

4.6 

4.3 

4.3 

4.4

Nonfarm payroll employ. 
Unemployment rate1 

Millions 
% 

110.8 
6.7 

111.4 
6.5 

112.0 
6.6 

113.0 
6.2 

113.8 
6.2 

114.3 
6.2 

114.7 
6.2 

115.0 
6.2 

115.4 
6.3 

115.8
6.3

Industrial  prod.  index 
Capacity util.  rate-mfg.1 

% change 

2.8 
80.3 

6.7 
81.5 

8.3 
82.5 

4.4 
82.9 

3.9 
83.0 

3.0 
82.9 

2.5 
82.8 

2.6 
82.7 

2.8 
82.6 

3.0
82.6

Housing  starts 
Light Motor Vehicle Sales 

Auto sales  in U.S. 

North  American prod. 
Other 

INCOME  AND  SAVING

Millions 

1.31 
13.69 
8.65 
6.68 
1.97 

1.48 
14.53 
8.97 
7.08 
1.89 

1.37 
15.45 
9.45 
7.44 
2.00 

1.44 
14.75 
9.15 
7.16 
1.99 

1.33 
14.73 
9.10 
7.16 
1.94 

1.31 
15.08 
9.25 
7.40 
1.85 

1.32 
15.05 
9.15 
7.32 
1.83 

1.33 
15.10 
9.15 
7.34 
1.81 

1.36 
15.15 
9.15 
7.36 
1.79 

1.38
15.22
9.17
7.38
1.79

Nominal GNP 
Nominal  GNP 
Nominal  personal  income 
Real  disposable  income 
Personal  saving  rate1 

Bill.  $ 
% change 

% 

6367.8  6476.2  6574.0  6680.7  6754.6  6831.2  6908.7  6975.9  7052.4  7124.8
4.2
5.7
2.8
4.3

4.5 
4.1 
2.1 
4.2 

3.9 
5.2 
1.2 
4.1 

4.6 
6.6 
3.4 
4.3 

4.6 
6.5 
3.2 
4.0 

7.0 
6.7 
4.3 
4.0 

6.7 
7.2 
3.0 
4.0 

4.2 
2.4 
.8 
3.9 

6.2 
5.3 
3.4 
3.6 

4.5 
4.4 
2.0 
3.8 

Corp.  profits.  IVA&CCAdj  % change 

Profit  share  of  GDP

% 

1  

18.4 
7.7 

37.0 
8.2 

-17.9 
7.7 

49.2 
8.4 

2.8 
8.4 

.1 
8.3 

-2.5 
8.1 

-2.3 
8.0 

7.2 
8.1 

2.7
8.0

Federal  govt. surpl./def.  Bill.  $ 
State/local  surpl./def. 
Ex. social  ins.  funds 

-224.9 
23.9 
-42.4 

-220.1 

-176.2 

34.5 

-31.7 

25.2 

-40.7 

-135.5 
24.4 
-41.4 

-143.8 
30.0 
-35.5 

-166.5 

-170.1 

31.7 

-33.5 

33.2 

-31.7 

-158.4 
33.6 
-31.0 

-159.6 
38.5 
-25.8 

-178.9
39.5
-24.7

PRICES AND  COSTS

GDP implicit  deflator 
GDP  fixed-wt.  price  index 
Gross  domestic  purchases
fixed-wt.  price  index 

CPI 

Ex.  food and  energy 

ECI,  hourly compensation 2  

Nonfarm business  sector

output  per  hour 
Compensation  per  hour 
Unit  labor cost 

% change 

1.1 
2.0 

1.6 
2.0 
2.4 

1.3 
2.4 

2.4 
3.1 
2.9 

2.7 
3.1 

2.5 
1.9 
2.6 

3.0 
2.9 

3.2 
2.8 
3.4 

1.5 
2.6 

3.1 
4.0 
3.1 

2.5 
3.1 

3.1 
3.5 
3.3 

2.6 
3.2 

3.2 
3.3 
3.3 

2.1 
2.7 

2.7 
2.9 
3.1 

2.1 
2.7 

2.6 
2.9 
3.1 

3.4 

3.4 

2.7 

3.7 

4.5 

2.7 

3.5 

3.5 

4.0 

4.1 
2.8 
-1.2 

4.9 
2.4 
-2.4 

2.9 
6.1 
3.1 

-1.2 
.8 
2.0 

1.1 
3.7 
2.6 

.5 
3.6 
3.1 

1.2 
3.8 
2.6 

1.3 
3.5 
2.2 

1.3 
3.5 
2.1 

2.0
2.7

2.6
2.9
3.1

2.9

1.3
3.5
2.1

1. Not  at  an annual  rate.

2. Private-industry workers.

Strictly Confidential  (FR)
Class II 

FOMC

NET CHANGES  IN  REAL  GROSS DOMESTIC  PRODUCT AND  RELATED ITEMS 1

(Billions of  1987  dollars)

August  12,  1994

Projected

1994 

1995

Projected

Item

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4

Q2 

Q3 

34.0 
51.1 

40.0 
54.5 

Real GDP
Gross domestic purchases

Final  sales
Private dom. final  purch.

Personal cons.  expend.

Durables
Nondurables
Services

Business  fixed invest.

Producers'  dur.  equip.
Nonres.  structures

Res.  structures

26.9 
16.6 
.2 
4.7 

78.6 
74.4 

80.7 
76.9 

34.0 
18.1 
6.3 
9.6 

29.3 
28.2 
1.2 
13.5 

43.1 
64.9 

28.5
61.9

40.1
10.9
10.3
18.9

16.4
20.9
-4.6
5.4

14.6
11.4

3,2

48.1 
57.5 

19.5 
30.1 

-10.8 
1.1 
1.9 
7.8 

15.5 
9.3 
6.2 
3.9 

37.4 
34.7 

51.2 
42.8 

24.4 
6.7 
2.5 
15.2 

20.7 
10.1 
2.7 
-2.4 

28.6 
27.9 

-13.8
-16.8

.8 

2.9

Change 

in  bus.  invent.

Nonfarm
Farm

Net exports
Exports
Imports

Government  purchases

Federal

Defense
Nondefense
State  and  local

-5.9 
-1.9 
-4.0 

-2.2 
-10.2 

8.0 

-17.0 
-4.9 
12.0 

4.1 
29.9 
25.8 

-21.8
-5.6
16.2

-. 3
-4.5
-2.2
-2.3
4.2

-11.6

-9.4

-10.2

.8

-3.1

2.7 
14.7 
11.9 

-9.4 
16.5 
25.9 

-1.2
-4.2
-2.2
-2.0
2.9

1.  Annual  changes  are  from  Q4  to  Q4.

30.0 
26.4 

36.9 
31.7 

21.0 
5.1 
6.2 
9.7 

16.9
14.2
2.6
-6.2

-6.9 
-6.7 
.2 

3.6 
11.1 
7.5 

25.2 
26.6 

28.4 
30.9 

19.7 
3.7 
5.5 
10.5 

13.5 
11.1 
2.3 
-2.2 

-3.2 
-1.2 
-2.0 

-1.4 
11.5 
12.9 

29.2 
30.4 

30.2 
31.9 

17.2 
4.0 
3.9 
9.3 

13.1 
10.7 
2.4 
1.6 

-1.0 
.3 
-1,3 

-1.2 
12.7 
13.9 

28.4 
28.2 

30.4 
30.5 

16.2 
3.4 
3.5 
9.3 

13.7 
11.1 
2.6 
.6 

-2.1 
-.8 
-1.3 

.1 
12.0 
11.9 

.2
-3.5
-3.6

.1
3.3

Q4

31.7
32.1

34.0
33.6

18.1
4.4
3.9
9.9

12.9
10.5
2.4
2.6

-2.3
-2.4
.1

.4

13.7
14.1

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995

179.9 
201.6 

186.8 
202.2 

138.1
41.1
33.8
63.1

34.0
39.1
-5.1
30.2

-6.9
-8.3
1.4

-21.6
28.1
49.9

6.2
2.9
-3.4
6.4
3.2

157.3 
201.0 

153.1 
205.9 

102.8
42.0
13.8
47.0

86.3
83.9

2.4
16.8

4.2
4.4
.2

-43.7 
34.5 
78.1 

-9.1 

-25.9 
-23.7 
-2.2 
16.8 

158.6 
183.4 

136.1 
166.5 

96.3
23.8
20.9
51.6

69.4
62.5
6.9

.7

22.5 
15.8 
6.7 

-24.8
36.7
61.5

-5.6

-14.8
-13.6
-1.2
9.2

114.5
117.5

123.1
127.0

71.2
15.5
16.7
39.0

53.1
43.4
9.7
2.7

-8.6
-4.  1
-4.5

-2.9
49.9
52.8

.9
-14.2
-14.5

.3
13.3

Strictly  Confidential  (FR)
Class  II FOMC

STAFF  PROJECTIONS  OF 

FEDERAL SECTOR  ACCOUNTS  AND  RELATED  ITEMS

(Billions of  dollars  except  as  noted)

August  12,  1994

Item 

1992a 

1993a 

1994 

1995 

Q1a 

Q2a 

Q3a 

Q4a 

Q1a 

Q2b 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

03 

04

Fiscal  year 

1993 

1994 

1995

UNIFIED BUDGET 

Receipts1 

Outlays1 
Surplus/deficit1 

On-budget 

Off-budget 

Surplus  excluding

1090 
1381 
-290 
-340 
50 

1153 
1408 
-255 
-301 

44 

1258 
1464 
-201 
-263 
56 

1333 
1530 
-197 
-257 

60 

262 
325 
-63 
-90 
27 

331 
349 
-18 
-49 
31 

295 
349 
-54 
-54 
0 

287 
379 
-92 
-105 
13 

deposit  insurance2 

-287 

-283 

-213 

-208 

-68 

-25 

-61 

-92 

Not  seasonally adjusted

289 
346 
-59 
-66 
8 

-65 

363 
362 
1 
-33 
33 

319 
375 
-56 
-59 
2 

305 
380 
-75 
-82 
7 

290 
391 
-101 
-110 
8 

409 
376 
33 
-6 
39 

330 
383 
-54 
-60 
6 

314
399
-85
-90
5

4 

-58 

-76 

-106 

32 

-5s 

-86

Means  of  financing
Borrowing 
Cash decrease 
Other3 

Cash operating balance,

end of  period 

NIPA  FEDERAL  SECTOR 

Receipts 

Expenditures 

Purchases 
Defense 
Nonde f e n s e  

Other  expenditures 

Surplus/deficit 

FISCAL INDICATORS

High-employment  (HEB)
surplus/deficit 
Change in  HEB,  percent

of  potential  GDP 

Fiscal  impetus  (FI),

311 
-17 
-4 

249 
€ 
0 

18l 
4 
14 

217 
-12 
-8 

60 
8 
-6 

61 
-39 
-4 

46 
8 
0 

89 
3 
0 

51 
5 
2 

B 

-6 
-2 

39 
3 
14 

68 
10 
-3 

81 
24 
-3 

20 
-45 
-7 

49 
0 
5 

59 

53 

48 

60 

22 

61 

53 

50 

45 

51 

48 

39 

15 

60 

60 

Seasonally adjusted,  annual  rate

69
25
-9

35

1158 
1435 
445 
313 
132 
990 
-276 

1242 
1497 
447 
307 
140 
1049 
-254 

1357 
152 

439 
294 
145 
1087 
-149 

1437 
1601 
438 
290 
148 
1163 
-164 

1213 
1494 
447 
307 
140 
1049 
-283 

1264 
1501 
445 
306 
139 
1055 
-237 

1273 
1498 
443 
299 
144 
1055 
-225 

1314 
1534 
440 
299 
141 
1094 
-220 

1338 
1514 
438 
292 
144 
1074 
-176 

1386 
1522 
439 
291 
14 
1083 
-135 

1391 
1535 
430 
293 
145 
1097 
-144 

1409 
1575 
439 
292 
14 
1137 
-167 

1427 
1597 
440 
292 
148 
1157 
-170 

1454 
1612 
437 
289 
148 
1175 
-158 

1459 
1619 
435 
286 
149 
1184 
-160 

1477
1656
433
283
149
1223
-179

-218 

-210 

-156 

-161 

-237 

-192 

-184 

-195 

-158 

-130 

-142 

-166 

-168 

-155 

-155 

-174

1 

-. 1 

-.8 

.1 

.2 

-.7 

-. 1 

.2 

-. 6 

-. 4 

.2 

.4 

0 

-. 2 

0 

.3

percent,  cal.  year 

-4.4 

-4.1 

-7.8 

-5.1 

-4.7 

0 

0 

-1.1 

-4.4 

-4.1 

.9 

-.7 

-2.2 

-1.9 

-.4 

-.8

1.  OMB's  July  1994  deficit 

estimates  are  $220  billion 

in  FY94  and  $167  billion  in  FY95(excluding  health reform).  CBO's  April  1994  deficit

estimates of  the budget  are  $227  billion in FY94  and $182  billion  in  FY95. 
corresponding  social security  (OASDI)  categories.  The  OASDI  surplus  is  excluded from the on-budget  deficit 
budget, as classified under  current  law.  The Postal  Service  deficit  is  included in off-budget outlays beginning  in FY90.

Budget  receipts,  outlays,  and surplus/deficit  include

and  shown separately as  off-

2.  OMB's  July  1994 deficit  estimates, excluding deposit  insurance spending,  are  $224 billion  in FY94 and  $185  billion

in FY95.  CBO's  April  1994 deficit estimates,  excluding  deposit  insurance  spending, are  $230 billion in FY94, and  $194  billion  in  FY95.

3. Other means of  financing  are  checks  issued  less  checks paid,  accrued items,  and changes  in other financial  assets  and liabilities.

4.  HEB is  the NIFA measure in  current  dollars,  with cyclically  sensitive  receipts  and outlays  adjusted  to the  level  of potential  output  generated

by 2.3 percent  real growth  and an associated uneployment  rate  of  6 percent.  Quarterly figures  for  change in HEB  and  FI are not  at  annual  rates.
Change in HEB,  as  a percent of nominal potential  GDP, is  reversed  in  sign. FI  is  the weighted  difference of  discretionary changes  in federal
spending  and taxes  (in 1987  dollars),  scaled by real  federal purchases.  For  change in HEB  and  FI,  negative values  indicate restraint.

a--Actual.

b--Unified  and  NIPA  data  are actuals  except  for  NIPA  corporate  profit  tax  accrual  which is  a staff  projection.

DOMESTIC  FINANCIAL  DEVELOPMENTS

Recent  Developments

Interest  rates  edged  lower  after  the  July  FOMC  meeting,  as

economic  activity  appeared to  be moderating.  However  they

subsequently moved back up when  economic  reports  issued  in August

rekindled  concerns  about  an  economy  pressing  against  capacity  and

expectations  of  a further  tightening  of  policy  in  the near  term.  On

balance,  short-term Treasury  rates  are  now up  as  much  as  25  basis

points  over  the intermeeting  period,  and  longer-term rates  are  about

unchanged.  Meanwhile,  stock prices have  risen  about  2-1/2  to  3-1/2

percent  amid  generally favorable  earnings  reports  for the  second

quarter.

The monetary  aggregates  strengthened  in July.  After  declining

in  June,  M2  grew  at  an annual  rate  of  5 percent, the  growth  fueled

in  substantial  measure  by  a  sharp turnaround  in money market mutual

funds.  Investors  apparently  resumed  shifting  out  of  bond  funds,

presumably  to  avoid  possible  further  capital  losses.  A pickup  in

demand  and  Eurodollar  deposits,  as  well  as  slower  runoffs  of  savings

deposits,  also  contributed to  the advance  in M2.  M3  growth

rebounded  to  a 6 percent  rate,  lifted  both by  its  M2  components  and

by  a jump  in  large  time  deposits  prompted  by stepped-up  loan  demand.

Growth  in M2  and  M3  from the  fourth  quarter  left  both aggregates

just  above  the  lower  bounds  of  their target  ranges.

Bank  credit  expanded  sharply in July.  paced  by the  strong  loan

growth;  business  loans  climbed  at  a  17  percent  annual  rate  and

consumer  loans  at  a 23  percent  rate.  The  strength in business  loans

was  attributable partly to  a shift  by  firms  away  from stock and bond

issuance  and partly to  a  sizable volume  of financing  for mergers  and

acquisitions.  In  a recent  Federal  Reserve  survey,  loan  officers  at

large  domestic banks  reported a  further  easing  of  standards  and

I-19

I-20

terms  for  businesses  of  all  sizes. 

The  strength  in  consumer  loans

at  banks  probably  reflected  some  gain  in market  share  as  well  as

relatively  heavy  borrowing by  consumers  overall 

Banks  are  the

largest  factor  in  the  rapidly  growing  credit  card  area  and  have

lately  been competing  aggressively  for  auto  loans.  In  July,  they

also  kept more  of  their consumer  loans  on  their  own books  instead  of

securitizing them.

Aggregate  net  borrowing  by nonfinancial businesses  apparently

picked up  somewhat  in  July,  with new  debt  continuing to  be

concentrated  in the  short-to-intermediate  range  of the maturity

spectrum.  Besides  the  sharp  rise in  bank loans  to  businesses,  there

was  also an  increase  in  commercial  paper outstanding  after  two

quarters  of  run-off.  Because  of  a slide  in  junk bond  offerings,

however,  public  bond  issuance  slowed  in July  to  a relatively

sluggish pace.  Gross  equity  issuance also was  weak. and  with an

increased volume  of  share  repurchases,  net  equity issuance  probably

was  negative.

Few direct  indications  of household borrowing  are  available

beyond  the  second  quarter 

Consumer  credit  growth  was  quite  strong

in  June  and  in  the  second  quarter  as  a whole,  as  auto  loans  and

revolving  credit  both  increased  rapidly.  The bank data  suggest  that

the  overall  pace  of consumer borrowing has  remained  brisk, despite

slower  sales  of motor  vehicles  in  July.  Growth in home mortgage

debt  in the  second  quarter  remained  below the  pace  in  the latter

half  of  1993,  as  sales  of  new and  existing homes  have  leveled  off

and mortgage  refinancing  activity has dropped  substantially.  The

pace  of mortgage  borrowing probably  changed  little  in July,

notwithstanding  a solid increase  in  real  estate loans  at  banks,

This  rise  was  attributable partly  to transfers  of thrift assets  to

I-21

the  banking  sector and  perhaps  partly  to  a continuing  shift  by

mortgage borrowers  to  adjustable-rate  loans 

Compared  with

fixed-rate loans,  ARMs  are  more  often  held  in  portfolio  and  less

often  securitized.

In  the municipal  securities  market,  gross  issuance  of  long-term

tax-exempt  bonds  in  July  stayed  around the  relatively  low  second-

quarter  volume,  Bond  issuance continues  to  be  depressed  by  a

shortage  of  securities  eligible  for  refunding.  In  contrast,  short-

term borrowing,  bolstered by  a large  amount  of  revenue  anticipation

notes  from California,  was  fairly  strong.

After  a respite  in the  second  quarter, the  Treasury  is

borrowing  a larger  volume  of funds  this  quarter,  about  in  line  with

the  anticipated  seasonal  swing in  the federal  deficit.  Bill

auctions have  been enlarged to  accommodate the  Treasury's  heavier

borrowing  needs.

Outlook

The staff's  economic  projection is  based  on  an  assumed  firming

in money market  conditions  over the  coming months,  as  the System's

efforts to  check inflationary pressures  continue.  The  tightening

ends  sooner than  the markets  currently appear  to  be  anticipating,

however,  and  that  difference  is  consistent with  the staff's

expectation that  long-term rates  are  not  far  from their peaks  and

will  retreat  next year

Total  debt of the  domestic  nonfinancial  sectors  is  expected to

grow about  5 percent  in  both  1994  and  1995.  Debt  of  the nonfederal

sectors  is  expected to  grow at  a 5 percent  rate  in the  current

quarter  and  average  about  4-1/2  percent  over the  rest  of the

projection  period.  After  dropping sharply  in the  first  half  of

1994,  federal  borrowing  is  expected  to  pick up  somewhat  in  the

second half and  to  grow  a bit  faster next  year as  well.

I-22

In  the  household  sector  growth  in  consumer  credit  should

back  off  in  the  second  half  of  this  year  from its  very  rapid

second-quarter  pace  and  slow  further  next  year,  partly  because  of  an

expected  deceleration  in  spending  on  durable  goods.  Home mortgage

debt  is  expected  to  decelerate  a bit  in  the  near  term but  to  pick up

in  line with home  sales  late  next  year.

Debt  of nonfinancial  businesses  is  projected to  grow

2-3/4  percent  this  year  and  a shade  more than 3 percent  next  year

Although  growth  at  this  pace  is  slow by historical  standards,  it

represents  a pickup  from the  very low  rates  of  1992  and  1993

Corporations will  face  a  growing  need  for  external  funds  to  finance

projected  increases  in capital  expenditures,  as  internal  funds  are

expected to  level  out.  We  expect  the  external needs  to  be met

almost  entirely  through borrowing.  Little,  if  any,  net  issuance  of

equity  is  anticipated this  year  or next,  as  a quickened  pace  of

mergers  and  share  repurchases  involving  cash  for  equity  retire  a

sizable  volume  of  shares.  Banks  and  finance  companies will  provide

a major  share  of  business  financing  in  1994,  but  as  long  rates  come

down next  year  bond  financing  should  strengthen.

In the  state  and  local  government  sector,  debt  growth  is

projected  to  slow through  1995,  as  a large number  of  pre-refunded

securities  reach their  call  dates  and  are  retired,  and  as  further

advance  refunding  volume  is  depressed  by a lack  of  eligible  issues.

These  factors  outweigh a probable  increase  in  borrowing to  finance

rising  outlays  for  infrastructure,

Confidential  FR Class  II

August  12,  1994

CHANGE  IN DEBT OF  THE DOMESTIC  NONFINANCIAL SECTORS 1
(Percent)

--------------------- Nonfederal--------------------

Total 2

Federal 
govt. 

Total 

Total 

Home 
mtg. 

Cons. 
credit 

Business 

----- Households----- 

State  and 
local 
govt 

-------MEMO-
Private
financial 
assets 

Nominal
GDP

Year

1981
1982
1983
1984
1985

1986
1987
1988
1989
1990

1991
1992
1993
1994
1995

9.7
9.8
11.9
14.5
15.5

12.3
9.5
8.8
7.7
6.3

4.4
5.1
5.2
4.9
5.1

11.6
19.7
18.9
16.9
16.5

13.6
8.0
8.0
7.0

11.0

11.1
10.9
8.3
5.0
6.2

9.3
7.4

10.1
13.8
15.2

11.9
9.9
9.0
7.9
5.0

2.4
3.2
4.1
4.9
4.7

7.5
5.5
11.1
12.8
15.3

12.0
12.4
10.8
8.8
6.2

4.6
5.6
6.6
6.8
6.2

Quarter  (seasonally adjusted annual  rates)

1993:1
2
3
4

1994:1
2
3
4

1995:1
2
3
4

3.4
6.3
5.0
5.8

5.1
4.8
4.8
4.7

5.8
4.8
4.7
4.6

1.9 
4.6 
4.8 
4.9 

7.5
11.1
5.5
8.2

5.9
4.1
4.4
5.3

2.8 
6.8 
8.3 
7.7 

6.2 
7.3 
6.7 
6.4 

6.3 
6.0 
6.0 
5.8 

7.0
4.7

10.8
11.7
13.2

14.3
14.9
11.8
10.2
7.7

6.7
6.6
6.6
6.4
6.0

3.4
7.4
7.9
7.0

6.1
6.6
6.3
6.0

5.8
5.8
5.9
6.1

4.8
4.4
12.6
18.7
15.8

9.6
5.0
7.2
6.2
2.0

-1.8
0.7
8.0
10.6
8.0

2.4
5.3
9.6
13.7

8.4
12.4
10.4
9.6

11.9
8.8
9.3
15.6
12.1

12.2
7.1
7.9
7.0
3.4

-0.9
0.0
0.8
2.8
3.1

-0.4
1.6
0.8
1.2

2.5
2.6
3.2
2.7

5.2
9.3
9.7
9.1

31.3

10.5
13.4
7.0
8.4
6.7

7.2
6.4
6.6
4.8
4.0

7.2
6.8
5.1
6.6

6.8
4.7
3.8
3.6

10.3
9.6
12.4
12.6
12.1

9.3
3.2
11.0
9.1
7.0

-0.6
0.8
-1.0
2.7
1.0

-5.0
1.1
-1.8
1.8

1.5 
0.6 
0.8 
1.1 

4.6
4.3
4.3
4.4

1. Data after  1994:1  are  staff projections.  Year-to-year changes  in nominal  GDP are  measured  from  the
fourth quarter of  the preceding year  to  the  fourth  quarter of  the year  indicated;  other  changes  are
measured  from end of preceding period  to  end  of  period  indicated.

2. On  a quarterly average basis,  total  debt  growth  is  projected  to  be  5.2  in  1994  and  5.1  in  1995.

2.6.3  FOF

Confidential  Class II
August  12,  1994

FLOW OF  FUNDS PROJECTIONS:  HIGHLIGHTS1
(Billions of  dollars)

Calendar year

1993 

1994 

1995 

1993-  -----------

Q4 

Q1 

1994----------- 
Q3 

Q4 

Q2 

-----------
Q1 

1995-----------
Q4

Q3 

Q2 

----------- Seasonally Adjusted Annual  Rates----------

635.6  604.0  656.0  734.7  628.1  612.6  579.3  595.9  755.2  627.3  618.7  622.7
-2.0
612.7  611.0  658.0  705.2  626.1  600.6  608.3  608.9  757.2  629.3  620.7  624.7

12.0  -29.0  -13.0 

22.9 

29.5 

-7.0 

-2.0 

-2.0 

-2.0 

-2.0 

2.0 

33.5 
64.2 
99.2 
-2.0 
-7.0 
22.9 
29.6  103.9  117.0 

20.3 
29.5 
45.5 

21.6 
2.0 
93.4 

79.2 
81.0 
74.8 
90.0  100.0  102.1  104.6
12.0  -29.0  -13.0 
-2.0 
-2.0
98.8  122.0  101.5  113.4  115.4  116.5  122.6

-2.0 

-2.0 

261.5  289.3  279.2  321.3  264.6  313.2  295.7  283.8  284.5  276.8  280.2  275.1
181.4  188.0  188.4  200.9  180.0  196.9  190.0  185.0  181.1  183.1  191.1  198.2
70.0
90.6

77.5  115.7 
88.8 
89.6 

72.9  110.4 
89.4 
89.2 

90.0 
89.8 

75.0 
90.5 

64.4 
87.6 

85.0 
89.7 

95.0 
89.7 

80.0 
90.2 

92.1 
88.8 

65.4 

42.5
-32.9  -29.2  -22.8  -30.6  -25.8  -34.0  -29.4  -27.8  -25.1  -25.2  -20.8  -20.3

42.5 

47.0 

45.0 

41.8 

39.8 

72.2 

68.8 

50.6 

44.2 

51.1 

Net  funds  raised by domestic
nonfinancial  sectors

1  Total 
2 
3 

Net  equity  issuance 
Net  debt  issuance 

Borrowing  sectors

Nonfinancial  business

Financing gap 
Net  equity issuance 
Credit market borrowing 

Households

Net  borrowing, of which: 

Home  mortgages 
Consumer  credit 
Debt/DPI  (percent)3  

State  and local governments

Net  borrowing 
Current surplus4 

4 
5 
6 

7 
8 
9 
10 

11 
12 

13 
14 
15 

U.S.government

Net  borrowing 
256.1  166.6  217.6  269.6  195.9  138.0  148.8  183.8  314.2  190.0  181.5  184.6
Net  borrowing;quarterly, nsa 
256.1  166.6  217.6 
68.7
Unified deficit;quarterly, nsa  226.3  189.2  206.7 
84.7

68.2 
19.6 
80.8 
75.0  101.3  -32.8 

39.5 
56.1 

51.2 
58.6 

89.2 
92.1 

48.5 
53.5 

7.7 
-0.6 

Funds  supplied by

16  depository institutions 

MEMO: 
17 
18 
19 
20 

(percent  of  GDP)
Dom.  nonfinancial  debt 3  
Dom. nonfinancial  borrowing 

U.S. government5  
Private 

141.5  186.0  167.1  186.9  187.6  184.5  195.0  176.9  173.7  166.3  166.9  161.6

190.0  188.7  189.4  190.8  190.4  189.5  189.8  189.7  190.4  190.6  190.8  191,0
8.8
2.6
6.2

10.9 
4.2 
6.7 

11.0 
4.5 
6.4 

9.7 
4.0 
5.6 

9.1 
2.5 
6.6 

9.5 
3.0 
6.5 

9.0 
2.2 
6.8 

8.9 
2.7 
6.2 

9.0 
2.1 
6.9 

9.0 
2.7 
6.3 

9.4 
3.1 
6.3 

8.8 
2.6 
6.2 

Data  after 1994:1  are staff  projections.
For  corporations:  Excess  of  capital expenditures  over U.S.  internal  funds.
Annuals are average debt  levels  in  the year  (computed as  the  average of year-end debt  positions)
NIPA surplus, net of retirement funds.
Excludes government-insured mortgage  pool securities.

divided by  nominal GDP.

2.6.4 

POF

INTERNATIONAL  DEVELOPMENTS

Recent  Developments

Since  the  July  FOMC meeting,  the weighted-average  foreign

exchange  value  of  the  dollar  in  terms  of  the  other  G-10  currencies

has  changed  little  on balance.  The  dollar  declined  in  early  July,

apparently  reflecting  market  perceptions  following  the  G-7  meeting

that  U.S.  officials  were not  concerned  about  the  dollar's value  and

were  perhaps willing  to  use  dollar weakness  as  a tool  in  trade

negotiations.  Statements of  concern  about  the dollar  by Treasury

officials  and  Chairman Greenspan  coincided  with a rebound  in  its

value  in  mid-July.  Over the  intermeeting  period, the  dollar

depreciated  about  2 percent  in  terms  of  the  mark but has  appreciated

about  1 percent  in terms  of the  yen to  trade  around  the  100

yen/dollar  rate.

Long-term  interest  rates  in  Japan have  risen  about  25  basis

points  over  the  intermeeting  period  while  rates  in the  United  States

have  remained  about  unchanged.  The higher  rates  appear  to  reflect

market  expectations  that the  Japanese  economy  is  beginning to

recover  and  that  the  Bank of  Japan may  soon  act  to  move  short-term

rates  higher.  In  fact,  three-month market  rates  in  Japan  rose  20

basis  points  over  the period while  such  rates  in  the  United States

showed  little  change.

In  continental Europe,  long-term interest  rates  generally moved

higher  following the  August  11  announcements by  the  central banks  of

Italy  and  Sweden of  higher  official  rates.  The long-term  rate  in

Germany  rose about  25 basis  points,  on balance,  over  the

intermeeting  period, with almost  all  of  that  increase  since

August  11 

Although the  moves by  Italian  and  Swedish  officials  were

largely  intended to  support  their  respective currencies,  they  appear

I-25

I-26

to  have  reinforced market  perceptions  that  a relatively  early  shift

to  monetary tightening may be  more  likely  in many  European

countries 

Italian  short-term  rates  rose  more  than  125  basis  points

over  the  intermeeting period,  with  most  of  this  increase  coming

after  the  announcement  of  the  official  rate  increase.  German short-

term  rates  have  shown  almost  no  net  change  since  the  July  FOMC

meeting.  In  the  United  Kingdom,  short-term rates  increased  about  50

basis  points  as  signs  of  continuing strength  in  the  U.K.  economy

have  contributed  to  expectations  of  tightening by  the Bank  of

England.  In  Canada,  rates  dropped  75  basis  points  in  response  to  an

easing  of  pressure  on  the Canadian  dollar

The  Desk  did  not intervene.

Economic  indicators  suggest  that  during the  second  quarter

growth  remained  positive  in  every foreign  G-7  country.  In  Japan,

however,  signs  of  recovery continued  to  be  tentative.  Industrial

production and  housing  starts  moved up  moderately on average  in the

quarter  and  the  index of  leading  indicators  remained  positive.

However,  new machinery  orders  fell  sharply, and  labor market

conditions  deteriorated  further  through  June.  In western Germany,

recovery apparently  continued  in the  second  quarter,  with  industrial

production  and manufacturing  orders  both  rising.  Capacity

utilization  moved  above  80  percent  for  the  first  time  since  the  end

of  1992  but  remained  somewhat below  its  average  for  the  past  decade

of  84.  In  the United  Kingdom,  preliminary data  show total  real  GDP

growth  strengthened  further  in the  second  quarter,  with  non-oil  real

GDP  expanding  rapidly  as  well

Consumer price  inflation remains  low in  the  major foreign

industrial  countries,  particularly in  Japan  and  Canada where  the

I-27

latest  data  show  a decline  in  prices  over  the  preceding  twelve

months.  In  Canada,  cuts  in  excise  taxes  have  contributed to  the

fall  in  prices.  In  Japan,  the  strength  of  the  yen has  helped  to

lower  inflation  below zero.

In  May, the  U.S.  nominal  trade  deficit  for  goods  and  services

widened  slightly  from the  April figure;  for April and  May combined,

the  deficit was  $9 billion  larger,  annual  rate,  than  in  the  first

quarter 

Exports  rose  sharply  on  average  in the  two  months,

particularly exports  of machinery,  automotive products  to  Canada  and

Mexico,  industrial  supplies,  and  travel  and  transportation receipts

from foreigners.  Imports  also  rose  significantly  in April/May, with

all major merchandise  categories  increasing.  The  quantity of  oil

imports  in April  and May averaged  a bit  above the  first-quarter

quantity;  preliminary data  suggest  that  oil  consumption rose  sharply

in  June  with the  onset of  the  driving  season,  likely increasing

imports  further

In  the  second  quarter,  prices  of  U.S.  non-oil  imports  rose  3

percent  at  an annual  rate,  somewhat  faster than  the  average  over  the

preceding  four  quarters.  Prices  of nonagricultural  exports  also

rose  about  the  same  percent.  The  price  of  imported  oil  rose  more

than  $1 per  barrel  in May  as  supply  remained  roughly unchanged  while

oil  demand  increased with  the  pace  of  industrial-country activity;

for  April/May  on average,  the price  of  imported oil  was  11  percent

higher  than  in  the  first  quarter.  Since June,  spot  WTI  prices have

fluctuated between  $18.50  and  almost  $21.00  per  barrel,  largely  in

response  to  unrest  in Nigeria.  Currently,  spot  WTI  is  trading at

$18.55  per barrel

Outlook

The  staff projects  that the  growth  rate  of real  GDP in  foreign

industrial  and  developing  countries will  remain strong  over  the

I-28

forecast  period,  averaging  3-1/2  percent  over  the  next  six  quarters,

well  above  the  projected  rate  of  U.S.  growth.  We  project  that  the

dollar will  remain  about  unchanged  from  recent  levels.  As  a result

real  exports  of  goods  and  services  will  grow  somewhat  faster  than

real  imports  over  the  forecast  period.  With  imports  currently

exceeding exports,  the  projected  growth  rates  imply that  real  net

exports  of goods  and  services  will  fluctuate  slightly but  be  about

unchanged  at  the  end  of  the  forecast  period from its  second-quarter

rate.  As  a consequence,  real  net exports will  have  a negligible

impact  on  real  GDP  growth  through the  end  of  1995.

The  dollar.  We  project  that  the  foreign  exchange  value of  the

dollar  in terms  of  the  other  G-10  currencies will  remain near  its

current  level  throughout  the  forecast  period.  This  projection  is

unchanged  from  that  in the  June  Greenbook.  Against  the  currencies

of  key  developing  countries,  we  expect  the  CPI-adjusted value  of  the

dollar  to  show a moderate depreciation on  average  through  the  end  of

the  forecast  period,  also  essentially  unchanged  from  the June

Greenbook.

Foreign industrial  countries.  Real  GDP  growth  in the  foreign

G-7  countries  (weighted by  U.S.  exports)  is  projected to  average  3

percent  during the  remainder  of  this  year and  then  to  rise to  3-1/4

percent  in  1995.  For  1994,  the  growth  outlook  for France  and  the

United  Kingdom has  been  revised  upward since  the  June  Greenbook.

Real  GDP  growth in  Japan  is  expected  to  average  1-3/4  percent,

annual  rate.  during the  last two  quarters  of  this year  and  then to

rise  somewhat  next year  as  domestic  demand  strengthens.  In  Germany,

recovery is  projected  to  become more firmly established, with  real

output  growth  averaging  about 2-1/2  percent,  annual  rate,  during the

remaining  six  quarters  of  the forecast  period,  led  by  strong

domestic  fixed  investment and  continued  growth of  exports.  In  the

I-29

United  Kingdom,  output  growth  is  expected  to  ease  back  somewhat  from

the  very  rapid  pace  in  the  second  quarter  but  to  remain  strong  over

the  forecast  period.  Output  growth  in  Canada  is  also  projected  to

slow  a bit  from  the  rapid  pace  of  the  first  half  of  this  year  but

still  to  average more  than 3-1/2  percent,  annual  rate,  through  the

end  of  1995.

Consumer  price  inflation  in  the  foreign  G-7  countries  is  again

projected  to  remain  quite  low over the  forecast  period,  with  a

slight  downward  revision to  the  inflation outlook  for  the  United

Kingdom being the  only change  since  the  June Greenbook. 1  Average

inflation  for the  these  countries  is  forecast to be  about  1 percent

(weighted by U.S.  imports)  in  1994 and  to  rise  slightly to  1-1/2

percent  in  1995.

Through the  end  of  this  year,  the  forecast incorporates  the

assumption of  a slight  decline  in  short-term interest  rates  on

average;  short-term  rates  are  expected  to move up  during  1995  in

response  to  the  higher  projected  pace  of  economic  activity abroad.

This  assumed  path for  short-term  interest  rates  is  little  changed

from  that in  the  June Greenbook.

Foreign  long-term rates,  on average,  are  expected to  decline

somewhat  through  the  middle  of next  year and  then  to begin to

retrace  some  of  that  decline  by  the  end  of  the  year  as  activity

continues  to  strengthen.

Developing  countries.  The real  GDP  of developing  countries

that  are  major U.S.  trading partners  (weighted by bilateral

nonagricultural  export  shares)  is  forecast  to  increase  about  5

percent  in both  1994  and  1995.  Asian developing  economies  should

benefit  from continued  strong  growth in  their  external  demand  as  GDP

1  Average  consumer  price  inflation in  the foreign  G-7  countries

continues to  be  forecast  using west German prices.

I-30

growth  in  the  foreign  G-7  rises.  Some  Asian  economies  will  also

likely benefit  somewhat  from  increased  export  competitiveness  due  to

the  appreciation  of  the  yen.

Since  the  last  Greenbook,  the  forecast  for  developing country

growth  in  1994  has  been  revised  upward  about  1/4  percent.  The

forecast  for  1994 Mexican  growth was  revised  upward  1/2  percent  to

reflect  an  expected  positive  revision to the  1994:Q1  growth  estimate

and  evidence  of very  robust  import  growth,  which suggests  some

recovery  in  investment  demand.  Growth  forecasts  for  1994  for

Argentina  and  Brazil  were also  revised  upward  significantly  to

reflect  incoming data.

U.S.  real  net  exports.  Real  net  exports  of  goods  and  services

are  expected  to  fluctuate  a bit  over  the  remaining  six  quarters  of

the  forecast  period  but to  be  about unchanged  at  the  end  of  1995

from  the  rate  recorded for  the  second  quarter

The  quantity  of  merchandise  exports  is  projected  to  be

supported  by the  strong pace  of foreign  output  growth.  Growth of

computer  exports  is  expected  to  rebound  from  its  pace  in  the first

half  of  this  year  and  to  continue  rapid  through the  end  of  1995.

Growth of other  nonagricultural  exports  is  projected  to  slow some

from the  projected  pace  in the  current  quarter,  averaging just  over

4 percent  over  the  subsequent  five  quarters.  Agricultural  exports

are  projected to  rebound  at  the  end  of  the year  and  then  to  expand

slowly  in  1995

Growth of non-oil  imports  other  than  computers is  expected  to

slow  some  from  the  rapid  pace  experienced  in the  first half of this

year  and  to  level  off at  about 4 percent  in  1995,  as  the  rate  of  GDP

growth  in  the  United  States diminishes  and  as  the  effects  of  the

lower  dollar  are  felt.  The  growth  of  computer  imports  slows  a bit

in the  near  term  and  then  rises  some  in  1995.

I-31

We  expect  that  the  quantity  of oil  imports  will  increase

slightly  in  the  current  quarter  as  U.S.  stocks  continue  to  be

rebuilt.  In  1995,  imports  are  projected  to  resume  upward  trend  as

U.S.  oil  consumption continues  to  increase  in  line  with  economic

activity.

(percent change from end  of  previous  period,  saar)

TRADE QUANTITIES

Merchandise  exports

Total 

Agricultural 
Computers 
Other  nonag. 

Merchandise  imports

Total 

Oil 
Computers 
Other  non-oil 

-Projection-

1993 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

1994 

Q4

6.1 

-3.1 

12.0 

10.1 

7.6 

5.3 
23.1 
4.5 

13.1 

10.0 
38.3 
9.3 

23.2 
16.6 
-4.6 

7.9 
6.4 
13.5 

2.1 
23.8 
8.2 

14.5 
21.5 
3.9 

10.6 

19.0 

7.5 

4.6 

-10.6 
23.4 
10.9 

19.7 
32.7 
16.1 

2.0 
21.5 
5.2 

14.2 
21.5 
3.3 

1995

8.3

1.5
28.6
4.3

7 7

5.3
24.7
3.9

*NIPA basis,  1987  dollars.

Oil  prices.  Owing to  the  unrest  in  Nigeria,  spot  oil  prices  in

July and  early August were well  above  the  levels  anticipated  at  the

time  of  the  June  Greenbook.  Accordingly,  our assumption  for  the  oil

import  unit value  in  the  current  quarter has  been increased  $0.66

per  barrel 

We  expect the  spot  price  for WTI  to  fall  to  $18.50  per

barrel by October,  as  unrest  in Nigeria  subsides.

Over the  longer term, world  oil  consumption  should continue  to

increase with  gains  in foreign economic  activity.  OPEC production

is  likely to  increase  only marginally through  year-end, although in

1995  Saudi Arabian  production  should  increase  to  offset  gains  in  oil

consumption.  We  continue to  expect  Iraq to  remain  off  the world oil

market through  1995,  perhaps  exporting in  1996.  Thus,  by  early  1995

we  anticipate  a WTI  price  of  $18.50  per  barrel, consistent with  an

import  unit value of  $16.00  per  barrel

I-32

Prices  of  non-oil  imports  and  exports.  We  expect  that  the

prices  of  non-oil  imports  excluding  computers  will  accelerate

markedly  during the  second  half  of  this  year  in  response  to  the

recent  substantial  rise  of  non-oil  commodity  prices  and  the  lagged

effect  of  the  lower  dollar 

Next  year,  the  increase  in  these  prices

will  fall  back  to  about  2 percent  as  the  effects  of  these factors

wane.  Prices  of  U.S.  nonagricultural  exports  are  expected  to  move

with U.S.  producer  prices,  increasing  about  2-1/2  percent  on  average

over  the  forecast  period,

SELECTED  PRICE  INDICATORS
(percent change  from  end  of  previous  period  except as  noted,  ar)

I

PPI  (export. wts.) 
Nonag.  exports* 
Non-oil  imports* 
Oil  imports

(Q4 level,  $/bl.) 

1993 

Q1 

Q2 

1994 

Q3 

Q4

-Projection-

0.9 
0.7 
1 3 

1.5 
2.9 
0.5 

3.7 
3.9 
3.3 

5.7 
4.0 
5.6 

2.6 
2.3 
4.8 

1995

2.3
2.1
2.1

14.09 

12.66 

14.74 

16.82  16.11 

16.00

* Excluding  computers.

Nominal  trade  and  current  account  balances.  The merchandise

trade  deficit  is  projected  to  increase  to  $180  billion  (AR) by the

end  of  1994  and  to  rise  a bit  further  in  1995.  Net service  receipts

will  continue to  expand,  to  an annual  rate of  about  $65  billion  at

the  end  of  this  year  and  to  about  $75  billion  by the end  of  1995.

The  deficit  on  net  investment  income is  projected to  reach about  $15

billion  by the end  of  1995,  reflecting higher  interest  rates  and

rising  net  indebtedness.  We  expect  that,  as  a result  of  these

developments,  the  current  account  deficit will  rise  to  nearly $170

billion  by  the  end  of  1995,  2.3  percent  of  GDP,

STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL  - FR
CLASS  II  FOMC

August  12,  1994

REAL  GDP AND CONSUMER  PRICES,  SELECTED COUNTRIES,  1991-95
(Percent change  from  fourth  quarter to  fourth quarter)

Measure  and country 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995

Projection

REAL GDP

Canada 
France 
Germany 

W. Germany 

Italy 
Japan 
United  Kingdom 

-0.2 
1.3 
2.2 
2.8 
1.8 
3.6 
-1.6 

0.5 
0.6 
0.7 
0.1 

-0.6 
-0.3 
0.3 

3.2 
-0.5 
-0.2 
-0.8 
0.3 
-0.1 
2.6 

Average, weighted by 1987-89  GDP 

1.7 

0.1 

0.5 

Average, weighted by share  of

U.S.  nonagricultural  exports

Total  foreign 

G-6 
Developing  countries 

2.2 
0.8 
5.0 

1.6 
0.3 
3.9 

2.7 
1.7 
4.6 

3.9 
2.8 
2.3 
1.6 
1.7 
2.1 
3.1 

2.5 

3.5 
3.1 
4.8 

CONSUMER PRICES

Canada 
Prance 
Western  Germany 
Italy 
Japan 
United Kingdom 

Average, weighted by 1987-89 GDP 

Average, weighted by share  of
U.S.  non-oil  imports 

4.1 
2.9 
3.9 
6.1 
3.2 
4.2 

3.9 

1.8 
1.8 
3.7 
4.8 
0.9 
3.1 

2.4 

1.8 
2.1 
3.7 
4.1 
1.2 
1.6 

2.2 

-0.2 
1.7 
2.8 
3.4 
1.0 
3.0 

1.9 

3.8 

1.9 

1.9 

1.1 

1.6

3.6
2.7
2.5
2.3
2.3
2.8
3.0

2.8

3.6
3.2
4.8

1.8
1.5
2.1
3.0
0.8
3.7

1.9

Strictly confidential  (FR) Class II-FOMC

U.S. INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTIONS  IN  GOODS,  SERVICES, AND THE CURRENT ACCOUNT

(Billions of  dollars, seasonally  adjusted annual  rates)

1991

1992

1993

ANNUAL

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4

Q1 

Q2 

1990 

1991 

1992

-20.4 

-13.8 

-27.1 

-16.9

-17.9  -34.1  -38.9  -38.5

-57.6  -69.3 

-54.7  -19.5  -32.3

NIPA Real  Net  Exports
of  Goods &  Services  (87$)

Exports  of G&S

Goods

Agricultural
Computers
Other  Goods

Services

Imports  of G&S

Goods
Oil
Computers
Other  Goods

Services

519.0  544.0
382.2  398.5
34.0
40.2
308.9  324.3
136.7  145.3

34.8 
38.5 

539.4
441.5
44.7
36.3
360.5
97.9

557.8
459.0
52.0
39.7
367.3
98.7

Memo:(Percent  change  1/)

Exports  of G&S
Agricultural
Computers
Other Goods
Services

-1.1

9.7

43.1

4.7

-22.7

Imports  of G&S

Oil
Computers
Other Goods
Services

-12.2
11.5
74.1
-17.3
-21.8

20.7
-8.9
18.9
21.5
28.3

14.4
83.1
43.1
7.8
3.3

544.8
397.9
35.4
42.4
320.1
146.9

571.8
475.3
52.9
44.4
378.0
96.5

0.6
17.5
23.8
-5.1
3.9

10.4
7.1
56.4
12.2
-8.6

562.6
409.8
37.7
44.6
327.5
152.7

579.4
481.8
47.1
46.0
388.8
97.6

13.7
28.6
22.4
9.6
16.8

5.4
-37.2
15.2
11.9

4.6

571.0
416.0
38.9
47.1
330.0
154.9

588.8
489.5
47.2
51.2
391.1
99.3

6.1
13.4
24.4

3.1
5.9

6.6
0.9

53.5
2.4
7.2

573.1
421.5
38.4
52.3
330.8
151.6

607.1
509.7
51.6
57.5
400.6
97.4

1.5

-5.0
52.0
1.0
-8.3

13.0
42.8
59.1
10.1
-7.4

580.5
427.4
40.5
56.2
330.7
153.1

619.4
521.7
53.1
64.7
403.9
97.7

5.3
23.7
33.3
-0.1
4.0

8.4

12.1
60.3
3.3
1.2

590.7
441.1
41.3
60.1
339.8
149.6

629.3
530.2
52,8
68.4
409.0
99.0

7.2
8.1

30.8
11.5
-8.8

6.5
-2.2
24.9
5.1
5.4

589.2
433.9
39.1
60.9
333,9
155.3

646.8
546.6
53.4
73,3
419.9
100.1

-1.0

-19.7

5.4
-6.8
16.1

11.6
4.6
31.9
11.1
4.5

600.2
443.3
39.3
62.9
341.1
156.9

669.6
567.4
57.7
80.0
429.7
102.2

7.7
2.1
13.8

8.9
4.2

14.9
36.3
41.9

9.7
8.7

510.5
368.9
35.1
33.7
300.1
141.6

565.1
461.4
52.1
29.8
379.6
103.7

6.7
-6.3
16.2

6.0
9.7

0.4
-15.7

9.3
0.0
7.9

542.6
397.1
35.5
41.4
320.2
145.5

562.1
464.4
49.2
41.6
373  .7
97.7

8.1
10.9
26.7
7.2
4.7

4.0
8.3
45.6
2.9
-6.2

578.8
426.5
39.8
53.9
332.8
152.3

611.1
512.8
51.2
60.5
401.2
98.3

5.0
9.5
34.8

3.8

-2.0

8.6
12.1
48.7
5.2
1.4

Current Account Balance

40.1 

7.0  -46.3  -28.6

-33.4  -66.2  -74.4  -97.5

-79.4 

-102.4

-91.7 

-6.9 

-67.9

Goods  & Serv  (BOP),  net

Goods  (BOP),  net
Services  (BOP),  net

Investment  Income,  net

Direct, net
Portfolio, net

-42.6
-75.2

32.6

26.1
63.2
-37.1

-20.7
-64.7
44.0

11.9
53.9
-42.0

-28.5
-79.0
50.5

8.3
48.0
-39.8

-22.1
-77.4
55.3

13.1
56.4
-43.3

-15.5
-72.3
56.8

9.7

50.8
-41.1

-41.5
-97,3
55.8

6.5
51.0
-44.5

-51.1
-109.4
58.3

-53.4
-105.3
52.0

-57.7
-116.8
59.1

-76.3
-134.9
58.6

4.9
47.1
-42.2

-2.9
42.0
-44.9

7.4
54.6
-47.2

2.7

50.8
-48.1

-78.8
-109.0
30.2

20.7
55.9
-35.1

-28.5
-74.1
45.6

14.8
55.4

-40.5

-40.4
-96.1
55.7

4.5
47.7

-43.2

Unilateral  Transfers, net 

56.6 

15.8  -26.1  -19.6 

-27.7  -31.1  -28.2  -41.2 

-29.1  -28.8 

-33.7 

6.7  -32.0

1/ Percent  change  (AR) from previous period;  percent  changes  for  annual  data  are calculated Q4/Q4.

Strictly  Confidential  (FR) Class  II-FOMC

OUTLOOK FOR U.S.  INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTIONS IN GOODS,  SERVICES,  AND THE  CURRENT ACCOUNT

(Billions of  dollars,  seasonally adjusted annual  rates)

NIPA  Real Net Exports
of  Goods  & Services  (87$)

1993

Q3 

Q4

Projection

1994

1995

Projection

ANNUAL

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Ql 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4

1993 

1994 

1995

-86.3  -82.2 

-104.0  -113.4  -110.7  -107.0

-108.4  -108.3  -109,5  -110.0

-73.9  -108.8  -109.1

Exports of G&S

Goods

Agricultural
Computers
Other Goods

Services

Imports  of G&S

Goods
Oil
Computers
Other Goods

Services

Memo:(Percent change  1/)

Exports of G&S
Agricultural
Computers
Other Goods
Services

Imports of G&S

Oil
Computers
Other Goods
Services

595.3
438.5
36.9
68.5
333.1
156.7

681.6
577.1
56.7
87.8
432.6
104.5

-3.2
-22.3

40.7
-9.1
-0.5

7.4
-6.8
45.1
2.7
9.3

625.2
468.1
39.1
74.0
355.1
157.1

707.4
599.9
58.1
94.6
447.2
107.6

21.7
26.1
36.2
29.2

1.0

16.0
10.2
34.8
14,2
12.4

619.6
464.4
36.6
76.9
350.9
155.2

723.6
615.2
56.5
99.7
450.9
108.5

-3.5

-23.2

16.6
-4.6
-4.8

9.5
-10.6
23.4
10.9
3.4

636.1
477.7
37.3
78.1
362.2
158.4

749.5
642.5
59.1
107.0
476.3
107.0

11.1
7.9
6.4
13.5

8.5

15.1
19.7
32.7
16.1
-5.4

650.8
489.4
37.5
82.4
369.4
161.4

761.4
654.3
59.4
112.3
482.4
107.2

9.5
2.1
23.8

8.2
7.8

6.5
2.0
21.5
5.2
0.6

661.9
498.4
38.8
86.5
373.0
163.5

768.9
661.6
57.2
117.9
486.4
107.3

7.0

14.5
21.5

3.9
5.4

4.0

-14.2
21.5

3.3
0.6

673.4
507.9
38.9
92.1
376.7
165.5

781.8
674.1
58.5
125.1
490.4
107.7

7.1
1.6
28.6
4.0
5.0

6.9
9.4

26.7
3.3
1.5

685.4
517.8
39.0
98.1
380.5
167.6

793.7
685.6
58.8
132.3
494.5
108.1

698.1
528.3
39.1
104.5
384.6
169.8

807.6
699.0
60.0
139.5
499.3
108.6

7.3
1.0

28.6

4.1
5.1

7.6
1.1

28.6

4.4
5.3

24.8

6.2
2.1

3.3
1.5

7.2
9.0

23.9

4.0
1.9

711.8
539.8
39.4
111.2
389.1
172.0

821.7
712.5
60.2
147.1
505.1
109.2

8.1
2.2
28.6
4.7
5.3

7.2
1.0

23.4
4.7
2.2

602.5
445.9
38.6
66.6
340.8
156.5

676,3
572.8
56.5
83.9
432.4
103.6

5.8

-5.3
23.1

4.5
5.0

12.4
10.0
38.3

9.3
8.7

642.1
482.5
37.5
81.0
363.9
159.6

750.9
643.4
58.0
109.2
476.0
107.5

5.9
-0.8
16.9

5.0
4.1

8.7
-1.6
24.7
8.8
-0.3

692.2
523.4
39.1
101.5
382.7
168.7

801.2
692.8
59.4
136.0
497.3
108.4

28.6

7.5
1.5

4.3
5.2

24.7

6.9
5.3

3.9
1.8

Current Account Balance

-111.4 -122.3 

-127.6  -145,5  -152.5  -162.4 

-154.1  -158.1  -154.8  -167.1

-103.9  -147.0  -158.5

Goods & Serv  (BOP), net

Goods  (BOP),  net
Services  (BOP), net

-89.0  -79.9
-145.9  -132.7
52.8

56.9 

-97.1  -110.9  -118.9  -115.7
-147.9  -169.0  -180.0  -179.4
63.7

61.1 

58.1 

50.8 

-116.0  -114.4  -113.3  -112.0
-182.2  -183.1  -184.5  -185.9
73.8

71.2 

68.7 

66.1 

-75.7  -110.6  -113.9
-132.6  -169.1  -183.9
70.0

58.4 

56.8 

Investment Income, net

Direct,  net
Portfolio, net

8.1 
55.9 

-2.4 
48.4 
-47.8  -50.8 

-1.5
47.7
-49.2

-3.7
49.5
-53.2

-2.6
50.3

-52.9

-6.7
52.2
-59.0

-6.1
53.1
-59.2

-11.7 

-9.5
52.6
-64.6  -62.2

52.9 

-14.0
54.0
-68.0

4.0
52.4

-48.5

-3.6
50.0

-53.6

Unilateral Transfers,  net  -30.5  -40.1

-29.1  -31.0  -31.0  -40.0

-32.0  -32.0  -32.0  -41.0

-32.1 

-32.8

1/ Percent change  (AR) from previous period;  percent changes  for annual  data are calculated 04/Q4.

-10.4
53.1
-63.5

-34.2




==== GREENBOOK | 1994-08-16_fomc19940816gbpt219940812.txt ====

Prefatory Note 

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 

available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain. 

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 

gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.    

1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Confidential  (FR)  Class  III  FOMC

August  12,  1994

RECENT  DEVELOPMENTS

Prepared  for the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee

By  the staff of the  Board  of Governors  of the  Federal  Reserve  System

DOMESTIC  NONFINANCIAL
DEVELOPMENTS

DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL  DEVELOPMENTS

Recent  indicators  have  provided mixed  signs  on  the  current  pace

of  economic  expansion.  It  is  fairly  clear  that  hiring has  continued

at  a good  clip  into  the  summer  months,  but,  owing  to  a leveling of

the  workweek,  aggregate hours  in July  were  only  modestly  above the

second-quarter  average.  Although there  are no  signs  of  a

troublesome  overhang  of  stocks  in the  wake  of  the  spring  surge  in

inventory  investment,  that  rate  of  accumulation  is  not  likely  to  be

sustained.  Among  final  sales  categories,  housing  activity  is

showing  the  effects  of higher  interest  rates:  consumer  demand

appears  to  be  firm, with  spending probably  damped  a bit  recently by

the  limited  availability  of desired  motor vehicles;  and  indicators

of business  fixed  investment  remain  strongly positive.  On  balance.

the  picture  suggests  that  GDP  growth probably has  slowed  somewhat

from the  average  pace  of the  first  half, but  not  enough  to  relieve

pressures  on productive  resources.  Meanwhile, there has  been  no

significant  change  in the  trends  of  labor  costs  and  of prices  of

finished  goods  and  services--despite  a  continued  rise  in  the  prices

of  industrial  materials.

Employment  and Unemployment

In  July,  nonfarm  payroll  employment  rose  about  260,000,  a pace

not  appreciably different  from the average  for  the  first  six months

of  the  year.  Although average  weekly hours  of  production or

nonsupervisory workers  were  essentially  flat  in  July,  the  gain  in

employment  was  enough to  push  production worker  hours  up  to  a  level

0.4  percent  above the  second-quarter  average.  The  unemployment  rate

in July backed  up  0.1  percentage  point  to  6.1  percent.

Increases  in  payroll  jobs  were widespread  in  July.  Employment

in the  services  industry  posted a  large  gain,  owing in  part  to

another  sizable  increase in hiring  at  personnel  supply  agencies.

II-1

II-2

CHANGES  IN EMPLOYMENT1
(Thousands of  employees;  based on  seasonally adjusted  data)

1993 

1994 

1994

1992  1993 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

May  June  July

------------Average monthly  changes--------

Nonfarm payroll employment 2  

96 

194 

229 

229 

336 

252 

356 

259

Private 

Manufacturing 
Durable 
Nondurable 
Construction 
Trade 
Finance,  insurance, real  estate 
Services 

Health services 
Business services 

Total government 

76 
-14 
-14 
0 
-1 
10 
4 
78 
22 
31 
20 

179 
-11 
-7 
-4 
19 
42 
10 
116 
23 
46 
15 

Private nonfarm production workers 
Manufacturing production workers 

86 
-3 

164 
-1 

Total  employment3  
Nonagricultural 

127 
120 

209 
219 

219 
3 
10 
-7 
24 
47 
11 
127 
20 
62 
10 

185 
12 

364 
363 

222 
13 
12 
0 
23 
44 
4 
133 
23 
61 
8 

311 
19 
20 
-1 
39 
93 
6 
146 
21 
58 
25 

219 
2 
1 
1 
14 
25 
-4 
101 
13 
23 
33 

353 
27 
32 
-5 
16 
127 
13 
165 
24 
77 
3 

211 
22 

295 
22 

203 
1 

323 
32 

459 
349 

131-  534  -442 
195 
557  -242 

261
6
-5
11
25
80
1
138
18
73
-2

149
7

22
-22

Memo:
Aggregate hours of private production

workers  (percent  change) 

Average  workweek  (hours) 
Manufacturing  (hours) 

.1 

.3 

.4
34.4  34.5  34.5  34.6  34.7  34.8  34.6  34.6
41.1  41.5  41.7  41.7  42.1  42.1  42.0  41.9

-.3 

.7 

.4 

.4 

.4 

1.  Average  change  from  final  month  of  preceding  period  to  final  month  of

period  indicated.

2. Survey  of  establishments.
3. Survey  of households.  Data  for  1994  are  not  directly comparable  with earlier

years  because of  a redesign of  the CPS  in January 1994.

SELECTED UNEMPLOYMENT AND LABOR  FORCE PARTICIPATION RATES 1
(Percent; based on seasonally adjusted data)

Civilian unemployment  rate
(16 years  and older) 

Teenagers 
20-24  years old 
Men, 25 years  and older 
Women,  25  years  and  older 

1993 

1994 

1994

1992  1993 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

May 

June  July

7.4 

6.8 

6.5 

6.6 

6.2 

6.0 

6.0 

6.1

20.0  19.0  18.3  18.0  18.4  18.3  16.9  17.7
11.3  10.5 
9.9
5.8 
4.9
5.4 
4.8

9.7  10.6 
5.3 
5.5 
5.3 
5.3 

9.6 
4.8 
5.0 

9.4 
4.7 
4.9 

9.4 
4.6 
4.9 

6.4 
5.7 

Full-time  workers 

7.4 

6.8 

6.2 

6.7 

6.2 

6.0 

6.1 

6.2

Labor  force participation rate  66.3  66.2  66.2  66.6  66.5  66.5  66.2  66.3

Teenagers 
20-24  years old 
Men, 25 years  and older 
Women, 25 years  and older 

51.3  51.5  51.1  52.7  53.6  53.1  53.7  52.5
77.1  77.1  76.7  77.0  77.0  77.1  77.2  76.4
76.6  76.2  76.2  76.3  75.8  75.9  75.5  75.8
57.0  57.1  57.5  58.0  57.9  58.1  57.6  57.8

1. Data for  1994  are  not  directly comparable  with earlier years because of a

redesign of the  CPS in January 1994.

II-3

Retail  trade  employment  grew  75,000,  reflecting  gains  at  eating  and

drinking  establishments  as  well  as  general merchandise  and  food

stores.  In  the  construction  industry,  employment  rose  another

25,000  in  July--a  surprisingly large  gain  in  light  of  the  recent

trends  in homebuilding  activity.  Manufacturing  employment  rose

6,000  in  July;  however,  strike  activity by  the  United  Auto  Workers

(UAW) at  Caterpillar  and  General  Dynamics  reduced manufacturing

payrolls  by  12,000  workers.  The  average workweek  in  manufacturing

edged  down  in  July;  nevertheless,  at  41.9  hours,  it  remains  very

high by the  standards  of  recent  years.

The  latest  strikes  in manufacturing underscore the  more

aggressive  posture  of  organized  labor  this  year.  From January  to

June  of this  year,  24  strikes  involving  1,000  or more workers

occurred.  Should  strikes  continue to  occur  at  this  rate,  1994 would

register  the  largest  number  of  work  stoppages since  1989.

Nevertheless,  strike  activity this year  remains  low  in  comparison

with the  1970s,  when  strikes  totaled  at  least  200  or  more  each year.

MAJOR  WORK STOPPAGES
(Strikes  involving  1.000  or  more workers,  for  selected  years)

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994 1

Strikes 
Workers  involved
(thousands) 

40 

51 

44 

40 

35 

35 

24

118 

452 

185 

392 

364 

182 

215

1. January  to  June,  not  annualized.

In  the  household  survey, total  employment  increased just  22.000

in  July.  Since  January,  growth  in  household employment  has  fallen

1. The  workweek was  down  in a number  of  industries  and  fell

sharply  in  motor  vehicles.  Unlike  in  previous  years,  General  Motors
shut  down  all  of  its  plants  in early  July for  summer  vacation.
Although most  workers  received  paid  time  off  for  a regular  workweek,
their  reported hours  fell  because  no  overtime was  scheduled during
that  period.

II-4

LABOR  FORCE  PARTICIPATION  RATES

(Seasonally adjusted  data)

Total  Labor  Force  Participation Rate

Percent

.

.

.

.

...... 
.. 

.... 

.. 

.I 

.

. ..........
.

.

..... 

1975  1976 

1977  1978  1979  1980  1981 

1982  1983  1984  1985  1986  1987  1988  1989  1990 

---- 
1991 

1992  1993  1994

Lin

W

Males, ages 16 to 24

Percent

Males, ages  25 & over

Percent

975 

1980 

1985 

1990

975 

1980 

1985 

1990

Females,  ages  16 to  24

Percent

Females,  ages 25  & over

Percent

Note:  Data for 1994 are not directly comparable  with  earlier years because  of the redesign  of the CPS  in 1994.

1980 

1985 

1990

II-5

considerably  short  of  that  in  payroll  employment. 

The  number  of

unemployed  workers  rose  188,000  in July,  mostly  reflecting  more

individuals  on  temporary  layoff  and  a larger number  of unemployed

new  entrants  into  the  labor  force.  Meanwhile,  the  labor  force  moved

higher  in  July,  nudging the  participation  rate  up  to  66.3  percent--a

level  still well  below the  January  reading  of  66.7  percent.

As  with  employment,  the  weakness  in  the  participation  rate  this

year  may  reflect  sampling  error  or  start-up  problems  with the  new

CPS.  However,  even  when viewed  over  a longer time  span,  labor  force

participation  in  recent  years  has  lagged  earlier  trends.  In

particular, the  flatness  in  participation  since  1990  contrasts

sharply  with the  increases  recorded during  the  mid-  to  late  1980s

when  a significant number  of  youths  and women were  pulled  into  a

booming  labor market.

Even before  the  recession began to  discourage  participation,

the  rates  for younger  workers  had begun to  decline,  in part,  it

appears,  because  they  were  opting for  school.  During  the  recession

and  slow recovery,  participation  remained weak,  not  only  among young

workers  but  also  adults.  But  even as  the  economy  has  strengthened,

the  participation  rate  has  not  picked up.  In  part,  the  recent  lack

of  entry  may reflect  a continuing  perception that  job  opportunities

are  scarce.  But,  more  fundamental  changes  in  labor  force  growth

appear  to  be  involved.  With  the  gap  between  female  and male

participation  rates  having narrowed  dramatically  over  the  past

twenty years,  the  scope  for  sizable further  contributions  from

rising  participation rates  of women  probably has  diminished.

2. Over  the  six months  ending in  July  1994,  employment  growth  in

the  payroll  survey exceeded  that  in the  household  survey by  almost
1.4  million--large, but  not  unprecedented  in  the  history  of  the
series.  BLS  has  indicated  some  discomfort  with the  recent
divergence  in  these  series  and has  cautioned users  to  discount  the
household  survey  data because  of  the  uncertainties  associated  with
the  introduction  of the  new  CPS.

II-6

LABOR  PRODUCTIVITY
(Nonfarm  business sector)

Output per  Hour

1987  dollars

1980 

1981 

1982 

1983 

1984 

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

Revised Output per  Hour

1987  dollars

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

REVISIONS  TO LABOR PRODUCTIVITY
(Nonfarm business  sector;  percent  change  at  an  annual  rate)

1991 

1992 

1993 

Q1 

Q2 

1994 

1993:Q2-
1994:02

Output per  hour

Revised 
Previous 

2.3 
2.2 

3.2 
3.3 

1.9  2.9  -1.2 
1.7  1.3 

n.a. 

2.6
n.a.

II-7

Although  some  further  gains  are  anticipated in  aggregate

participation, the  underlying uptrend  is  likely to  fall  short  of the

rapid  rate  of  increase  seen  over  the  previous  two  decades.

Initial  claims  for  unemployment  insurance  were  327,000 during

the  week ended  August  6.  With the  exception of  a brief  run-up  in

early July,  weekly  filings  of initial  claims  in  recent  weeks  have

moved  below the  350,000  average  evident  between March  and  June  of

this year.

In  the  second  quarter,  output  per  hour  in  the  nonfarm business

sector  is  estimated to  have  fallen  at  an  annual  rate  of  1.2  percent.

Although nonfarm  output  rose  4.1  percent  in the  second  quarter,

hours  worked  jumped  5.4  percent  at  an  annual  rate.  Nonetheless,

over  the  four  quarters  ended  in  1994:Q2,  labor  productivity  rose

2.6  percent--a  gain  well  above  our  estimate  of  1.4  percent  annual

trend  growth.

In the  first  quarter,  labor  productivity  growth was  revised  up

more  than  1-1/2  percentage  points  to  2.9  percent  (annual  rate).

However,  revisions  to  labor  productivity  in  earlier  years were

small,  and  left  productivity only a little  above  its  previous  level

(chart).

Industrial  Production

Data  on hours of  production workers  and measures  of  physical

product  suggest that  industrial  production  advanced moderately  in

July,  after  rising  1/2  percent  in June.  A decline  in  electricity

generation  from its  unusually high June  level  is  expected to  reduce

the  July  gain  by  about  0.1  percentage  point.  Production in

manufacturing  rose  fairly  strongly,  and  the  rate  of factory  capacity

utilization probably  remained near  83  percent.  Utilization  rates  in

3. Claims  were  boosted  in  early  July by  some transitory  factors.
which  included  flood-related  claims  in the  Southeast  and  shutdowns
at  General  Motors  plants  for  summer vacations.

II-8

GROWTH IN SELECTED COMPONENTS OF  INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION
(Percent change  from preceding period except  as noted)

Proportion
in
total
IP
1993:Q4

100.0

85.2
5.6
6.9
7.9

Total index 
Previous

Manufacturing 

Motor vehicles and parts 

Mining 
Utilities 

Manufacturing

excl. motor vehicles and parts  79.6

Consumer goods 

Durables 
Nondurables 

Business  equipment 

Office  and computing 
Industrial 
Other 

Defense and space equipment 
Construction supplies 

Materials 

Durables 
Nondurables 
Energy 

21.4
3.7
17.7

14.9
4.2
3.9
6.8

2.8
5.2

39.0
19.8
9.2
10.0

1994

1994

19931 

Q1 

Q2 

Apr.  May 

Jun.

-Annual

rate-

--Monthly rate---

4.2
4.2

5.0
16.6
-. 8
.9

4.3

.6
5.8
-.4

9.1
33.9
4.2

.3

-9.5
5.9

4.3
7.4
3.8
-1.0

8.3
8.1

7.8
37.9
4.9
15.8

5.9

2.7
1.9
2.9

12.0
33.9
6.1
3.0

-10.2
-. 4

8.0
9.5
3.7
8.9

4.4

5.3
-22.9
2.2
-2.8

7.7

5.6
.0
6.8

11.6
17.0
12.2

7.7

-6.1
9.7

6.6
10.7
3.8
1.2

.2 
.1 

.1 
.2

.5

.3 

.2 
-1.7  -3.9 
.4  -1.2 

.2
-.6
-.5
.9  5.4

-1.4 

.5

.2
.4
.2

.6
1.0
.8
.3

-. 2
2.0

.3
1.0
-. 7
-.1

.5

.1
-1.5
.4

1.1
1.1
1.0
1.2

-. 9
.4

.2
.2
1.2
-. 6

1. From the  final quarter of  the previous  period to  the final quarter of  the

period indicated.

NEW ORDERS  FOR DURABLE GOODS
(Percent change  from preceding period, seasonally adjusted)

Total durable goods 

Adjusted durable goods  orders1  

Nondefense capital  goods
excluding aircraft and computers 

Office & computing machines 

All other categories 2  

Real adjusted durable goods orders 3  

Share
1994
HI 

100.0 

65.0 

17.0 

5.0 

44.0 

1994 

1994

Q1 

Q2 

Apr.  May 

Jun.

5.4 

3.2 

1.5 

3.4 

.3 

1.4 

1.2

-.5 

.4 

1.2

1.9 

3.0 

-.6 

-2.9 

8.2

.8 

6.0 

-.1 

-1.4 

-1.1

3.9 

2.5 

3.3 

3.5 

-.5 

1.9 

-1.1

-.3 

.2 

1.0

1. Orders excluding defense capital  goods, nondefense aircraft, and motor vehicle

parts.

2. Includes  primary metals; most  fabricated metals;  most stone, clay, and glass

products;  electronic components;  household appliances;  scientific instruments;
and miscellaneous durable goods.

3. Nominal adjusted durable goods orders were deflated with a PPI for durable goods

excluding transportation equipment and the BEA deflator for office, computing,
and accounting machinery.

II-9

primary  processing industries,  such  as  textiles,  lumber,  and  iron

and  steel,  remained  well  above  their  1967-93  averages.

Assembly schedules  for  the third  quarter indicate  little  change

in  car  and  truck  output.  In  July,  auto  production was  close  to

schedules,  and  truck production  actually  exceeded  plans.  As  in

July,  car  assemblies  in  August  are  expected to  be  held  down by

extended model  changeovers  at  some  plants. 

Truck  schedules  call

for  production to  increase  in August  as  additional  capacity  comes  on

line.

PRODUCTION OF  DOMESTIC  AUTOS  AND  TRUCKS
(Millions of units  at  an  annual  rate;  FRB  seasonal  basis)

May 

June 

July 

Q1 

Q2 

1994

U.S.  production 

Autos 
Trucks 

11.5 
6.3 
5.3 

11.6 
6.2 
5.4 

11.3 
6.0 
5.2 

12.9 
7.1 
5.9 

11.8 
6.4 
5.4 

Days'  supply

Autos 
Light  trucks 

60.3 
61.7 

63.0 
64.2 

64.5  2  60.0 
53.0 
61.7 

60.9
60.0

1. Components  may not  add  to  totals  due  to  rounding.
2. Days'  supply  in  July  estimated  from  production and  sales.
s  Scheduled.

Q3 s

11.7
6.2
5.5

The  available evidence  suggests  that output  of  appliances  and

other  household durables  was  robust  in  July.  Meanwhile, declines  in

output  of  gasoline and  residential  electricity held  down  growth in

production  of  consumer nondurables.  The  fallback  in  residential

electricity  came  on the  heels of  a double-digit  gain  in  June  and

4. Altogether, unusually  long  downtimes  reduced  the  level  of
motor  vehicle  output  in the  second  quarter by  roughly  0.2  million  to
0.3  million  units  (annual  rate)  and  are  likely  to  reduce  the  level
of motor  vehicle  output  in the  third  quarter by  a  similar  amount.
The  lost  production is  expected to  be  made  up  only  gradually  in
coming  quarters.

II-10

CAPACITY UTILIZATION  IN INDUSTRY
(Percent of  capacity;  seasonally adjusted)

1967-93  1988-89 

1994 

1994

Avg. 

High  1 

Q1 

Q2 

May 

June

Total  industry 

Manufacturing 

81.9 

84.8 

83.4 

83.8 

83.6 

83.9

81.2 

85.1 

82.5 

82.9 

82.9 

82.8

Primary processing 

Textile mill products 
Lumber and products 
Pulp and  paper 
Chemicals 2  
Petroleum products 
Stone,  clay and  glass 
Primary metals 

Iron and steel 
Nonferrous metals 

Fabricated metal products 

Advanced processing 

Furniture  and fixtures 
Chemicals3  
Nonelectrical machinery 
Electrical machinery 
Motor vehicles and parts 

Autos  and light  trucks4  

Aerospace and misc.

transportation equipment 

Instruments 

82.2 
86.2 
83.1 
92.2 
83.3 
85.5 
77.9 
80.1 
79.8 
80.9 
77.2 

80.6 
81.7 
77.3 
80.8 
80.4 
75.7 

75.5 
82.0 

89.1 
92.1 
93.3 
98.1 
92.3 
88.5 
83.7 
92.9 
95.7 
88.9 
82.0 

83.3 
86.8 
82.0 
83.7 
84.9 
84.5 
89.6 

88.3 
81.2 

85.8 
90.3 
89.8 
93.7 
85.5 
90.5 
77.9 
89.6 
91.1 
87.4 
80.3 

81.2 
82.0 
78.5 
87.4 
85.1 
90.5 
92.8 

62.4 
73.5 

86.8 
91.8 
90.0 
92.3 
86.3 
94.1 
78.2 
93.1 
96.2 
88.5 
81.3 

81.3 
83.1 
78.9 
88.5 
86.3 
83.7 
83.0 

62.4 
73.3 

87.0 
91.5 
90.5 
94.1 
86.7 
94.6 
78.4 
93.0 
95.9 
88.6 
81.1 

81.3 
82.5 
79.3 
88.5 
86.4 
82.8 
81.7 

62.4 
73.0 

86.8
91.8
90.2
90.2
86.5
93.6
78.3
92.8
95.7
88.4
81.5

81.2
83.6
79..
88.7
86.1
81.9
80.1

62.6
73.5

Mining 

Utilities 

87.4 

87.0 

89.0 

89.5 

89.3 

88.8

86.7 

92.6 

89.0 

88.1 

86.8 

91.4

1. The  historical highs shown

are  specific  to each series  and did not occur

in the  same month.

2.  Includes  industrial organic and  inorganic chemicals,  synthetic materials,

plastics  resins, and  fertilizers.

3.  Includes drugs  and toiletries,  soaps  and detergents, paints  and allied

products,  pesticides, and other miscellaneous chemical products.

4. Series  begins  in 1977.

II-11

reflected more  moderate temperatures,  which  reduced  air  conditioning

demands.

Recent  data  also  indicate  that  output  of  business  equipment  and

related  parts  (excluding motor  vehicles)  advanced  quite  strongly  in

July,  despite  the  ongoing weakness  in  aircraft  and  defense  equipment

and  the  strike  at  Caterpillar. 

Production  worker  hours  for

business  equipment  excluding motor vehicles  increased  moderately

last  month,  and  the implied  gains  in  production  are  consistent with

the  uptrend  in  orders  for  information processing,  industrial,  and

other  equipment.

Production of  construction  supplies  looks  to  have  changed

little  for  a second month  in  July,  and  growth  in  output of

industrial materials, which was  rapid  through March,  has  slowed

because  of  declines  in  the production of  parts  used  to  make

vehicles.  Output  of energy materials  declined  in  July,  and  raw

steel  production  fell because  of  repairs  to  equipment  at  several

plants.  Elsewhere, a rebound  in  paper  and  paperboard  and  continued

growth  in  equipment  parts  contributed to  a small  overall  gain  in

production  of  industrial materials.

Motor  Vehicles

Sales  of  new light  vehicles  fell to  an average  of  a little over

14  million units  (annual rate)  in  June  and July,  with declines  in

purchases  of  both  cars  and  trucks.  Nearly  all  of  this  decline  in

sales  from the  robust  pace of  the first  quarter has  occurred  among

vehicles  produced by  the Big Three.

5. The  strike  at  Caterpillar  began  on June  22.  Sources  at
Caterpillar report  that  plants  are  currently operating with a
workforce that  is  at  75  percent  of its  pre-strike  level.  About
25  percent  of  the  regular hourly employees  have  returned,  and been
joined  by  roughly  13.500 white-collar workers,  re-hired workers,
contract  employees,  and  newly hired  permanent  employees.  This
information  suggests  that  the  level  of July  production  at
Caterpillar was  roughly one-half  of  the  normal  nonstrike  level.

II-12

MOTOR  VEHICLE  SALES AND  INVENTORIES

GM  and Ford  Domestic Auto  Sales
(Seasonally adjusted annual  rate;  FRB  seasonals)
Millions of Units

Auto Sales
(Seasonally adjusted annual  rate;  BEA  seasonals)

Millions of Units

Retail

-Fleet

Fleet

* 

4 

,/

St 

,

I

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

Note:  Data are confidential.  Retail includes consumer leasing.

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

Light  Truck Sales
(Seasonally adjusted  annual  rate; BEA  seasonals)
Millions of Units

Light Truck Stocks
(Seasonally adjusted;  FRB  seasonals)

-

Millions of  Units
-1 

0.66

Jul

-4  0.55

Pickups

Vans

Sport utility vehidcles 

-

1991

1992

1993 

1994 

1 

! 

1

1991 

1992

1993

II-13

SALES  OF  AUTOMOBILES AND  LIGHT  TRUCKS1
(Millions of  units  at  an  annual  rate;  BEA  seasonals)

Total 

Autos 
Light  trucks 

North American 2  

Autos 

Big  Three 
Transplants 

Light  trucks 

Foreign  produced 

Autos 
Light  trucks 

Memo:  domestic  name-

plate market  share

Total 
Autos 

1993 
Q4 

14.5 
9.0 
5.6 

12.5 
7.1 
5.7 
1.4 
5.4 

1993 

13.9 
8.7 
5.2 

11.7 
6.7 
5.5 
1.3 
5.0 

2.2 
2.0 
.2 

1994 

Q1 

Q2 

May 

June 

July

1994

15.5 
9.4 
6.0 

13.3 
7.4 
6.0 
1.4 
5.9 

14.7 
9.2 
5.6 

12.6 
7.2 
5.7 
1.5 
5.4 

14.6 
9.1 
5.6 

12.5 
7.1 
5.7 
1.4 
5.4 

14.5 
9.0 
5.5 

12.2 
6.9 
5.4 
1.5 
5.3 

13.7
8.5
5.3

11.6
6.5
5.1
1.4
5.1

2.1
2.0
.1

2.0 
1.9 

.1 

2.2 
2.0 

.1 

2.2 
2.0 
.2 

2.1 
2.0 

.2 

2.2 
2.1 

.2 

.74 
.64 

.74 
.65 

.74 
.65 

.73 
.63 

.74 
.64 

.72 
.61 

.72
.61

Note:  Data  on  sales  of  trucks  and  imported  autos for  the  most  recent

month  are  preliminary and  subject  to  revision.

1. Components  may not  add  to  totals  because  of  rounding.
2. Excludes  some vehicles  produced  in Canada  that  are  classified  as
imports  by the  industry;  before  January  1994,  some  vehicles  produced  in
Mexico  were also  excluded.

Two  special  factors  have  contributed to  the  decline  in  light

motor  vehicle  sales  since the  first  quarter.  First, more  than  half

of the  drop  in car  sales  in the  second quarter  reflected  lower

levels  of  fleet  sales  (chart, upper left  panel). 

The  swing in

rental  car  purchases  was  concentrated  in sales  of mid-sized  and

large vehicles,  which  represent  a  larger  share  of  fleet  purchases

than of  overall  sales.  Second,  short  supplies  of  several  models  of

cars  and  trucks have  held  down  sales.  Inventories  of  some  domestic

models  of  small  and mid-sized  cars  have  been  extremely  lean owing  to

the  extended model  changeovers,  and  sales  of these vehicles  have

fallen  appreciably  (upper right  panel).  Among  light  trucks,  sales

6. The  first-quarter  spurt  in  purchases by  rental  car  companies
represented a catch-up  in  sales  delayed  from  the  second half  of  last
year because  of  supply  shortages.  The  information on  fleet  and
retail  sales  from  Ford  and General  Motors  is  confidential.

II-14

RETAIL SALES
(Percent change;  seasonally adjusted)

1993 

1994 

1994

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

May 

June 

July

Total sales

Previous estimate

Retail control1

Previous estimate

3.0 

1.5 

1.4 

1.0 

Total excl.  automotive group

Previous estimate

GAF2

Previous  estimate

.7 

.7 

1.1

.7

1.2
.7

1.5
1.1

1.8
1.4

Durable goods  stores
Previous estimate

5.7 

2.2 

1.4 
1.1 

-. 6
-1.1

Bldg. material and supply
Automotive dealers
Furniture and appliances
Other durable goods

7.6
7.2
4.8
-1.8

-1.6
4.2
.0
.1

Nondurable goods  stores

1.4 

1.0

Previous estimate

Apparel
Food
General merchandise 3
Gasoline stations
Other nondurables4

1.0
1.7
1.3
-.2
1.7

-1.3

.9

1.9
3.0
.6

.1
-1.8
1.4
2.1

.4
.1

-. 5
.9
.1
-1.3
.7

2.0
-.2
1.8
1.4

.4

-. 5

1.5
-1.7
1.3
1.0

1. Total  retail sales  less building material and supply stores  and

automotive dealers, except auto  and home  supply stores.

2. General merchandise,  apparel, furniture, and appliance stores.
3. Excludes mail-order nonstores;  mail-order  sales  are also  excluded

from the GAP grouping.

4. Includes  sales at  eating and drinking places, drug  stores,  and

proprietary stores.

II-15

have  been  limited  by  short  supplies  of  sport  utility  vehicles  (lower

left  panel),  where  production has  run  into  capacity  constraints  at

either  assembly  or  parts  plants,  and  inventories  have  become  very

tight  (lower  right  panel).

In  addition,  the highly  favorable market  fundamentals  that

boosted demand  earlier  this  year  have  ebbed  a bit.  Prices  have

increased  further,  and the  average  interest  rate  at  auto  finance

companies  was  10  percent  in June,  2-1/2  percentage  points  higher

than  its  recent  low in  January.  The  latest  readings  on car  buying

attitudes  from the  Michigan  SRC  survey were  little  changed  in  early

August  at  a level  somewhat  below the  high  readings  seen  earlier  this

7

year.

Personal  Income  and  Consumption

The  latest  spending  data  show that  nominal  retail  sales  were

flat  in  July.  Nominal  sales  in  the  retail  control  category

increased  only  0.3  percent;  however,  the  previously  slight  gains  in

May  and  June  were  revised upward to  0.5  percent  and  0.7  percent,

respectively.  Sales  at  general  merchandise  and  furniture  and

appliance  stores  increased  further, while  purchases  at  apparel

stores  were off  in  July after  large  June  increases.  In  combination

with today's  CPI  report,  the  retail  sales  data  suggest  that  real

consumption  of  goods  excluding motor  vehicles in  July was

0.4  percent  above  the  second-quarter  average.  The  upward  revisions

to  retail  sales  also  imply  second-quarter  growth in  real PCE  of

nearly  2 percent,  about  3/4  percentage  point  above  the  initial  BEA

estimate.

The  biggest  contributor to the  recent  volatility in  PCE  growth

has  been  spending  on  durable  goods,  which  jumped  8-3/4  percent  at  an

7. In  recent  months,  fewer households  have  been  reporting that  it

is  a good  time  to  buy  a car  because  of  low interest  rates  or  low
prices,  and  more respondents  have  been  saying  that  it  is  a good  time
to  buy  because  prices  will  rise  in the  future.

II-16

PERSONAL INCOME
(Average monthly change  at  an annual rate;  billions of  dollars)

1993 

1994 

1994

1993 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

May 

June

Total  personal income 

.1  33.5 

30.3 

18.8 

Wages and  salaries 

Private 

Other  labor  income 

Proprietors' income 

Farm 

Rent 
Dividend 
Interest 

23.4 

24.8 
19.1 

-8.8 
-10.2 

13.7 
13.6 

19.8 
17.0 

15.9 
13.7 

2.5 

2.7 

1.8 

1.7 

1.7 

2.9 
.7 

16.2 
10.7 

.5 
-1.7 

1.9 
.8 
-2.7 

.7 
.3 
-3.1 

2.3 

.9 
3.2 

-4.9 
-6.3 

-2.3 

2.1 
4.8 

-8.3 
-10.2 

-. 7 
1.9 
4.7 

4.9

1.4
3.2

1.7

-5.3
-6.3

-2.2
1.6
5.0

Transfer payments 

4.6 

4.1 

4.9 

2.6 

.7 

3.0

Less:  Personal  contributions

for social  insurance 

Less:  Personal tax and nontax

payments 

1.1 

1.1 

3.1 

1.0 

1.4 

.1 

4.4 

5.2 

3.9 

-25.7 

.2

.6

Equals:  Disposable personal  income 

.0  29.1 

25.1 

14.9 

48.9 

4.4

Memo:  Real disposable income 

-6.4 

16.4 

11.8 

3.4 

30.4 

-5.3

REAL  PCE SERVICES
(Percent change  from the  preceding period)

PCE  Services 

Energy 

Nonenergy 
Housing 
Household operation 
Transportation 
Medical 
Personal business 
Other 

1993 

1994 

1994

1993 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

May 

June

------ Annual rate----- 

Monthly rate

2.5 

2.2 

2.5 
1.6 
1.1 
4.8 
2.5 
3.5 
3.1 

2.0 

4.0 

1.6 

.7 

.5

-1.2 

2.2 
1.4 
-.6 
4.4 
2.4 
4.5 
1.6 

5.9 

3.9 
1.9 
1.2 
3.4 
2.4 
8.1 
7.4 

-2.9 

6.9 

4.2

1.9 
1.9 
3.3 
4.3 
2.5 
-1.9 
2.6 

.4 
.1 
.2 
1.0 
.4 
-.2 
1.3 

.3
.2
.2
.5
.2
.2
.4

II-17

annual  rate  in  the  first  quarter,  and  then  slowed  substantially  in

the  second  quarter.  A temporary  surge  in  consumer  purchases  of

motor  vehicles  in  the  first  quarter  more  than  accounted for  the

swing:  transactions  in  used  cars,  in  particular,  were  boosted  by

unusually large  sales  from rental  car  companies.

Spending  on  nondurable  goods  and  services  has  also  grown  more

slowly  than  in  the  first  quarter.  In  part,  this  pattern  reflects

temporary  first-quarter  strength  in  spending on  personal business

services--pushed  up by increased  securities  trading--and  energy

services,  which were  boosted  by  severe  winter weather.  The  most

recent  data  show that  services  spending  increased  0.5  percent  in

June;  about  two-thirds  of  this  gain  was  attributable  to  increased

outlays  for  electricity during  the  June  heat  wave.

During the  past year  or  so,  the pace  of  consumption growth has

roughly matched  that  of disposable  income adjusted  for the  effects

of  the  California  earthquake  and  other  special  factors  (top and

middle  panels).  This  pattern has  produced  a fairly  flat  adjusted

saving  rate  for  this  period  (bottom panel). 

The  recent

stability  of the  saving  rate  contrasts  with the  decline  that

occurred between  early  1992  and mid-1993.

Some  analysts  have  suggested  that  the weakness  in  spending in

the  second  quarter  is  an  important  signal  that  household debt

burdens  have  again become too  high and  consumers  are  beginning to

retrench.  The  evidence is  mixed:  While  the  ratio  of  debt  service

payments  to  income has  stopped  declining, it  has  not  as  yet  shown a

significant  increase  (top panel).  Although the  ratio  of  debt  to

8. The  adjusted  income  and  saving  rate  series  exclude BEA's

adjustments  for  uninsured  losses  to  residential  and business
properties  that  occurred  during  the  Northridge  earthquake  and
hurricanes  Andrew,  Iniki,  and Hugo.  The  series  also  transfer  some
bonuses  paid  in the  fourth  quarter  of  1992  for  tax  reasons  to the
first  quarter  of  1993,  which  is  when they  normally would have been
paid.  BEA has  made no  adjustment  for  bonus-shifting between  1993
and  1994.

II-18

RECENT  BEHAVIOR  OF CONSUMPTION  AND  INCOME

Real  Disposable Income

-

---

Actual
Adjusted*

'Adjusted  to  remove  effects  of special factors  mentioned  in the text

Percent change

\Q2

. I

1990

1991

1992 

1993

1994

Real  PCE  and Real Adjusted  Disposable  Income

Percent change

--
-

PCE

-

-

-Adjusted  Disposable  Income

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

Adjusted and  Unadjusted  NIPA Saving  Rates

Percent  of disposable  income

----
-
-

Actual
-Adjusted

-

'Staff  estimate

199 

1990 

199 
1991

19921993199
1992 

I 

I 

I 

1993

I 

i

1994

I 

Q2*

II-19

HOUSEHOLD  SECTOR  INDICATORS

Ratio of Debt  Service  Payments  to Disposable  Income

Ratio
I

0.22

02

0.18

0.16

0.14

1

I 
1975 

I 

I 

I 
I 
1979 

I 

I 

I 

I 
1983

I 

i 

I 

I 
1987

I 

I 

illii l 
1991

i 

ll  ll
1995

0.12

Ratio of Total Household Debt to  Disposable  Income

Ratio

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

1  1 I 

1975 

I 

I 
1979

I 

I 

I  I  1  1 

1983 

I 
1987

I  1 

I  I 

I 
iulu 

l 

1991

i ia l  l
L 
1995

0 .5

Consumer  Sentiment

FMichigan  Survey

Conference  Board Survey

----

1986 

1987 

1988

1989 

1990 

1991

1992 

1993 

1994

Index

S60

1930
1995

'  A4 f

II-20

(Millions of  units;  seasonally  adjusted annual  rate)

PRIVATE  HOUSING ACTIVITY

1993 

1993 

1994 

Annual r   Q4 

Q1 

Q2 p  

Apr. 

1994
May r  

June p

1.29 
1.21 

1.48 
1.38 

1.37 
1.29 

1.44 
1.35 

1.47 
1.38 

1.50 
1.36 

1.35
1.32

1.13 
1.01 

1.29 
1.13 

1.17 
1.06 

1.19 
1.06 

1.21 
1.07 

1.20 
1.08 

1.16
1.04

All  units
Starts 
Permits 

Single-family  units

Starts 
Permits 

Sales

New homes 
Existing  homes 

.67 
3.80 

.77 
4.17 

.69 
4.05 

.65 
4.06 

.67 
4.12 

.69 
4.11 

.59
3.96

Multifamily  units

Starts 
Permits 

p  Preliminary.
r  Revised  estimates.

.16 
.21 

.19 
.25 

.20 
.23 

.25 
.29 

.26 
.31 

.30 
.27 

.19
.28

PRIVATE  HOUSING  STARTS
(Seasonally adjusted  annual rate)

Total

Millions  of units

:  ' , 
.95 
, 

, 

Multifamily 
,. 

., ., 

'" 
*,;

-

I, 

A' 

' 

P
I  I 

",Jw 

I 

.

.

I L,' 

I 

I 
1978 

1 
I 
I 
197  1980 
1980

i  1  ! 
192 
1982 

I  I 

18 
1984 

I 
9898 
1986 

I 

I 
1988

I 
I 
190 
1990

Ifv  Mnim/nmIrVJune
Inmnuihiimnninmmnim
19
92 
1994
1992

II-21

income  has  edged  up  recently  (middle panel),  some  of the  recent  debt

growth  occurred because  of increased  transactions  use  of  credit

cards,  stimulated  in  part  by  incentives  such  as  frequent  flyer  miles

or  rebates.

Historically, movements  in  consumption spending have  been more

closely  related  to  consumer  confidence than  to  debt  burdens,

probably because  perceptions  about  current  and  future  economic

conditions  are  a key  factor  in determining whether  a given  debt

burden is  acceptable  or worrisome.  The  preliminary  results from  the

Michigan  survey  indicate that  confidence  improved in  early August,

raising the  level  of  the  index back close to  its  recent  peak.  Gains

were  evident  in  consumers'  assessments  of both  current  and  expected

conditions.  The  Conference Board  index edged  off in  July  but

remained near  its  highest  reading  in  four years.

Housing  Markets

Housing markets  have  continued  to  weaken in  response  to  the

higher  level  of mortgage  interest  rates,  with activity  slowing

further  in June.  Total  private  housing  starts  fell  9.8  percent  in

June,  to  1.35  million  units  at  an  annual  rate.

In  the single-family  sector, housing  starts  declined  to

1.16  million units  in  June,  while sales  of new  single-family  homes

fell  to  591,000  units  at  an  annual  rate,  the  lowest  level  in  two

9
years. 

The  latest  data  leave  single-family  starts  and permits

unusually high in  relation to  sales,  suggesting--as  do  other

indicators--that the June  estimate  of  sales  may understate  the

actual  level.  The number  of  new homes  for  sale  rose  in  June  to

317,000 units,  the highest  level  since  late  1990,  though not  an

unusually high  level historically.  The  declines  in  new home  sales

and  in  single-family  starts  were  accompanied by  a small  drop  in

9. The  sales  estimates  for April  and May  also  were  revised  down

considerably.

II-22

INDICATORS  OF HOUSING  DEMAND
(Seasonally adjusted)

Consumer  Homebuying  Attitudes*
Millions of units,  annual rate

1.6  1

8/12/94

Diffusion index

Consumer  homebuying atttudes  (right scale)

A  ,,/vW 

A  A 

,

Augsl(p)

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I

Single-Family  Starts  (left scale)

1987 

1998 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993

SThe  homobuying  atlitudes  index is calculated  by the  Survey  Research  Center  (Unversity of  Micnigan)  as  the proportion  of respondents

June

1994

rating  current  conditions as good  minus the proportion rating  such conditions as bad,

Builders'  Rating  of  New  Home Sales*
Millions of units, annual  rate

A

Bui  ingofn h 

sals 

Diffusion  index
sal 

80

Builders' rating of new  home  sales  (right scale)

(p  40

A 

.,

SS 

June

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I

Single-Family  Starts (left scale)

1987 

1990 
index  is calculated  from National Association  of Homebuilders  data as  the proportion  of respondents  rating current  sales  as good

1988 

1989 

1991 

1992 

1993

'The 

to excellent  minus  the proportion rating  them  as poor.

1994

MBA  Index  of Mortgage  Loan  Applications
Millions of  units, annual  rate

Purchase  index  (right scale)

March 16,  1990 = 100

-

210

e 

August  5

1.6  -

0.8  I-

r-\

I'/

./-
4,

Single-Family  Starts (left scale)

99 
1990

199 
1992 

1993
1993

II-23

existing  home  sales  in June  (but most  such  sales  are  reported  at

closing  and thus  lag the  other  series).  Further,  although

consumers'  homebuying attitudes,  home  builders'  assessments  of  new

home  sales,  and mortgage  applications  for  purchasing a home  all

edged  up  in  early  August,  they remained  well  below the  favorable

readings  at  the  beginning  of  the year  (chart).

In  the  multifamily  sector,  starts  fell more than  100,000  units

(annual  rate)  in  June,  accounting for  nearly  three-fourths  of  the

decline  in  total  housing  starts.  Averaging through  the monthly

fluctuations,  multifamily  starts  jumped  25  percent  in  the  second

quarter.  An  increase  in multifamily  activity is  consistent  with

anecdotal  reports  of demand  pressures  for  multifamily housing  and

rising  rents  in  various  localities,  but  some  of the  recent  pickup

may  also  reflect  construction postponed  during the  first  quarter.

Furthermore, market  conditions  for the  nation  as  a whole do  not

appear  to  favor  sustained  rapid  growth  in this  sector.  Vacancy

rates  for  apartments  have  been stuck at  about the  same  level  over

the  past  year,  and  they  remain high by  historical  standards  (chart).

Also,  increases  in  residential  rent  have been persistently  low

relative  to  the  non-housing components  of the  consumer  price  index

(chart).

Recent  press  reports  have  suggested  that  reduced  availability

of  homeowners'  insurance  may  adversely  affect home  sales  in

California, which  accounts  for  roughly  7 percent  of  single-family

construction activity  nationwide.  Under  California law, companies

that  write homeowners'  insurance  are  required to  offer  earthquake

coverage.  But,  with losses  mounting, many  firms  have  stopped

selling new homeowner policies.  (In most  cases,  renewals  of

existing policies  have  not  been  affected.)  Because  lenders  are

increasingly  requiring  earthquake  coverage  as  a condition for  a

II-24

MULTIFAMILY  RENTAL  HOUSING

Multifamily  Rental  Vacancy  Rate
(Seasonally  adjusted)

8/12/94

Percent

94Q2

I 

I 
I 
1969

I 

I 

I 

I 
I 
1974

I 

1 

1 

I  1 

I 
1979

I 

I 

I 
1 
1984

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 
I 
1989

I
1994

Real Rent*

Twelve-month percent  change

rPtA

1969 

1974 

1979 

1984 

1989

* CPI  rent/  CPI excluding shelter

II-25

loan,  difficulties  in  obtaining homeowners'  policies  could hamper

home  sales.  According  to  information  obtained  from the  staff  of

Governor Wilson  and  from the  California  Association  of Realtors,  few

if  any  closings  have  fallen through  at  this  point,  but  some

settlements  have  been  delayed.  A state-run program  that offers

minimal  fire  and  earthquake  coverage may  provide  an  alternative to

private  coverage.

For  some  time,  home builders  have  been  citing  price  increases

for  some  materials  and  shortages  of  skilled  construction  labor  as

factors  that have  begun to  exert upward  pressure on  home prices.

Lumber  prices  have  stabilized  somewhat  at  a fairly high  level,  and

the  prices  of many  other  building materials--including  plywood,

gypsum products,  concrete products,  and  insulation--have continued

to  move upward  (chart).

Employment of  production or  nonsupervisory workers  in

construction has  risen moderately  over the  past  couple  of  years  for

residential  contractors  and  more  noticeably for  skilled workers  in

special  trades  (chart).10  However,  employment  at  operative

builders,  who  construct homes  for  sale,  has  only edged  up.  Data on

average hourly  earnings  of  production or  nonsupervisory workers  in

residential  construction  indicate that  hourly wage  increases

generally have  been modest  in  recent months.  Although AHE  for total

construction  jumped 0.8  percent  in July,  data  are  not  yet  available

separately  for the  residential  and nonresidential  sectors.

The  employment  cost  index provides more  comprehensive  data  on

the  construction industry.  ECI  hourly compensation in  construction,

which  includes  residential,  nonresidential,  and  public  building,

rose  at  an  annual  rate  of  4.8  percent  over the March  to  June  period,

following  a 7 percent  increase  in the  first  quarter.  Unpublished

10.  Data  for  special  trades  employment  are not  specific  to

residential  construction.

11-26

CONSTRUCTION  MATERIAL  PRICES
(Not  seasonally adjusted)

8/11/94

Lumber  (Spot Price)

Dollars per thousand 
board feet

Plywood  (Spot Price)

Dollars per thousand
square feet

FWeekly

1 

i  500 

Weekly

1985 

1988 

1991 

1994 

1985 
1

1988 

1991 

Gypsum  Products* 

Monthly 

onthy 

Ci

oncrete  Products*

150 

r

Monthly 

Index

July

1994

Index

July

130

110

90

i 

i i 

i

1990

1992

1994

I 

1990

I 

I 

I

1992

1994

Insulation  Materials*

Monthly

Index
=i a

120

Asphalt Roofing*

Monthly

110

100

90

1990 

1992 

1994

*Producer price  index,  1982 = 100.

Index

July

1992

1994

CONSTRUCTION  EMPLOYMENT  AND  WAGES

II-27

8/11/94

Employment

Residential  General  Contractors

Thousands 

-- 

600 

Hourly  Wage*
--

400

1980  1982 

1985 

1988 

1991 

1994 

1980  1982

1985 

1988 

1991

nn

1 A  IA 

I 

I 

J 

I  I  I

Employment 
-- 

Special  Trades

Thousands 

Hourly  Wage*

-

3000-

EL 
1980  1982 

tI  II 

I 

1  1  1  1 
1985 

1988 

Employment

June

- 2400

-1800

1200 

-

19E

91 

1994 

1980  1982

Operative  Builders

Thousands 

--  60 

Hourly Wage*
r--

Vw\

Percent

-- 

15

June

-J 5
1994

Percent

Percent

June

1980  1982 

1985 

1988 

1991 

1994

* Percent change  in average hourly earnings  from a year earlier.

I  -
1980  1982 

l  i  1 

i 

1985 

I 
1988 

1 

1 
1991 

20

1I 
1994

II-28

BUSINESS CAPITAL SPENDING INDICATORS
(Percent change from preceding comparable period;
based on seasonally adjusted data,  in current dollars)

1993 

1994 

1994

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Apr. 

May  June

Producers' durable  equipment

Shipments of nondefense capital goods 

Excluding aircraft  and parts 

Office and computing 
All other categories 

7.1 
8.0 
5.2 
8.8 

1.0 
1.2 
3.3 
.5 

1.8 
4.0 
1.5 
4.8 

-1.5 
1.3 
-2.3 
2.4 

1.0 
1.9 
-.3 
2.5 

1.7
.7
1.9
.3

Shipments  of  complete  aircraft1 

34.1 

10.0  -32.5  -57.6 

-9.9 

67.2

Sales of  heavy trucks 

10.3 

-1.0 

5.3 

3.3 

-1.9 

11.8

Orders of  nondefense capital goods 

Excluding aircraft and parts 

Office and  computing 
All other categories 

10.4 
10.9 
12.9 
10.4 

6.2 
1.7 
.8 
1.9 

-.2 
3.7 
6.0 
3.0 

-.9 
-.4 
-.1 
-.6 

-.9 
-2.5 
-1.4 
-2.9 

5.9
6.0
-1.1
8.2

Nonresidential structures

Construction put-in-place 

Office 
Other  commercial 
Institutional 
Industrial 
Public  utilities 
Lodging and misc. 

5.0 
4.6 
13.7 
-4.5 
1.3 
7.4 

-3.1 
-.3 
-6.0 
-6.7 
1.0 
-2.2 
.6  -2.7 

5.6 
3.6 
12.0 
6.5 
7.2 
2.3 
1.1 

2.9 
-2.5 
4.5 
2.5 
6.9 
2.3 
2.2 

.9 
-1.4 
2.2 
2.0 

.7
-2.1
2.3
1.3
.7  -1.6
2.1
-3.6

1.0 
-1.8 

Rotary drilling rigs  in use 

-3.7 

.8 

2.2 

1.9 

-1.6 

-.7

Memo:

Business fixed  investment2  

Producers' durable equipment 2  
Nonresidential  structures 2  

21.1 
27.5 

10.9 
18.6 
3.3  -11.8 

10.0 
7.7 
18.4 

n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 

n.a.  n.a.
n.a.
n.a. 
n.a.
n.a. 

1. From the Current  Industrial  Report  "Civil Aircraft and Aircraft Engines."
Monthly data are  seasonally adjusted using FRB seasonal  factors constrained to
BEA quarterly seasonal  factors.  Quarterly data are seasonally adjusted using
BEA seasonal  factors.

2. Based on constant-dollar data;  percent change, annual rate.
n.a. Not available.

II-29

data  from the  BLS  indicate  that  rising  wages  and  benefits  of

professional  and  managerial personnel  have  fueled most  of  the  recent

pickup  in  overall  construction compensation  growth. 1 1

Although  trade  reports  from some  areas  have  mentioned  rising

home  prices  as  a partial  explanation for  lower  sales  in June,

increases  in national  measures  of home  prices  remained  moderate  in

the  second  quarter.  The  constant-quality new home  price  index,

which  adjusts  for  compositional  changes  in house  quality and

geographic  location,  rose  3.0  percent  from the  level  a year  earlier,

with  no  clear  trend  in the  rate  of  increase  in  recent  quarters.  The

constant-quality  index of  existing home  prices  (compiled jointly  by

Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie Mac  from  repeat  sales  of  individual

properties)  increased  3.7  percent  during  the  same  period;  the  rate

of  increase  in  this  index has  been on  a gradual  uptrend  since  early

1993.

Business  Fixed  Investment

Real  business  fixed  investment  advanced at  an  annual  rate  of

10  percent  in  the  second  quarter,  roughly the  same  pace  as  in  the

first  quarter,  but  down from  the  16  percent  growth  rate  registered

in  1993.  Outlays  in  the  second  quarter were  boosted by a strong

recovery  in  real  nonresidential  construction.  Investment  in

producers'  durable  equipment--which advanced  at  an  annual  rate  of

21  percent  in  1993--rose  less  than  8 percent  in the  second  quarter.

A marked  slowing  in  the  growth rate  of  real  outlays  for  office

and  computing  equipment  accounted  for much  of the  deceleration in

PDE.  After  soaring nearly  60  percent  in  1993,  real  computer

purchases  have  advanced  at  only  about  one-quarter that  pace  so  far

this  year.  While  growth  in nominal  expenditures  has  tailed  off a

bit,  the  deceleration  in  real  expenditures  has  been intensified by  a

11.  Wages  of  workers  in  these  occupations  are  excluded from

average  hourly  earnings.

II-30

PERSONAL  COMPUTER  PRICES
(Adjusted for changes in system  performance)*

Dell
Index,  1987-  1

Dollars,  ratio  scale

486, 66MHz

S 
'- 

PDE  deflator for office
and computing equipment

486  33MHz

N4

-WI-

N 

N 

~ 

WI--- 

WI
--
~-W 

--

Pentium,  60MHz 

-'WI

N

N

---------

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

I 

1992 

1992 

I 

19 

1993 

I

1994

Gateway  2000
Index,  1987  - 1

PDE deflator  for office
S  and computing equipment

-

Dollars,  ratio  scale

N  486. 33MHz
N<

W

*  8 *0, 

, 

-

*W * 

09  V

z

W-

Pentium, 60MHz

-- 

Pentium, 66MHz

N.,---

N 

N 

N

N

-

I

WI 

-

-

-

0.55

0.5

0.45  I-

0.4  -

5000

4000

3000

2000

1000

5000

4000

3000

2000

' FRB staff estimate.  Data  collected from  vendor advertisements  in various  issues of PC  Magazine.

1993 
1993

1994
1994

1000

II-31

slowing  of  the  rate  of  decline  in BEA's  computer deflator.  This

deflator  decreased  only  3-3/4  percent  at  an  annual  rate  in  the

second  quarter,  after  falling  at  an  annual  rate  of  about  15  percent

over  the  1992-93  period.

Price measurement  problems  may have  exaggerated the  extent  of

the  estimated  slowdown  in  real  computer  purchases  during the  first

half  of this  year.  Industry  sources  do  not  believe  that  prices  are

firming,  and  a small  sample  of mail-order PC  vendor  prices  collected

by  Board  staff  provides  some  evidence to  this  effect.  Although  the

sample  does  not  cover the  full  range  of  equipment  in  the  computer

deflator,  the  models  included  are in  what  currently is  one  of  the

hottest  segments  of the market,  and  they  still  are  posting

significant  price  declines  (chart).  The  biggest  drops  apply  to  the

newest  models,  which may be  underrepresented in  the  computer

deflator. 1 2  Had  the  computer  deflator  fallen at  the  1992-93  pace,

office  and  computing  investment  would have  grown  at  an  annual  rate

of  close  to  25  percent  in the  second  quarter--adding

3-1/2  percentage  points  to  growth  in  real  PDE.

Most  other  components  of PDE have  continued to  show solid

gains.  PDE  excluding  aircraft,  computers,  and motor vehicles

advanced  17  percent  at  an  annual  rate  in the  second  quarter;  for  the

first  six months  of  1994.  spending  in this  category  rose  at  roughly

last  year's  pace.  Real  investment  in communications  equipment

jumped  at  an  annual  rate  of  34  percent  in  the  second quarter,  and

special  industrial  equipment--a  category  that  includes  woodworking,

textile,  paper  industry,  food  product,  and  printing machinery--

advanced  17  percent.  The  only  major  categories  of PDE  that did  not

12.  In  the  most  recent  annual  revision, the  computer  deflator was

revised  down  substantially  for  1992  and  1993.  The  revision
reflected  new  information collected  by the  Census  Bureau on the
composition  of  computer  purchases,  with a higher weight  given  to
personal  computers  in  the  revised  numbers.

ORDERS  AND  SHIPMENTS  OF  NONDEFENSE  CAPITAL  GOODS

II-32

Office  and Computing  Equipment

Billions of dollars

Billions of dollars

-

Unfilled orders

June

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

Other Equipment  (Excluding Aircraft  and Computing  Equipment)

Billions of dollars

Billions of  dollars

-------

Shipments
Orders

-- 

Unfilled  orders

1991 

1992 

1993

1994

____-----------

1992

1993

June

II-33

show solid  growth were  aircraft  and  motor vehicles.  Business

purchases  of  aircraft  declined  sharply  in  the  second  quarter.3

Motor  vehicle  purchases  were  off  17  percent,  as  fleet  sales  dropped

from their  high  first-quarter  level,  and  heavy truck sales  flattened

out  because  of  capacity  constraints.

Most  leading  indicators  of investment  activity  point  to  further

large  gains  in PDE  in  coming months.  Orders  for  nondefense  capital

goods  surged  in June,  continuing  a strong uptrend.  Bookings  have

been  solid  for most  types  of  equipment,  and  the  stock  of unfilled

orders  for  nondefense  capital  goods  (excluding aircraft  and

computers)  has  risen  sharply  in  recent months.  In  addition,  heavy-

truck manufacturers  report  large  order  backlogs,  and  planned

capacity  expansions  should begin to  come  online  in  the early  fall.

Unfilled  orders for  computers  also  have  surged,  and  industry  sources

are  reporting  that  some major manufacturers  are  accumulating  large

inventories  in  anticipation of  another  sharp  jump  in sales  later

this  year.

Real  investment  in  nonresidential  structures  climbed  18  percent

at  an  annual  rate  in  the  second  quarter,  more than offsetting  the

large  weather-related decline  in  the  first  quarter.14 Outlays

advanced at  double-digit  rates  in virtually  every  category, with  the

largest  gains  occurring  in  the industrial  and  commercial  sectors.

13.  Because  growth  in aircraft  spending has  been  depressed for
some  time,  this  category  is  no  longer  a major component  of PDE.
In  the  second  quarter,  aircraft  represented less  than  1 percent  of
PDE;  this  share  is  well  below the  shares  in  excess  of  7 percent
seen  at  times  during the  boom years  of  the  late  1960s.

14.  The  June data  on  construction  put-in-place  for nonresidential

structures  were  close  to  BEA's  assumptions  in the  advance  estimate
of  GDP  and  do  not  suggest  any  significant  revision to  real
investment  in  the  second quarter.

II-34

NONRESIDENTIAL  CONSTRUCTION  AND  PERMITS
(Six-month moving average)

Total  Building

index,  Dec.  1982  =  100  ratio  scale

-" 
-------

Construction  (C) 
Permits  (P)

-- 

280

-

210

June 

140

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

1 

I 

I 

I

1982 

1983 

1984 

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

Office

Other Commercial

1982 

1984 

1986 

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994

1982 

1984 

1986 

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994

Industrial

Institutional

1982 

1984 

1986 

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994

1982 

1984 

1986 

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994

II-35

The  second-quarter  jump  in  construction  returned  that  series  to  last

year's  slightly positive  trend. 1 5

A  recent  spurt  in  permit  issuance  suggests  that  the  modest

recovery  in  nonresidential construction  may  well  continue  into  the

second  half  of  the  year.  Permits  for  private  nonresidential

structures  increased  1.5  percent  in  June  and were  up  10  percent  for

the  second  quarter  as  a whole.  Permits  for industrial  and

commercial  buildings have  picked up,  while  institutional  permits

have  continued  their  recent  downtrend.

Manufacturing  and  Trade  Inventories

Business  inventory investment  slowed  in June  after  a sharp

acceleration  in April  and  May.  Excluding  auto  dealers,  stocks  in

manufacturing  and  trade  rose  in  June  at  a $29  billion annual  rate  in

current-cost  terms,  as  compared with the  average  $80  billion  April-

May  pace.16 Despite  this  surge  last  quarter, stocks  do  not  appear

excessive  at  this  point.  The  bulk of  the  runup  was  in  retail  and

wholesale trade  inventories,  but  given the  high  level  of  demand,

stock-sales  ratios  in these  sectors  remained within  their  recent

ranges.  And  in manufacturing, stockbuilding  appears  to  have  been

the  planned  response to  rising demand.

Recent  buildups  in  manufacturing  stocks have  been concentrated

in  just  a few  industries.  Particularly noteworthy is  the  machinery

industry, where  stocks  have  been trending upward  over  the  past  year.

Orders  have been  strong  for many types  of  industrial  machines  and

electrical  and  electronic  equipment,  and the  inventory  investment  in

15.  Growth  in  nonresidential  structures  investment  was  revised
down  for  1991,  1992,  and  1993  in the  latest  annual  NIPA  revision,
with  reductions  in estimated  spending  on industrial buildings,
utilities,  and  drilling  and  mining.

16.  For  the  second  quarter,  the  current-cost  inventory

accumulation  for  all  manufacturing and  trade excluding motor
vehicles  is  now  shown  to  have  been $57  billion based  on Census  data,
about  $4 billion  more  than BEA's  assumption  in  the  advance  GDP
report.

II-36

CHANGES  IN MANUFACTURING AND TRADE  INVENTORIES
(Billions of dollars  at  annual  rates;
based on  seasonally adjusted  data)

Current-cost basis

Total 

Excluding auto  dealers 
Manufacturing 

Defense  aircraft 
Nondefense aircraft 
Excluding  aircraft 

Wholesale 
Retail 

Automotive 
Excluding auto dealers 

Constant-dollar basis

Total 

Excluding auto dealers 
Manufacturing 
Wholesale 
Retail 

Automotive 
Excluding auto dealers 

1993 

1994 

1994

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Apr. 

May 

June

18.8 
5.5 
-13.1 
-4.7 
-4.5 
-3.9 
6.1 
25.8 
13.3 
12.5 

-3.1 
1.5 
-7.7 
-.4 
5.0 
-4.5 
9.6 

18.4 
15.9 
9.4 
-4.4 
-1.4 
15.2 
3.1 
5.9 
2.6 
3.4 

9.9 
7.3 
9.9 
-2.0 
2.0 
2.5 
-.5 

73.8 
62.0 
11.8 
-4.5 
3.6 
12.7 
19.8 
42.2 
11.8 
30.5 

n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 

57.6 
52.0 
10.5 
-1.9 
3.2 
9.2 
27.0 
20.2 
5.6 
14.6 

21.2 
36.8 
3.6 
21.9 
-4.3 
-15.6 
11.3 

122.4 
105.0 
20.8 
-8.2 
8.7 
20.4 
43.3 
58.2 
17.4 
40.8 

83.2 
81.9 
15.3 
34.3 
33.7 
1.3 
32.4 

41.3
29.0
4.0
-3.5
-1.1
8.6
-11.0
48.3
12.3
36.0

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

INVENTORIES  RELATIVE TO  SALES 1
(Months supply;  based on seasonally adjusted data)

1993 

1994 

1994

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Apr. 

May 

June

Current-cost basis

Total 

Excluding auto dealers 
Manufacturing 

Defense aircraft 
Nondefense aircraft 
Excluding aircraft 

Wholesale 
Retail 

Automotive 
Excluding auto  dealers 

1.43 
1.41 
1.42 
5.24 
5.05 
1.29 
1.34 
1.51 
1.66 
1.47 

1.41 
1.39 
1.40 
4.80 
4.98 
1.28 
1.31 
1.50 
1.61 
1.47 

1.41 
1.40 
1.38 
4.86 
5.84 
1.26 
1.32 
1.54 
1.68 
1.50 

1.40 
1.38 
1.39 
5.11 
5.65 
1.26 
1.31 
1.50 
1.61 
1.46 

1.41 
1.39 
1.38 
4.96 
6.14 
1.26 
1.33 
1.52 
1.67 
1.48 

1.41
1.39
1.37
4.86
5.61
1.25
1.32
1.53
1.68
1.49

1. Ratio  of  end of period inventories  to average monthly sales  for the period.

II-37

RATIO  OF  INVENTORIES  TO  SALES
(Current-cost  data)

Manufacturing

1  1 
-
1980 

A 

I 
1982 

I 1- 
1984 

1986 

1988 

1990 

1992 

Wholesale

Ratio

-22

1.95

1,7

1.45

June

i 
1994

1.2

Ratio

1.5

1.4

June

- 1.3-- 1.1

1980 

1982 

1984 

1986 

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994

Retail
Ratio 

2.7 

:  # t 

*$A 

2.5 

.

.

r 

GAF group
T 
-

S. 

2.3 

2.1  -

Ratio
-

1.7

-

1.6

June

- 1.4

V 

Total excluding auto 

-1.4

1980 

1982 

1984 

1986 

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994

II-38

this  area  appears  to  have  been  intended.  Recent  Census  data  show

that  increases  in  manufacturers' bookings  became  more  widespread  in

June;  orders  for  many  types  of nondefense  capital  goods--

construction and  materials  handling  equipment,  metalworking

machinery,  and  equipment  for  the  telecommunications,  rail  and marine

transportation  industries--increased  substantially.  By  stage  of

processing,  inventories  of  materials  and  supplies  and work  in

process  grew last  quarter,  but  stocks  of finished  goods  edged  down.

This  pattern  also  suggests  that  the  accumulation of  factory  stocks

was  largely intended.

In the  trade  sector,  the  sharp  accumulations  in  April  and May

followed  sizable  drawdowns  in  March  and  generally modest  buildups

over  the  first  quarter  as  a whole.  In  June,  inventories were

reduced  at  some  trade  establishments  and  expanded  much more  slowly

at  others.  The  accumulation of  wholesale  inventories  in  the  second

quarter  was  largely in  durable  goods--motor  vehicles,  machinery,

electrical  goods,  and  professional  and  commercial  equipment.  By  and

large,  this  pattern of  stockbuilding  mirrors that  observed  for

manufacturers  and  is  generally  in  line  with the  brisk  pace  of

business  fixed  investment  in  recent  months.  In  contrast,  retail

inventory buildups  outside of  automotive dealers  in May  and  June

were  concentrated  in  nondurable  goods,  especially  in  stocks  of

general merchandise.  Sales  at  general  merchandise  stores  rebounded

in  June,  and  inventories  were up  considerably.  The  inventory-sales

ratio  for  general  merchandise  stores  at  the  end  of  June  was  still

below  its  recent  high  posted  in November  of  last year.

Federal  Sector

Real  federal  government  purchases  declined  at  a 4.8  percent

annual  rate  in  the  second  quarter, with  drops  in both  defense  and

nondefense purchases.  Much  of the  relatively  steep  6.9  percent

II-39

FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OUTLAYS AND RECEIPTS
(Unified  basis, billions  of dollars, except where  otherwise noted)

Fiscal year  to date

Jun. 
1993 

Jun. 
1994 

FY1993  FY1994 

Dollar  Percent
change  change

Outlays 

Deposit  insurance  (DI) 

117.5 
-2.0 

122.9 
1.2 

1059.5  1089.2 
-3.8 

-20.5 

29.7 
16.7 

2.8
-81.4

Outlays  excluding DI 
National defense 
Net  interest 
Social  security 
Medicare and health 
Income  security 
Other 

119.5 
24.8 
15.5 
28.7 
21.3 
13.8 
15.4 

121.7 
24.2 
15.9 
30.1 
23.0 
13.1 
15.4 

1080.1  1093.0 
207.8 
149.7 
239.2 
186.6 
163.0 
146.7 

218.5 
148.8 
227.9 
170.0 
158.8 
156.0 

13.0 
-10.7 
.9 
11.3 
16.6 
4.2 
-9.4 

1.2
-4.9
.6
5.0
9.8
2.6
-6.0

Receipts 

128.6 

138.1 

858.4 

939.1 

80.8 

9.4

Personal  income  and social
insurance taxes

Withheld 
Nonwithheld 
Other 

Corporate  income  taxes 
Other 

70.4 
24.9 
-. 5 
24.9 
8.8 

74.4 
25.8 
-.6 
29.1 
9.4 

604.4 
138.8 
-44.5 
88.4 
71.3 

647.8 
148.3 
-44.1 
106.2 
81.0 

43.4 
9.4 
.5 
17.8 
9.7 

7.2
6.8
N.A.
20.2
13.6

Deficit(+) 

Excluding DI 

-11.1 
-9.1 

-15.2 
-16.4 

201.2 
221.7 

150.1 
153.9 

-51.1 
-67.8 

-25.4
-30.6

Details may not  add to totals because  of rounding.

II-40

ADMINISTRATION BUDGET  PROJECTIONS1
(Billions of  dollars)

Outlays

Receipts

Deficit

1994 

1995 

Fiscal  ye
19
1996 

arsars
97 

1998

-- ~---

1999

I

1480 

1521 

1605 

16

83 

1761

1260 

1354 

1426 

14

93 

1569

220 

167 

179 

1

90 

192

1852

1645

207

1.  Estimates  exclude the budgetary impact of the Presiden't health

health

care  reform proposal.

ADMINISTRATION ECONOMIC ASSUMPTIONS

1994 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998 

Calendar years... 

..
1999

------ Percent  change,  Q4  over  Q4------

3.0 

2.7 

2.6 

2.5 

2.5 

2.5

2.7 

2.9 

2.8 

2.9 

3.0 

3.0 

3.2 

3.3 

3.4 

3.4 

3.0

3.4

------- Percent,  annual  average-------

Real  GDP 

GDP  deflator 

CPI-U 

Civilian  unemployment rate 

6.3 

6.2 

6.1 

6.1 

6.1 

6.1

Interest  rates

3-month  Treasury bills
10-year  Treasury notes

4.0 
6.8 

4.7 
7.0 

4.8 
7.0 

4.8 
7.0 

4.8 
7.0 

4.8
7.0

Source:  0MB, Mid-Session Review of the Budget,  July  1994.

II-41

decline  in  real  nondefense  spending  stemmed  from the  government's

employee  buyout  program,  which  reduced  the  nondefense  workforce by

roughly  17.000  people. 1 7  The  accompanying  transitory  boost  in

nominal  compensation led  to  an  increase  in  the  nondefense

compensation  deflator  in  the  second  quarter,  as  did  the  additional

paid  leave  given  to  the  federal work  force  for  the  day  of mourning

for  former President  Nixon. 1 8

The  unified  budget deficit  for  the  fiscal  year  through  June  was

$150  billion,  25  percent  below the corresponding  figure  for  fiscal

year  1993.  The  reduction  in  the  deficit  reflects  continuing

strength  in  all  categories  of  receipts,  as  well  as  restraint  in the

growth  of  outlays.

The  final  data  on  June tax  collections  showed  a $9.5  billion

increase over  this  same  period  last  year.  Corporate  estimated tax

payments  were  particularly  high,  rising  17  percent  above  last  year's

level,  primarily  because  of  continued  growth in  profits.  Withheld

personal  income  and  social  insurance  taxes  in  June were

5-1/2  percent  above  their  level  of  a year  ago; the  gain  roughly

matches  the  increase  in  wages  and  salaries  over  the  past  four

quarters.  Nonwithheld  personal  taxes were  up  only  3-1/2  percent

from the  June  1993  level,  but  these data  are  difficult  to  interpret

because  of  the  variability in  the  timing  of nonwithheld  payments  and

the  changes  in  tax  rates  and  safe  harbor  provisions.

19

17.  Real  federal  government  purchases  in  the  first  quarter  also
were  revised down  sharply;  most of the  revision was  in  nondefense
purchases.

18.  The  effect  of these  factors  is  only temporary, and  in the
third  quarter  the  nondefense  compensation  deflator  is  expected  to
retrace  its  run-up.

19.  OBRA-93  changed  the  safe harbor  provisions  such  that taxpayers

whose  income  increased by  more  than  $40,000  over the  previous  year
could  avoid  interest  or  penalty  charges  by  paying  110  percent  of
that year's  tax  liability.  Previously,  these taxpayers were
required  to  pay  90  percent  of  current  year  tax  liability  in withheld
or  estimated payments.

II-42

STATE  AND  LOCAL SECTOR  SURPLUS  (DEFICIT)

Aggregate (NIPA  Basis)*

-
--- 

Revised
- Previous

Billions of  dollars

1974 

1978 

1982 

1986 

1990

SExcludes  social insurance  funds.

Cities with Deficits (General  Fund  Accounts)

1984 

1985 

1986

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993

e - Estimate
Source:  National League  of Cities.

I -

75

1994

Percent

S60

50

- 40

- 30

20

II-43

Federal  outlays  excluding  deposit  insurance  so  far this  year

are  1.2  percent  higher  than  outlays  over  the  same  period last  year.

Outlays  during  June were  1.8  percent  higher  than  outlays  during  June

1993;  spending  in  the  defense  and  income  security  categories  was

lower,  while  spending  in  other  categories  was  higher.  The  reduction

in  income  security  expenditures  reflected  decreased  spending on

unemployment  benefits,  through  both  lower  unemployment  and  the

expiration  of  emergency unemployment  benefits.  Medicare and  health

spending was  up  8 percent  over  the  June  1993  level.

In  the Mid-Session  Review of the  1995  Budget,  OMB  projected

deficits  of  $220  billion for  1994  and  $167  billion  for  1995.

Thereafter, the  deficit  is  projected  to  increase  gradually  through

the  end  of  the  decade.  The  economic assumptions  underlying these

projections  are  little different  from those  used  in January,  except

for  higher  projected  interest  rates.  CBO  has  not  yet  released  its

summer  update  of  the  economic  and budget  outlook, but  press  reports

indicate  that  their deficit  forecast  for  1994 will  be  close  to

$200  billion,  $20  billion below  the  Administration's  forecast.  Most

of  the  difference  probably  stems  from projected  outlays;  OMB's

forecast  looks  high  compared with the  nine months  of  data  that  we

have  for  fiscal  1994.

State  and  Local Government  Sector

Real  purchases  by  state  and  local  governments  rose  at  a

2.0  percent  annual  rate  in the  second quarter,  following  a

1.4  percent  decline  in the  first  quarter.  The  second-quarter  gain

was  widespread  across  goods  and  services.  Real  construction

spending rose  at  a 1.9  percent  annual  rate  in the  second  quarter,

reversing  only  a little of  its  sharp  first-quarter  decline. 2 0

20.  The  June data  on  construction  put-in-place  suggest an  upward

revision to  real  construction expenditures  of  $1 billion, which
would  raise  the  growth rate  in  this  category to  6-1/2  percent
(annual rate).

II-44

The  BEA's  annual  revision has  significantly  reduced  the  deficit

on  operating  and  capital  accounts,  excluding  social  insurance  funds

(chart). 

21

Most  of the  revision  stems  from lower  estimates  of

goods  and  services.  Other factors  contributing to  the  revision

include  lower  estimated transfer  payments  (mostly for  Medicaid),  and

greater  personal nontax  collections.  In  addition  to  being  smaller

than  previously  estimated, the  state  and  local  deficit  on  operating

and  capital  accounts  now  appears  to  have  improved  slightly  since

1991.  Nevertheless,  the  sector  has  a long way  to  go  before  it  can

see  a  surplus.

Although  the  condition  of  state  general  fund  budgets--largely

operating  accounts  that  represent  about  half of  state  spending--

appears  to  have  improved during  the  past  year,  recent  developments

for  cities  have  been  less  positive.  Survey data  from  the  National

League  of Cities  show that  the  share  of  cities  expecting  deficits  in

their  general  fund  accounts  increased  in  fiscal  1994,  after  dropping

considerably in  fiscal  1993.  The  rising  incidence of  deficits  is

apparent  for  cities  of all  sizes  and  in  all  regions  but  is  most

pronounced  in western  cities.  Many  cities  continue  to  see

infrastructure needs,  federal  and  state mandates,  crime,  and  the

demand  for  criminal  justice  as  important  sources  of  budgetary

pressure.

21.  With the  limited  amount  of  current data  on  state  and  local
governments available  to  BEA,  large  revisions  are  not  unusual.  The
detailed information used  for  revised  estimates  is  compiled
principally  from the  Census  of Governments.  BEA  is  now using  final
data  from the  Census  for  FY1992  and  preliminary data  for  FY1993;  it
has  no  additional  data  on  outlays  for  FY1994  (the year  ended
June  30,  1994,  for most  state  governments  and  about  half of  all
local  governments).  On the  revenue  side,  BEA has  quarterly tax  data
from the  Census  of Governments  through  calendar  1993.  It  also  has
more timely information  on Medicaid  from the  Health Care  Financing
Administration.  But,  even with these  data,  considerable uncertainty
surrounds  the  estimates  of state  and  local  government  finances  for
the  most  recent year.

II-45

Given the  growing  concern  about  crime, many  recent  state  and

local  legislative  sessions  focused  on  corrections  and law

enforcement.  Welfare  reform and  education  also were  important

topics.  However,  proposals  for  sweeping health care  reform failed

in  every state  where they  were  considered, and  implementation of

major  plans  has  stalled;  many legislatures  avoided  the  issue  as

debate  at  the  federal  level  proceeded this  year.  Meanwhile,

legislation  for  less  ambitious  changes  in health-care  systems  has

largely  succeeded, particularly those  resulting  in  Medicaid  reform.

Labor Costs

In  the  second  quarter,  hourly  compensation,  as  measured  by  the

employment  cost  index  (ECI),  rose  3.7  percent  at  an  annual  rate,

following  a sharp  slowing  in  the  first  quarter.  Over  the  twelve

months  ended  in  June,  ECI  hourly compensation increased

3.4  percent. 

22

The acceleration  in  compensation  last  quarter

largely  owed to  a pickup  in wage  and  salary  growth.  Hourly benefit

costs  increased  3.7  percent  at  an  annual  rate  over the  March to  June

period--just  slightly  faster  than  in the  first  quarter.

Over the  past year,  growth  in wages  and  salaries  has moved  up

about  1/2  percentage  point with  almost  all of  the  pickup due  to

increased  earnings  of  sales  workers.23  Wage  growth of  sales

23

workers  rose  from  1.4  percent  over the twelve months  ended  in  June

1993  to  4.1  percent  ended  in  June  of this  year.  Excluding  sales

occupations, hourly wage  and  salary  growth has  held  steady  at  about

3 percent  over  the past  year.

22.  Nonfarm hourly  compensation increased  3 percent  over the  same
period.  In  recent  revisions,  nonfarm hourly compensation  growth  was
not  revised  in  1993  at  2.5  percent,  growth in  compensation per  hour
in  1992  was  revised  up  about  1/2  percentage  point  to  5.2  percent,
and  growth  in  1991  was  not  revised.

23.  Earnings  of  sales workers  could  increase because  of  a greater

volume  of  sales,  an increase  in  the  commission  rate/base wage,  or
both.  An  increase  in the  commission  rate  or  base wage  is  more
indicative  of wage  pressure.  Unfortunately, no  information on the
source  of  change  is  available  from the ECI  data.

II-46

EMPLOYMENT  COST  INDEX  OF  HOURLY  COMPENSATION
FOR  PRIVATE  INDUSTRY  WORKERS

1993 

1994

June 

Sep. 

Dec. 

Mar. 

June

----- Quarterly percent  change

(compound annual rate)

3.8 
2.5 
5.6 

3.2 
4.5 
3.5 

3.4 
3.5 
4.2 

2.4 
3.4 
3.1 

3.4 
3.2 
4.5 

0.3 
3.7 
3.8 

3.7
3.5
3.7

4.8
4.0
1.3

2.7 
2.1 
3.5 

7.0 
1.3 
4.8 

-0.3

2.4
4.5
4.0

3.5 
3.8 
3.1 

3.8 
3.4 
2.4 

3.4 
3.4 
2.7 

3.4 
2.0 
3.4 

3.7
3.0
1.3

Total  hourly compensation:.1
Wages and  salaries
Benefit  costs

By industry:

Construction
Manufacturing
Transportation and
public utilities

Wholesale trade
Retail trade
FIRE
Services

By occupation:
White-collar
Blue-collar
Service occupations

Memo:

State  and local governments

2.0 

2.7

3.3 

3.6

----- Twelve-month  percent  change----

Total  hourly compensation:

Excluding  sales  workers
Wages and salaries
Benefit  costs

By industry:

Construction
Manufacturing
Transportation and
public utilities

Wholesale trade
Retail  trade
FIRE
Services

By occupation:
White-collar
Blue-collar
Service occupations

3.8 
4.4 
3.7 

3.3 
4.2 
3.5 

2.4 
4.1 
3.5 

3.2 
3.3 
3.8 

3.6
3.2
3.3

3.6 
3.8 
3.3 

3.7 
3.8 
3.0 

3.7 
3.7 
3.1 

3.5 
3.2 
2.9 

3.6
3.0
2.5

Memo

State and local  governments

3.0 

2.8 

2.8 

2.9

1.  Seasonally adjusted by the  BLS.

II-47

Increases  in  hourly benefit  costs  have  slowed  nearly

2 percentage  points  over  the  past  year  owing largely  to  a

deceleration  in  the  growth  of health  care  costs.  Growth  in

employers'  costs  for  health  insurance was  5 percent  over  the  twelve

months  ended  in  June,  down nearly  3 percentage  points  from the

previous  year  and  considerably  below the  annual  rates  of increase  of

close  to  14  percent  during the  late  1980s.  The  deceleration  in

employers'  health  costs  probably  reflects  the  combination of  the

slowing  in  overall  growth in  health care  costs,  efforts  by  employers

to  shift  a greater  proportion  of  costs  onto workers,  and the  ongoing

shift  away from traditional  indemnity plans.  Up-to-date  data  are

limited,  but  information  from the  Employee  Benefits  Survey  (EBS)  of

Medium to  Large Firms  (100  or  more  employees)  indicates  that  the

percent  of  employees  who  contributed to  their own  employer-sponsored

health  care  plans  rose  from 35  percent  in  1985,  before the  recent

run-up  in  ECI  hourly health care  costs,  to  more  than  50  percent  in

1991.24  Also,  the  percentage  of  employees  participating  in

employer-sponsored  health  plans  declined  from more than  90  percent

in  1989  (a coverage  rate  that  had held  for  some  time)  to  83  percent

in  1991.25

The  consumer  price  index also  indicates that  the  cost  of  health

care has  decelerated  considerably.  Over  the  twelve months  ended  in

July,  the  CPI  for  medical  care  (including services  and commodities)

24.  The  survey covers  the  same  group  of  firms  as  contained in the

ECI  data.  Trends  evident between  1985  and  1991  likely have
continued  over  the most  recent  2-1/2  years.

25.  Firms  have  put  downward  pressure  on  costs  through  preferred

provider  organizations  (PPOs).  The  EBS  indicates that  in  recent
years  participation  in PPOs  increased  considerably at  the  expense  of
traditional fee-for-service  plans.  The  percentage  participating  in
health maintenance  organizations  (HMOs) has  held  steady  at  about
17  percent  in  recent  years.

II-48

EMPLOYMENT  COST  INDEX  OF  HOURLY  WAGES  AND  SALARIES
FOR  PRIVATE  INDUSTRY  WORKERS
(Twelve-month  percent  changes)

1993 

1994

June 

Sep. 

Dec. 

Mar. 

June

Hourly wages  and salaries 

2.7 

3.1 

3.1 

2.9 

By  industry:

Construction 
Manufacturing 
Transportation and 
public utilities

Wholesale trade 
Retail trade 
FIRE 
Services 

By  occupations

White-collar 
Blue-collar 
Service occupations 

2.3 
2.9 
3.1 

2.3 
2.9 
1.0 
3.2 

2.8 
2.5 
2.2 

2.4 
3.0 
3.1 

2.9 
2.9 
3.8 
3.2 

3.4 
2.7 
2.1 

2.0 
3.2 
3.2 

2.6 
2.9 
4.2 
3.0 

3.3 
2.9 
2.1 

2.5 
2.9 
3.1 

2.0 
2.3 
4.0 
3.2 

3.1 
2.8 
2.5 

3.1

2.9
3.0
2.8

2.8
2.8
3.6
3.1

3.3
2.9
2.4

Memo

State  and local governments 

2.8 

2.9 

2.7 

2.7 

2.8

EMPLOYMENT COST  INDEX OF HOURLY BENEFIT COSTS
FOR  PRIVATE  INDUSTRY  WORKERS
(Twelve-month  percent  changes)

1993 

1994

June 

Sep. 

Dec. 

Mar. 

June

Hourly benefit  costs1  
Insurance  costs 
Health care 
Supplemental pay 
Retirement and savings 
Paid  leave 
Legally required 

By industry:

Goods-producing 
Service-producing 

By occupation:

5.8 
7.2 
7.8 
4.3 
6.6 
3.7 
5.3 

7.0 
4.9 

5.4 
6.8 
7.2 
4.8 
4.6 
3.7 
4.6 

5.0 
6.4 
6.9 
2.8 
4.9 
3.4 
4.4 

4.4 
5.1 
5.7 
5.3 
9.5 
2.9 
3.7 

6.3 
4.4 

5.6 
4.5 

4.2 
4.5 

White-collar occupations 
Blue-collar occupations 
Service  occupations 

5.4 
6.3 
6.3 

4.8 
5.9 
5.5 

4.6 
5.5 
5.5 

4.7 
4.0 
4.1 

3.9
4.4
5.0
5.5
9.6
2.8
3.1

3.8
4.1

4.5
3.3
2.9

Memo:

State  and local  governments 

4.4 

3.2 

2.9 

3.0 

3.2

1. The detail  on benefit costs  is  from unpublished data from the

BLS.

II-49

rose  4.6  percent. 2 6  This  is  down from  6.0  percent  over  the  same

period  of  a year  ago  and  annual  increases  of more  than  9-1/2  percent

in  late  1990  and  early  1991.

In  addition to  the  slowing  in  employers'  costs  for  health

insurance,  benefit  growth has  been  restrained  by  a sharp

deceleration in  costs  for  workers'  compensation  and  unemployment

insurance.  For workers'  compensation,  the  slowing  reflects  both  the

deceleration in health  care  costs  described  above  and  some  changes

in  state  laws  that  place  additional  restrictions  on eligibility.

The  slowing  in unemployment  insurance  costs  largely  reflects

improvements  in  experience  ratings,  and  the better  condition  of

state  unemployment  insurance  funds  associated with the  ongoing

strengthening  of  the  labor market.

In  contrast  to  these  areas  of  slowing benefit  cost  growth,

hourly  pension  costs  and  nonproduction  bonuses  increased more than

10  percent  over  the  past  twelve months,  compared with  increases  of

about  6-1/2  percent  for  the  same  period  a year  ago.  Anecdotal

evidence  indicates  that  the  acceleration  in pension  costs  reflects

the  need  by  some  firms  to  lower  overly  optimistic  investment

assumptions,  as  well  as  some  efforts  by  regulators  to  push companies

with underfunded  plans to  increase their  contributions.  The  faster

growth  in  nonproduction bonuses  largely  reflects  improved  profits  at

many firms  over  the  past  year.

The  only  aggregate data  that we  have  on wages  in  the  third

quarter  are  average  hourly  earnings  of  production  or nonsupervisory

workers.  AHE  rose  0.4  percent  in  July,  following  a decline  in  the

previous month.  The  largest  increases  last  month were  recorded  in

26.  The  CPI  measures  list  prices  of a fixed  basket  of medical
services  and  commodities.  Although the  PCE  deflator  for medical
services  is  based  partly  on  the  CPI,  it  also  incorporates  data on
transactions  prices  (rather  than  list  prices),  which  should  make  it
a better measure  of  costs  paid.  The  PCE deflator  for medical
services  increased 4  percent  over  the  year  ending  in  June.

II-50

8/4/94

COMPONENTS  OF ECI  BENEFIT  COSTS
(Private  industry workers;  twelve-month  percent change)

Insurance  Costs

-
-

-

Total insurance  costs
Health  insurance

Supplemental  Pay

-

-

-

All supplemental  pay
Nonproducton  bonuses

Twelve-month  percent  change

,  16

Twelve-month  percent change

/1

10

II

1986  1987  1988  1989  1990  1991 

1992  1993  1994

4

2

Paid Leave

I  1  I 

198  1987  1988  1989  1990  1991  1992  1993  1994

I 

I 

I,

919

Savings  and Pension  Plans

-
-

-

Retirement  and  savings
Pension  plans only

Twelve-month  percent  change  55

Twelve-month  percent change

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

1 

, 

i 

1v5

1  8 

1 

10

-

0

-5

1986  1987  1988  1989  1990  1991  1992  1993  1994

1986  1987  1988  1989  1990  191  1992  1993  1994

.

".l 

Legally  Required  Benefits

Legally  Required Benefits

-

Workers'  compensation insurance

-

State  unemployment insurance

Twelve-month  percent change

Twelve-month  percent  change

1986  1987  1988  1989  1990  1991 

1992  1993  1994

1986  1987  1988  1989  1990  1991

II-51

HOURLY  COMPENSATION
(Private  nonagricultural  industries)

Percent  change from year earlier

-
-

-

Employment  cost index

-Nonfarm  houry compensation

A 

/ 

-

/A

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

Unit  Labor Costs

Percent change from year earlier

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

REVISIONS  TO LABOR COSTS
(Nonfarm business  sector;  percent  change at  an  annual rate)

1991 

1992 

1993 

Q1 

1994 

02 

1993:Q2-
1994-Q2

Compensation per  hour

Revised 
Previous 

Unit  labor  costs

Revised 
Previous 

4.7 
4.7 

5.2 
4.8 

2.5 
2.5 

6.1 
5.3 

.8 
n.a. 

3.0
n.a.

2.3 
2.5 

1.9 
1.5 

.6  3.1 
.8  3.9 

2.0 
n.a. 

.4
n.a.

II52

RECENT  CHANGES  IN CONSUMER PRICES
(Percent change;  based on seasonally adjusted data) 1

Relative 
importance,
Dec.  1993 

1993 

1994 

1994

1992 

1993 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

June 

July

----- Annual  rate------  -Monthly rate-

All  items 2  
Food 
Energy 
All  items  less  food
and  energy 
Commodities 
Services 

Memo:

CPI-W3  

100.0 
15.8 
7.0 

77.2 
24.4 
52.8 

2.9 
1.5 
2.0 

3.3 
2.5 
3.7 

2.7 
2.9 
-1.4 

3.2 
1.6 
3.9 

3.3 
4.9 
1.2 

3.4 
2.4 
3.7 

2.5 
-1.1 
4.7 

2.9 

.6 

4.2 

2.5 
2.8 
-4.9 

3.1 
4.2 
2.4 

.3 
.3 
.1 

.3 
.4 
.2 

100.0 

2.9 

2.5 

3.1 

2.5 

2.5 

.3 

.3
.5
1.8

.2
.1
.2

.3

1.  Changes  are  from  final  month  of  preceding  period  to  final  month  of period  indicated.
2. Official  index for all urban consumers.
3.  Index  for  urban wage  earners  and  clerical  workers.

RECENT  CHANGES  IN  PRODUCER  PRICES
(Percent  change;  based  on  seasonally  adjusted  data) 1

Relative 
importance,
Dec.  1993 

1993 

1994 

1994

1992  1993 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

June 

July

----- Annual  rate------  -Monthly rate-

Finished goods 

Consumer  foods 
Consumer  energy 
Other  finished  goods 

Consumer  goods 
Capital  equipment 

Intermediate materials 2  

Excluding  food  and  energy 

Crude  food  materials 
Crude  energy 
Other crude materials 

100,0 
22.9 
13,3 
63.7 
40,3 
23.4 

95.2 
82,3 

44.1 
34.4 
21.5 

1.6 
1.6 
-. 3 
2.0 
2.1 
1.7 

1.1 
1.2 

.2 

2.4 
-4.1 
.4 
-. 4 
1.8 

-.3 
5.2 
-15.6 
.9 
1.5 
.3 

3.6 
-. 6 
15.4 
3.0 
2.0 
4.3 

.8 

1.6 

-.3 
1.6 

2.8 
1.9 

-.3 

-5.8 
-2.6 
2.1 
1.5 
3.6 

2.8 
3.9 

.0 
.0 
.3 
-. 1 
-. 1 
.1 

.5 
.6 

.5
.5
2.5
.1
.0
.1

.6
.4

3.0 
7.2 
2.3  -12.3 
5.7 

10.7 

18.4 
-22.1 
15.4 

-4.5 
10.1 
22.7 

-20.9 
26.9 
-2.1 

-1.2 
3.3 

-2.1
-1.3

.7 

2.0

1.  Changes  are  from  final  month  of  preceding  period  to  final  month  of  period  indicated.
2.  Excludes  materials  for  food  manufacturing  and  animal  feeds.

II-53

AVERAGE  HOURLY  EARNINGS
OF  PRODUCTION OR  NONSUPERVISORY WORKERS

1992 

1993 

Q1 

Q2 

1994 

1994
May  June  July

-Annual rate-  --Monthly  rate--

Total  private  nonfarm 

Construction 
Retail  trade 
FIRE 
Services 

2.1 
1.2 
2.4 
3.6 
2.4 

2.6 
1.2 
2.4 
5.5 
2.2 

2.2 
1.7 
3.5 
2.8 
2.2 

2.2 
5.6 
2.4 
2.1 
3.0 

.4 
.6 
.3 
.5 
.5 

-.1 
.5 
.0 
-.7 
-.1 

.4
.8
.5
.3
.2

1. Changes  over  periods  longer  than  one month  are  measured from
final  month  of preceding  period to  final  month  of  period indicated.

construction and  retail  trade.  Over  the  past  year,  AHE  rose

2.7  percent--up  1/4  percentage  point  relative  to  the  same  period  of

a year  ago  and  at  the  high  end  of the  range  seen  over  the  past

two  years.  In  July, the  chain-weighted  average  hourly  earnings

series  rose  0.5  percent.27  The difference  between the  chain-

27

weighted  and  the  regular hourly  earnings  series  indicates  that

industrial  shifts  in  employment  held  down wage  growth  last  month.

Prices

In  today's  release,  the  consumer  price  index  for July  rose

0.3  percent.  Excluding  food  and  energy,  the  CPI  was  up

0.2  percent--slightly below  the increases  in May  and  June.  Over  the

twelve months  through July,  the  overall  CPI  has  increased

2.8  percent  and  the  CPI  excluding  food  and  energy  has  increased

2.9  percent;  both  figures  are  about  unchanged  from the  rates  of

increase  during  the  preceding twelve-month  period.

Consumer energy  prices  rose  1.8  percent  in  July,  as  the  runup

in  crude-oil prices  since  March began to  make its way to  the  retail

level.  Gasoline  prices  rose  3.5  percent, while  fuel  oil  prices

increased  1.1  percent.  The  CPI  for  food  rose  0.5  percent  in  July.

27.  The  chain-weighted  series  holds  industry weights  constant  from

one  month  to  the  next.

II-54

INFLATION  RATES  EXCLUDING  FOOD  AND  ENERGY

Percent  change from  six months
earlier

CPI 

Goods 

Alcoholic beverages 
New vehicles 
Apparel 
House  furnishings 
Housekeeping supplies 
Medical  commodities 
Entertainment 
Tobacco 

Services 

Owners'  equivalent  rent 
Tenants'  rent 
Other  renters' costs 
Airline  fares 
Medical  care 
Entertainment 
Auto financing 
Tuition 

PPI  finished goods 

Consumer goods 

Capital goods,  excluding

computers 

Computers 

PPI  intermediate materials 

PPI  crude materials 

Factors  affecting price inflation

ECI  hourly compensation1 

Goods-producing 
Service-producing 

Civilian  unemployment rate,  3  

Capacity utilization2 , 3  

(manufacturing)

Inflation expectations5 ,6

Michigan  Survey 
Conference Board 
Non-oil  import  price 7  

Consumer goods, excluding autos,

food,  and beverages 

Autos 

Jan. 
1993 

3.3 

2.1 

2.3 
2.0 
0.5 
-0.4 
.0 
4.2 
1.8 
11.4 

3.9 

3.5 
2.6 
1.3 
16.6 
6.8 
3.4 
-13.1 
8.7 

1.8 

1.6 

2.4 
-9.9 

1.1 

8.3 

3.4 
3.9 
3.2 

7.1 

July 
1993 

3.2 

1.5 

0.3 
3.7 
-0.6 
-0.4 
-0.6 
3.4 
0.5 
2.8 

3.9 

2.9 
2.0 
4.3 
22.7 
6.5 
2.4 
-7.7 
8.0 

1.6 

1.4 

2.5 
-15.9 

1.5 

10.9 

3.8 
4.3 
3.3 

6.8 

Jan. 
1994 

July
1994

2.6 

1.0 

2.7 
2.7 
1.2 
4.3 
3.0 
3.0 
2.4 
-16.3 

3.4 

3.0 
2.4 
2.8 
2.5 
4.7 
6.1 
-5.5 
5.7 

-0.6 

-1.9 

2.3 
-7.3 

1.5 

9.2 

3.4 
3.2 
3.8 

6.7 

3.1

2.5

.0
5.3
0.8
0.9
0.9
2.7
2.7
5.2

3.4

3.2
2.2
3.1
3.3
5.2
1.9
27.2
7.5

1.6

0.9

3.1
-5.6

3.4

8.2

3.2
3.3
2.9

6.1

79.7 

80.1 

82.3 

82.8

4.6 
4.3 

1.8 

3.3 
1.5 

4.9 
4.6 

-1.5 

-0.8 
-0.6 

3.7 
4.3 

2.2 

1.9 
3.8 

4.7
4.3

1.7

.0
4.5

1.  Private  industry workers, periods  ended in June.
2.  End-of-period value.
3.  Data for  1994  are  not directly comparable  with earlier values

because of  a redesign of the CPS  in January 1994.

4. Latest  reported value:  June.
5.  One-year-ahead expectations.
6.  Latest  reported value:  August.
7.  BLS import  price index  (not seasonally  adjusted).

II-55

Fresh  fruit  and  vegetable  prices  registered  another  large  increase,

and  coffee  prices  were up  22  percent.  Meat  prices  declined  in  July,

and  price  increases  for  other  food  categories  were  quite modest.

Food  prices  so  far  this  year  have  risen  at  a 1-1/2  percent  annual

rate,  compared  with  a 3 percent  increase  in  1993.

In  today's  CPI  report,  new  vehicle  prices  rose  0.4 percent.

These  price  increases  reflected  the  effects  of  seasonal  adjustment;

the  prices before  seasonal  adjustment were  unchanged.  In  recent

years,  automotive  companies  have  offered  incentive  programs at  the

end  of  the  model year.  This  year,  however,  such  incentives were  not

needed  since  stocks  of  cars  and  trucks  are  quite  lean.  Elsewhere,

apparel  prices  fell  0.5  percent  in  July,  reflecting  summer  sales  and

the  slower-than-usual  introduction of  fall  merchandise.  Within the

services  category,  rent  increases  picked up  in  July,  but  this  was

partially offset  by  a decline  in  other  renters'  costs  and  small

increases  in  other service  components.

Over  the  six months  through  July,  the  CPI  excluding  food  and

energy  has  increased  3.1  percent  at  an  annual  rate,  essentially the

same  pace  as  in the  six-month period  a year  earlier.  (The

intervening  six-month period  is  distorted by an unusual  decline  in

tobacco  prices.)  Prices  of  consumer goods  other  than  food  and

energy have  increased  2.5  percent  over the  past  six months,  about

twice  the  pace  of  the  year-earlier period.  New motor  vehicle  prices

have  accelerated by  about  1-1/2  percentage  points  at  an annual  rate,

reflecting both  strong demand,  which has  pushed production  of  some

models  to  capacity,  and the weakness  of  the dollar  against  the

Japanese yen,  which has  boosted  prices  of imported models.  Among

other  goods,  apparel  prices  have  also accelerated;  however,

movements  in these  prices  can  be  very  erratic.

II-56

In  contrast  to  goods  prices,  prices  of  services have  continued

to  moderate.  The  CPI  for  services  other than  energy has  increased

3.4  percent  at  an  annual  rate over  the  past  six months,  down

1/2  percentage  point  from  the six months  ended  July  1993.  Increases

in  rent  have  picked up  a bit,  and  higher  interest  rates  have  boosted

auto  financing  costs.  But  offsetting  changes have  occurred  in

airline  fares,  tuition,  entertainment,  and medical  care  services.

INDEXES  OF  HOSPITAL  CARE PRICES
(Percent change between  July  of  the year  indicated

and  July  of the  previous  year)

1990 
1991 
1992 
1993 
1994 

CPI 

10.8 
10.3 
9.3 
8.4 
5.7 

PCE  deflator1 

PPI

6.8
7.0
5.3
5.1
3.7 

2.9

1. Percentage  change,  June  to  June.

An  important  part  of  medical  services  is  hospital  care.  While

hospital  prices  have  decelerated  in  recent  years  along with  other

medical  care  services  prices,  the  rate  of increase  in  the  CPI  for

hospitals  has  run  considerably higher  than  other measures  of

hospital-price  increases.  Over  the  twelve months  ended  July  1994,

the  CPI  for  hospital  care  increased  5.7  percent,  while the  latest

reading  for the  PPI  and  the PCE  deflator indicate  twelve-month

increases  of  2.9  and  3.7  percent  respectively.  The differences  in

these  price increases  may  reflect  the fact  that  the  CPI  relies  on

list  prices  for  hospital  services.  By  comparison, the  PPI  for

hospital  care  explicitly  attempts to  monitor  transactions price.

While  the PCE  deflator  relies,  in  part,  on  the CPI  series,  it  also

incorporates  information  on  input  costs  prepared by the Health  Care

Financing Administration.  Transactions  prices may have been  falling

II-57

relative  to  list  prices,  as  health  insurance  companies  have

increasingly  negotiated discounts  with hospitals.

PRICES  IN  THE  NATIONAL ACCOUNTS
(Percent  change,  annual  rate)

1992 1  1993 1 

1994:Q1  1994:Q2

GDP  fixed-weight  price  index 

3.2 

2.8 

Federal  government 

3.3 

3.9 

GDP  deflator 

2.6 

1.8 

3.1 

4.8 

2.9 

2.9

7.7

2.9

1. Fourth  quarter to  fourth  quarter  percent  change.

Over  the  first half  of  the  year,  the  fixed-weight  price  index

for  GDP  increased at  a  3 percent  annual  rate,  up  slightly from the

2-3/4  percent  increase over  the  four  quarters  of  1993.  The  pickup

in  the  price index  for the  federal  government  in the  first  half of

the  year was  particularly  marked,  reflecting  the  unusually  large

number  of  days  the  government  was  shut  down  for  inclement  weather

and  holidays,  the  effects  of the  early  retirement  "buy-out"  scheme

for  federal workers,  and  the  pay  raise  in  the  first  quarter  of the

year. 2 8  Excluding  the  federal  sector.  GDP  prices  rose  about  as

fast  in the first  half of the  year  as  in  1993.  The  larger

acceleration  in the GDP  deflator  reflects  both the  price  effects

evident  in the  fixed-weight  index and  shifts  in  the  composition of

GDP--particularly the  slower  growth in  business  purchases  of

computers,  which  have  a very  low deflator  level.

Finished  goods  prices  in yesterday's PPI  report  rose

0.5  percent, while,  excluding food  and  energy, the  PPI was  up

0.1  percent.  Finished  energy prices  posted a large  2.5  percent

increase,  led  by  an 8 percent  increase  in  gasoline  prices.

28.  As  noted  above,  the  early  retirement  program  and the  unusual

number  of  shutdowns  should  have  only  a transitory  effect on  the
level  of  the  federal  government  deflator.

II-58

COMMODITY PRICE  INDEXES1

------------- Percent  change2- -- - -- --- -

Past
Observ-
ation

1992 

1993 

Jun  28 3

Dec  93
to

Jun  283
to
date

nemo:
Year
earlier
to  date

1. 

PPI  for  crude  materials4

la.  Foods  and  feeds
lb.  Energy
lc.  Excluding  food  and  energy
1d.  Excluding  food  and  energy,
seasonally  adjusted

2.  Commodity  Research Bureau

2a.  Futures  prices
2b. 

Industrial  spot  prices

3. 

Journal  of  Commerce  industrials

3a.  Metals

4.  Dow-Jones  Spot

5. 

6. 

IMF  commodity  index4

5a.  Metals
5b.  Nonfood  agricultural

Economist  (U.S.  dollar  index)
Industrials

6a. 

Jun

Jun
Jun
Jun

Jun

Aug  09
Aug  09

Aug  09
Aug  09

Aug  09

Jun
Jun
Jun

Lug  02
Lure  A'2

3.3

3.0
2.3
5.7

6.1

-2.9
-0.7

5.0
1.9

10.4

-2.6
-3.1
2.4

1.6
A-

0.1

7.2
-12.3
10.7

10.6

11.6
-0.0

-4.0
-2.6

5.1

2.4
-14.4
0.2

9.1
A.A

2.6

-3.9
8.7
5.8

4.7

2.2
9.2

8.5
4.3

10.5

6.2

15.4

9.4

20.0
tr  1

n.a.

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

n.a,

0.5
5.1

3.5
1.3

1.0

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

4.5
I  a

-0.6

0.5

-5.9

7.3

7.3

7.6
19.0

10.5
7.3

14.0

15.7
11.9
11.7

34.4
,T  A

1.  Not seasonally adjusted.
2.  change  is measured to end of period, from
3.  Week of the June Greenbook.
4.  Monthly observations.  IMF index includes
n.a. Not available.

last  observation  of  previous period.

items not shown separately.

INDEX  WEIGHTS

Energy
O

Food Commodities
0

Precious  Metals
0

Others'
U

PPI for crude  materials

CRB futures

CRB  industrials

Journal of Commerce  index

14 

12 

Dow-Jones

IMF  index

Economist

41 

41 

1 

18

57 

14 

14

100

88

17 

25

45

5B 

55 

5050

1.  Forest products, mausbtna  metals  and other indusial matenals.

II-59

reflecting  the  recent  run-up  in  crude  oil  prices.  Finished  food

prices  rose  0.5  percent  in  July,  boosted by  a  43  percent  jump  in

coffee  prices.

Prices  of  intermediate  materials  other  than  food  and  energy

rose  0.4  percent  in  July  after  increasing  0.6  percent  in  June.  So

far  this  year,  intermediate  materials  prices  have  increased  at  a

3  percent  annual  rate,  up  from  1-1/2  percent  over the  twelve months

of  1993.  The  pickup  in  intermediate  materials  price  increases

likely  reflects  pressures  from tightening capacity  utilization  and

from higher  prices  of  nonfood,  nonenergy  crude  materials,  which have

risen  at  a  12  percent  annual  rate  so  far this  year,  following  an

11  percent  increase  in  1993.

Spot  commodity prices  have  been mixed  since  the  last  Greenbook.

Industrial  materials  have  posted further  increases,  led  by  steel

scrap  prices,  which have  surged  in  response to  the  continued  high

level  of  demand  in  this  sector.  In  contrast,  prices  of the major

crops  have  plummeted in  recent  weeks.  The  price  of  corn  has  fallen

16.5  percent  since  the  last  Greenbook and  the  price of  soybeans  has

dropped  almost  17  percent.  The  recent  declines  have  returned these

prices  to  their  levels  before  last  summer's  flood.  Coffee  prices,

which had  surged  in  the  second quarter,  increased  further  in  the

early  inter-Greenbook period.  Although  some  of  the  increase has

since  been  reversed,  spot  prices  are  roughly triple  the  levels  of  a

year  ago.

Driving  prices  lower  for  agricultural  commodities  have  been

forecasts  of near-record  production.  As  expected  at  the  time  of  the

last  Greenbook, the  USDA's August  forecast  of  crop  production,

indicates  a  bumper  harvest  in the  major  U.S.  grain  crops  (table).

Corn  production is  expected to  rise  45  percent  over  last  year's

unusually  low level,  as  a  result  of  favorable  growing  conditions  in

Journal of Commerce  Index

Total
Metals

-

-

II-60

COMMODITY  PRICE  MEASURES

Ratio scale,  index
(1980-100)

-1. 

SA 

\ 

it,

A  x

9.

130
125

115

105

\ 

~ 

e 

~J'

I 

.

ii 
1983 

II  Yllil  I L.L  r  L I I.L  I ( 11  I I i 1 I  L1  IL1  I L.1  I 1- I 
1993 
1988 

1989 

1986 

1987 

1990 

1985 

1984 

1992 

1991 

-
1994 

I'' 

1I.
19

95

95

85

75

-

105
- 104

100

Jul 

Aug

1994

-

i96
Jun 

CRB  Spot Industrials

CRB Futures

Ratio scale,  index
(1967-100)

Aug 9

CRB  hndustrial

Ratio scale, index
(1967-100) 

-

Aug9

320
310

-290

270

250

230

210

* 
* 
1983 

I  I 

,  I  [  , 

1984 

, 
, 
1985 

I * 

I  I 
1986 

* 
I 
, 
1987 

i 

I 

.
1988 

I.* 
1989 

i  1 
L 
1990 

r .
1991 

I  J 

, 
1992 

I  r  1  r 
1993 

I i 
1994 

r.  I  " 

1 ^90

1995

• Weekly  data, Tuesdays:  Journal of Commerce  data monthly  before  1985.

Dashed lines  indicate week  of

last Greenbook.

II-61

the Midwest.  The  soybean  harvest  is  expected to  be  roughly

25  percent  higher  than last  year,  and  wheat  production  is

anticipated to  be  in  line with  last  year's  output.  However,  wheat

prices  have been  buoyed  in  recent  weeks  by  the  expected shortfalls

in  world  production of wheat,  driven  particularly by problems  in  the

former  Soviet  Union.

SPOT PRICES  OF SELECTED COMMODITIES

II-62

--------------

Percent  change1------------

Current 
price 
($) 

1992 

1993 

To 

Jun 28 2 
to 

Jun 28 2  Aug  09 

Memo:
Year
earlier
to  Date

-----------

INDUSTRIAL  COMMODITIES-------------- 

-------

Metals:

Copper  (lb.)
Steel  scrap  (ton)
Aluminum, London  (lb.)
Lead  (lb.)
Zinc  (lb.)
Tin  (lb.)

Textiles and fibers:

Cotton  (lb.)
Burlap  (yd.)

Miscellaneous materials:

Hides  (lb.)

Rubber  (lb.)

Precious metals:

Gold  (oz.)
Silver  (oz.)
Platinum  (oz.)

Forest products:

Lumber  (m. bdft.)
Plywood  (m. sqft.)

Petroleum:

Crude oil  (barrel)
Gasoline  (gal.)
Fuel oil  (gal.)

Livestock:

Steers  (cwt.)
Hogs  (cwt.)
Broilers  (lb.)

U.S.  farm crops:

Corn  (bu.)
Wheat  (bu.)
Soybeans  (bu.)

Other foodstuffs:
Coffee  (lb.)

1.120 
136.500 
.651 
.380 
.465 
3.467 

4.1
1.1
9.9
-4.3
-10.3
6.5

-19.0 

46.8 

-10.7 
3.0 
-7.5 
-14.1 

.715 
.275 

-3.2
-9.6

.890 
.668 

11.4
12.3

19.6 
8.2 

1.3 
-7.3 

29.8 
-20.1 
29.5 
2.9 
3.9 
10.5 

17.9 
3.8 

12.0 
30.2 

.9
22.4
.5
7.1
-4.1
-4.1

-2.3

.0

.6
14.6

------------OTHER

COMMODITIES---------------

378.650 
5.140 
410.000 

323.000 
352.000 

17.750 
.598 
.500 

70.000 
43.000 
.533 

-5.9
-5.7
5.5

47.5
53.5

1.4
-2.9
21.9

10.6
10.4
-5.3

2.100 
3.510 
5.595 

-16.1
-11.7
1.1

16.6 
38.8 
8.0 

-. 3 
5.3 
3.4 

-2.0
-3.1
2.8

75.8 
-6.3 

-27.2 
-. 9 

-4.4
9.3

25.9 
44.1 
14.8 

-16.6 
6.7 
-1.4 

4.4
11.9
-. 3

15.7
-1.1
4.8

-25.0 
-31.0 
-22.4 

-7.3 
.6 
6.1 

41.7 
5.8 
24.5 

-12.4 
-14.0 
-3.2 

-16.5

4.3
-16.7

-7.1
10.1
-15.5

24.4
21.3
21.1
13.5
3.8
4.5

33.9
14.6

12.7
54.3

-. 4
10.4
4.5

1-

5.1

7.9
12.5
4.6

-8.8
-8.5
-7.6

-5.3

142

Memo:
Exchange value  of the

dollar  (March 1973=100)

89.962 

10.1

3.4 

-6.0 

.5

1.775 

17.9

-2.3 

162.4 

4.9

181.7

Yield on Treasury bill, 3-month 3
;  --

1.  Changes,  if  not specified, are
the last  week of the  preceding year.
2.  Week  of the  June  Greenbook.
3.  Changes are in basis points.

4.450

to the  last week of  the year indicated and from

II-63

U.S.  CROP  PRODUCTION 1

USDA  Projections
for  1994

1992 

1993 

May  12 

July  12 

Aug. 

12

-

--

-

-

-

Billions  of bushels  -

9.48
2.19
2.46
.88
.30
.46

6.34
1.81
2.40
.57
.21
.40

8.73
2.10
2.36
.59
.25
.40

9.00
2.16
2.42
.62
.25

9.20
2.28
2.39
.66
.25
.39

-

--

-

Billions  of hundredweight

Corn
Soybeans
Wheat
Sorghum
Oats
Barley

7. 

Rice

-

-

-

-

- - Billions  of  pounds  -

-

-

-

-

-

-

Peanuts
Tobacco

4.28
1.72

3.33
1.61

n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.

4.09
1.56

Millions  of  bales  -

10.  Cotton

16.22 

16.18

17.70

18.00 

19.2

-

-

-

-

-

- -

Millions  of tons  -

-

11.  Sugar  beets
12.  Sugar  cane

29.14 
30.36 

26.40
30.53

n.a.
n.a.

n.a. 
n.a. 

29.2
31.4

Memo:

13.  Value, 12  crops
13.  Value,  12  crops

47.03 

38.42

44.58

45.65 

46.76

- ----

Billions  of  1987  dollars  -

1.  Data  are  from the U.S.  Department  of Agriculture.
2.  Calculated by the  staff  from USDA data.

DOMESTIC  FINANCIAL
DEVELOPMENTS

III-T-1

SELECTED FINANCIAL MARKET QUOTATIONS  1/
(Percent except  as  noted)

i

1993 

1994 

Change  to  Aug 11,  1994:

Mid-Oct 
lows 

FOMC, 
Feb  3  Jul  5  Aug  11 

From Mid-Oct  From 

lows 

Feb 3 

From FOMC,
Jul  5

3.07 

3.07 

4.23

4.26 

1.19

1.19 

0.03

3.01 
3.09 
3.23 

3.13 
3.27 
3.52 

4.21 
4.66 
5.18 

3.13 
3.23 

3.16 
3.25 

4.52 
4.77 

3.08 
3.22 
3.23 

3.11 
3.25 
3.41 

4.50 
4.80 
5.19 

3.06 
3.25 

3.06 
3.25 

4.50 
4.81 

4.34 
4.92 
5.30 

4.54 
4.82 

4.51 
4.79 
5.23 

4.44 
4.75 

1.33
1.83
2.07

1.41
1.59

1.43
1.57
2.00

1.38
1.50

1.21 
1.65 
1.78 

1.38 
1.57 

0.13
0.26
0.12

0.02
0.05

1.40 
1.54 
1.82 

0.01
-0.01
0.04

1.38 
1.50 

-0.06
-0.06

Instrument

SHORT-TERM  RATES

Federal  funds  2/

Treasury bills  3/

3-month
6-month
1-year

Commercial  paper

1-month
3-month

Large negotiable  CDs  3/

1-month
3-month
6-month

Eurodollar  deposits  4/

1-month
3-month

Bank  prime  rate

6.00 

6.00 

7.25

7,25 

1.25

1.25 

0.00

INTERMEDIATE- AND  LONG-TERM RATES

U.S.  Treasury  (constant maturity)

3-year
10-year
30-year

Municipal revenue 5/
(Bond Buyer)

Corporate--A utility,

recently offered

Home mortgages 6/

FHLMC 30-yr.  fixed  rate
FHLMC  1-yr. adjustable rate

4.06 
5..19 
5.78 

4.60 
5.81 
6.31 

6.48
7.31
7.60

6.61 
7.36 
7.56 

2.55
2.17
1.78

2.01 
1.55 
1.25 

0.13
0.05
-0.04

5.41 

5.49 

6.56

6.49 

1.08

1.00 

-0.07

6.79 

7.35 

8.47

8.41 

1 62

1.06 

-0.06

6.74. 
4.14 

6.97
4.12

8.57 
5.56 

1.83
1.42

1.60 
1.44 

0.00
0.08

1989 

1994 

Percentage  change to Aug  11:

Stock  exchange  index 

Level 

Date 

Low. 

FOMC. 
Jan.  3  Jul 5 

Aug 11 

From 
record 
high 

From
1989 
low 

From  FOMC.
Jul  5

Record high

Dow-Jones  Industrial 
NYSE Composite 
NASDAQ  (OTC) 
Wilshire 

3978.36  1/31/94  2144.64 3652.48 
267.71  2/2/94  154.00  246.51 
803.93 3/18/94  378.56  703.59 
4804-31  2/2/94  2718.59  4412.17 

3750.90 
253.31 
728.20 
4537-07 

-5.72 
-5.38 
-9-42 
-5.56 

74.90 
64.49 
92.36 
66.89 

2.69
2.76
3.50
2.83

1. One-day quotes  except  as noted.
2. Average for  two-week  reserve maintenance
period  closest  to date  shown, Last  observation
is  average  to  date  for maintenance  period  ending
Aug  17,  1994.

3. Secondary market.

4. Bid  rates  for  Eurodollar

deposits at  11  a.m.  London time.

5. Most  recent observation  based on

one-day Thursday quote and  futures
market  index changes.

6. Quotes for week ending  Friday

previous  to  date shown.

Selected  Interest  Rates*
(percent)

Short-Term

Statement Week Averages

-- 1 12

-

Prime  Rate (daily)

-....  Federal  Funds
3-month  T-Bill
Discount Rate(daily)

--- 
-- 

FOMC
7/5

3-month T-Bil

Federal  Funds

4  F-

19 
1990 

I 

I 

I 

I

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

J  -
7/1 

p 
7/8 

I 
7/15 

-

I-j
8/5

7/29 

7/22

1994

Weekly/Daiy

-

10

FOMC
7/5 

Prm 

Fned-Rate

7

(Daily)

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993

SStatement  weeks are ploted through Aug 10;  Friday weeks thugh
Aug 5,  1994.

1 

I 
78 

I 
7/15 

I 
722
1984

I 
7/29 

i
85

DOMESTIC  FINANCIAL  DEVELOPMENTS

Interest  rates  registered mixed  changes  over  the  intermeeting

period.  A growing  sense  that  additional  tightening was  not  imminent

helped to  tilt  most  rates  down in the  opening weeks  of  the  period.

These  early declines  in yield were  reversed  in  August,  when the

monthly  employment  report  and  other  data were  interpreted as

suggesting  that the  economy  had  retained  considerable momentum  and

that  a policy  response would  be  forthcoming.  Major  equity  indexes

rose  2-1/2  to  3-1/2  percent  over  the  intermeeting  period,  on  better-

than-expected  earnings  reports.  The  spread of  the thirty-year

fixed-rate mortgage  over  the  comparable  Treasury yield  remained

fairly tight,  as  did most  quality  spreads.

The monetary  aggregates  rebounded  sharply  in  July,  after

contracting  in  June.  Growth  in M2  was  boosted  by  an  acceleration  in

liquid  deposits  and  a turnaround  in money market mutual  funds.

The  about-face  in money market  funds  was  accompanied by  renewed

liquidations  of  bond mutual  funds.  The strength in M2  showed

through to  M3,  which was  also propelled  by  inflows  to  M3-type  money

funds  and  significant  issuance of large  time  deposits,  which  at

least  in part  reflected strong expansion  in bank credit.

Borrowing by  businesses has  apparently  picked up  some  over June

and  July,  although  remaining concentrated  at  the  short  end.  Boosted

by business  lending,  as  well  as  strong growth  in  consumer  loans,

bank credit  accelerated  to  a double-digit  pace  in  July.  Business

loans were  boosted  in  part  by a cutback in  capital  market  financing

as  well  as  by  merger-related lending.  The  pace  of  public  offerings

in  corporate equity and bond markets  remained  sluggish  in  July,

barely  exceeding the  slow pace  seen during the turbulent  markets  of

April.  Issuance  of long-term debt  by  state  and  local  governments

was  similarly  slow, as  the volume  of bonds  eligible  for  refunding

III-1

III-2

MONETARY AGGREGATES
(Based on  seasonally  adjusted data)

Aggregate or  component 

Aggregate 

1994 

1994 

1993 

Q1 

Q2 

May 

Jun. 

1993:04 
to 

Jul.  Jul-  94 
(p) 

(p) 

Leve
(bil, S,
Jul.  94
(p)

Percentage  change  (annual rate) 1

10.5 
1.4 
0.6 

6.0
1.8
0.2

1.9 
1.4 
-0.1 

1.9 
0.3 
-1.8 

3.7 
-3.2 
-1.1 

7.6
4.9
6.0

1153.7
3595.9
4233.4

1. M1
2.  M2
3.  M3

Selected components

4. Mi-A

5.  Currency
6.  Demand  deposits

7. Other checkable deposits

8.4 

-0.2 

-1.1 

5.6 

0.6 

8.  M2  minus  M1

-2.3 

-0.1

1.2 

-0.3 

-6.4 

11.7 

9.5 

3.5 

-0.3 

10.3 
13.3 

11.8 
7.7 

10.6 
-2.5 

10.0 
-9.6 

5.6 

9.6 
2.5 

9.6 

6.6 

740.9

10.2 
9.0 

3.8 

3.6 

11.1 
2.9 

343.2
389.5

0.3 

412.7

0.3 

2442.2

9.  Overnight  RPs and Eurodollars,

n.s.a.

11.6

20.3 

0.0 

0.0 

21.6 

64.8 

18.0 

101.5

10. 

General-purpose  and broker-

dealer  money market  funds

11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 

Commercial  banks

Savings deposits
Small  time  deposits

Thrift  institutions
Savings  deposits
Small  time deposits

-2.1
-1.0
4.2
-8.6
-5.8
0.6

-13.2

-0.1 
0.7 
4.3 
-5.2 
-4.6 
0.6 
-11.5 

17.8 
-2.1 
-3.3 
0.1 
-3.0 
0.1 
-7.3 

12.0 
-1.5 
-6.1 
6.2 
-4.4 
-2.2 
-7.4 

-19.1 
-2.2 
-7.7 
6.7 
-8.1 
-10.3 
-5.1 

14.0 
0.5 
-2.5 
5.7 
-5.7 
-9.5 
-0.4 

7.3 
-0.7 
-0.8 
-0.4 
-4.4 
-1.9 
-7.7 

363.5
1246.4
777.6
468.8
728.3
424.6
303.7

17.  M3  minus  M2

-3.5 

-8.9 

-8.7 

-14.2 

10.9 

12.4 

-4.7 

637.6

Large time  deposits

At  commercial  banks3
At  thrift  institutions

Institution-only money market

mutual  funds
Term RPS,  n.s.a.
Term  Eurodollars,  n.s.a.

-6.9
-6.6
-8.2

-5.4
16.8
0.0

-4.7 
-3.6 
-9.5 

.b 
-2 
-16.5 
0.0 

-4.0 
-3.2 
-7.2 

-12.8 
13.7 
8.5 

10.5 
19.2 
-27.5 

-52.2 
-31.8 
-2.5 

1.1 
0.0 
6.0 

1.4 
47.1 
17.6 

11.1 
11.0 
12.0 

9.9 
5.0 
32.2 

-1.4 
-0.4 
-5.5 

-18.8 
1.9 
8.6 

336.9
276.2
60.7

10.9
95.7
49.7

Average monthly change  (billions of  dollars) 2

Memo

Managed liabilities  at  com'l.
banks  (lines 25  +  26)
Large  time deposits,  gross
Nondeposit  funds

Net  due to  related  foreign

institutions

Other 4

U.S.  government  deposits at

commercial  banks 5

5.5 
-2.3 
7.8 

4.5 
3.3 

24.2 
-3.3 
27.5 

13.0 
14.5 

11.4 
1.6 
9.8 

-14.2 
6.4 
-20.6 

8.9 
0.9 

-2.2 
-18.5 

9.9 
-2.1 
12.0 

13.5 
-1.5 

16.2 
3.2 
13.0 

12.7 
0.3 

0.2 

0.2 

-0.4 

-2.9 

-8.4 

-5.2 

.
.
.

.. 
.

.

.
.
.

.
.

.

.
.
.

.

956.0
341.6
614.4

197.9
416.5

16.7

1. For years,  "percentage change'  is  percentage change in quarterly average  from  fourth quarter of preceding

year  to  fourth  quarter of  specified year. For quarters,  it  is  the percentage  change  in quarterly average from
preceding quarter  to  specified quarter,  annualized.

2. For  years,  "average monthly change'  is  the  dollar change  from December  to December, divided by  12.
For  quarters,  it is  the  dollar  change  from the  last  month of  the  preceding quarter to  the  last  month of
the  specified  quarter, divided by  3.

3. Net  of holdings  of  money market mutual  funds, depository  institutions,  U.S. government, and  foreign bank

and official institutions.

4. Borrowing  from other  than commercial  banks  in  the  form  of  federal  funds purchased, securities

sold under agreements  to  repurchase, and other liabilities  for borrowed  money  (including borrowing  from the
Federal  Reserve and unaffiliated  foreign banks,  loan RPs,  and other minor items).  Data are partially estimated.

5. Treasury demand deposits  and note balances at  commercial  banks.

III-3

continued  to  dwindle.  In  the  federal  sector,  net  borrowing  is

rising  sharply  in  the current  quarter,  reflecting  a typical  seasonal

excess  of  outlays  over  receipts.  Available  data  on home  mortgage

lending  indicate  little  pickup  early  in the  third  quarter.  During

the  second  quarter,  consumer  credit  registered  its  strongest

quarterly  gain  of  the  current  expansion, and  bank  lending  to

consumers  continued to  show considerable strength  in  July.

Monetary  Aggregates and  Bank Credit

M2  rebounded  in July after  a weak showing  in  June.  Although

strength  in  demand deposits  provided  a boost,  the main contribution

was  from the nontransaction  component  of M2.  Retail money  market

funds  had  substantial inflows  in July  after experiencing  outflows  in

the previous  month, in  a saw-tooth  pattern related  to  the movement

of  long-term  interest  rates  (chart).  Over  the  past  few years,  as

bond  yields  have  risen, inducing  capital  losses  on  bond mutual  funds

and  other capital  market  instruments,  flows  into money funds  have

picked  up.  Bond  mutual funds  saw a modest inflow in  June  and  then  a

larger  outflow in  July, to  an  extent mirroring the  pattern  in money

funds;however, the dollar flows  from bond  funds were not  so

pronounced as  those from money funds.  A large  jump  in  the  level  of

overnight  Eurodollars  also  contributed to  M2  growth  in  July.

Although  rates  on  retail  CDs  moved  up  considerably in  July,

with  Treasury yields also  rising at  the  short  end,  yield  spreads  on

retail  deposits  remained unusually  wide.  In general,  deposit  rates

seem to be  adjusting  upward  more  slowly than is  normal  for  a period

of  rising market  interest  rates.  Despite their  considerable  yield

disadvantage,  growth in  small time  deposits  accelerated to  a 3-1/4

percent  pace  in  July.  Yield differentials  were  especially wide  on

savings  deposits  (including MMDAs),  and  this  component  continued  to

run  off in  July,  albeit  at  a slower  rate  than  in  June.  From the

III-4

Growth  rate of MMMFs  vs. Change  in Yield of Thirty-year Treasury Bond

Growth  Rate (monthly,saar)

Percentage  Points

S0.5

0.4

0.3

July-

- -Q.3

1994

monthly
$billions

Correlation = 0.58

,iA *A"*-". *

* 
A 

5

Change  in  Bond  yield
(right scale)

:*

4 

4 

4 ;1

-10  I-

II 

Growth  rate in  MMMFs
(left  scale)

1992

1993

Net  Due  To  Related  Foreign  Offices

S 

--- 

All  Banks

S  Foreign

Domestic

I

;~'

1./ 

1988 
1988 

I 

-

.I 
I 

1989 
1989

I 

1991  1992 
1991 

1992

I 

1

199I___1 
1993 

9
1994

III-5

fourth  quarter  of  1993  to  July,  M2  expanded  at  a  1-1/2  percent

annual  rate.  lifting  it  above the  lower  bound of  its  1-to-5  percent

annual  range.

The  turnaround in  M2  in  July  showed through  to M3,  which  rose

at  a brisk  6 percent  pace.  M3  was  also  boosted by  an  acceleration

in  large  time  deposits,  perhaps  reflecting  increased funding  needs

for  credit  growth  at  banks.  Moreover,  institution-only money market

funds,  which had  seen heavy  outflows  as  short-term rates  rose

earlier  this year,  grew moderately  in  July.  On balance,  M3  growth

from the  fourth  quarter  of  1993  to  July was  at  an  annual  rate  of  1/2

percent,  moving into  its  0-to-4 percent  annual  range.

After  expanding  at  only  a 3 percent  annual  rate  in  June,  bank

credit  accelerated  to  a 12-1/2  percent  pace  in  July, with both

securities  and  loans  showing  strength.  Holdings  of  U.S.  government

securities  declined  slightly,  while  other securities  advanced  at  a

21  percent  annual  rate.  Most  of  the  growth in  other  securities  was

caused  by FIN  39,  the  accounting  standard  that  limits  banks'  ability

to  net  off-balance-sheet  contracts.  The  implementation of this

standard  caused  a  one-time  grossing  up  of  other  securities  earlier

in the  year.  In  addition,  FIN  39  has  ongoing  effects  as  such  off-

balance-sheet  positions  are  marked to  market.

Led  by  the business  and  consumer  categories,  loans  expanded

smartly  in July.  Factors  contributing  to  business  loans were

merger-related  lending and  lack  of appeal  of  capital  markets  to

nonfinancial  firms.  Even  after  accounting for  these  factors,

business  loans  were  quite  strong.  Banks  reported  in  the  August

Survey  of  Bank  Lending Practices  that  they  saw  increased demand  for

business  loans  after May,  related  to  rising inventory  and working

capital  financing  needs  and  stronger  investment  outlays.  The  survey

also  found  that  banks  continued to  assume  a more  aggressive  lending

III-6

COMMERCIAL  BANK  CREDIT  AND  SHORT-  AND  INTERMEDIATE-TERM  BUSINESS  CREDIT
(Percentage  change  at  annual  rate,  based  on  seasonally  adjusted  data)

Dec. 

1992 
to  Dec. 
1993 

8.5 

9.6 

4.3 

4.0

-1.8

4.5

Type  of  credit 

1. Total  loans and securities

2.  Securities

3. 

U.S. government

4. 

Other

5.  Loans

6. 

Business

7. 

Real estate

8. 

Consumer

9. 

Security

10. 

Other

1994 
Q1 

1994 
Q2 

1994 
May 

1994 
Jun 

1994 
Jul 

Level,
Jul
1994

($billlions)

Commercial  bank credit

1.7

-2.7

2.4 

-11.1

16.0

10.0

39.6 

23.2 

28.3

3.2 

2.7 

7.3 

3.4 

4.8 

7.4 

9.6 

12.6 

3.237.9

4.0 

-.

8 

20.8 

966.7

749.2

217.5

16.3 

2,271.2

17.0 

7.6 

617.1

958.7

22.9 

422.6

9.0 

11.4 

12.4

35.6 

-19.6 

-34.6

7.8 

-20.2 

26.8

77.8

-. 6

6.5 

-11.1 

-16.0 

-24.3 

39.4 

195.0

Short-  and intermediate-term business credit

11.  Business  loans  net  of  bankers

-2.1

4.6 

17.2 

607.4

acceptances

12.  Loans  at  foreign branches 2

-12.1 

-7.4 

18.8 

16.3

5.4 

16.1 

22.6

13.  Sum of  lines  11 and  12

-2.5

4.3 

17.0 

630.0

14.  Commercial  paper  issued  by

4.4 

-12.2 

-9.2 

-14.3

2.4 

5.6 

150.1

nonfinancial  firms

15.  Sum of  lines  13  and 14

-1.1

3.0 

14.8 

780.1

16.  Bankers acceptances, U.S.

-12.2 

17.9 

-13.3 

-22.6 

-28.8 

n.a.

5

20.3

trade-related3 ,4

17.  Loans at finance companies4

-. 3 

14.1 

13.9 

13.4

8.5 

n.a. 

328.3

18.  Total  (sum of  lines  15,  16,

-1.1

4.0 

n.a.  1,119.2

and  17)

1.  Except  as  noted,  levels  are  averages  of Wednesday  data  and percentage  changes  are  based  on  aver-
ages  of  Wednesday  data;  data are  adjusted  for breaks  caused by  reclassification;  changes  are measured
from  preceding  period  to  period  indicated.

2.  Loans  to  U.S. firms made by  foreign  branches  of  domestically  chartered  banks.
3. Acceptances  that finance  U.S. imports, U.S. exports, and domestic  shipment and  storage  of

goods.

4.  Changes  are  based  on  averages  of  month-end data.

5. June 1994.
n.a.  Not available.

III-7

posture  by  further  easing  terms  and  standards  for  C&I  loans.1

Consumer  loans  expanded  at  more  than  a 20  percent  annual  rate  in

July,  but  this  acceleration  over  the  previous month  reflects  a lack

of  securitizations.

Real  estate  loans  maintained  solid  growth  in July.  The  recent

prominence  of adjustable-rate  mortgages  (ARMs) in originations  may

have  continued  into July,  boosting bank credit,  since  ARMs  are  less

likely  to  be  securitized.  Moreover,  a few  banks  have been  reporting

in  recent months  that  they are  more willing to  make loans  for

nonresidential  real  estate,  and  other  banks  indicate that  they have

stopped  tightening  standards  and  terms  for  such  loans.  About  3

percentage  points  of the  July  growth  in  real  estate  loans  at  banks

owed  to  the acquisition  of mortgage  assets  from thrift  institutions.

Reluctant  to  bid  aggressively for  retail  deposits,  banks  have

funded  loan  growth by  borrowing  from  affiliates  abroad.  July  saw

substantial  increases  in banks'  net  due-to  position with  related

foreign  offices  (chart).  U.S.  branches  and  agencies  of foreign

banks have  traditionally  been  large  borrowers  from foreign

affiliates,  especially since  1991.  Recently, U.S.  chartered  banks

have  also  begun  to  expand  rapidly  their  net  due-to  position.

Respondents  to  the August  loan officer  survey mentioned more

attractive  borrowing  costs  as  a reason why they have  been  relying

more  on this  source.

Mutual  Funds

Net  sales  of  stock and bond  fund shares  moderated  in the  second

quarter  (table).  Stock funds  continued to  attract  investors.

although inflows  have  slowed  somewhat.  Among  stock  funds,  net  sales

of domestic  funds moderated  in  July but  still  provided  support  to

1. The  results  of the August  survey  are  discussed more fully  in

the  appendix.

III-8

the  equity markets.  Inflows  to  international  funds  slowed  in  the

second  quarter,  and  net  sales  remained  relatively  light  in  July.

Bond  funds  posted small  outflows,  on  balance,  over the  second

quarter,  and  preliminary data  suggest  continued  outflows  in  July.

Net  sales  of bond  funds  have  been depressed  by  outflows  from

government  and  GNMA funds,  prompted  in  part  by publicity about

capital  losses  from derivative holdings.  Investors  retreated from

high-yield  funds  in  July after  increasing their holdings  by  about

$1.5  billion  in the  second  quarter.  Municipal  bond  funds  recorded

outflows  in  the  second  quarter  for  the  first  time  since  1987  but  saw

a small  inflow in  July.

NET SALES  OF MUTUAL  FUNDS  CLASSIFIED  BY TYPE
(Billions of  dollars,  monthly  rate)

Type  of Fund 
Total  stock 

International 
Domestic 

Total  bond 

GNMA 
Government 
High-yield 
Tax-exempt 
Other 

1993 

Q3  Q4 
10.9  14.7 
5.8 
8.9 

4.1 
6.8 

12.9 

9.5 
0.4  -0.9 
0.1 
1.1 
1.1 
0.3 
2.7 
3.9 
7.5 
7.4 

1994 

Q1 
13.8 
6.2 
7.6 

3.8 
-1.6 
-1.0 
0.0 
1.0 
5.3 

Q2 
11.0 
3.0 
8.0 

-0.8 
-1.4 
-1.6 
0.5 
-0.3 
2.5 

June 
9.2 
2.0 
7.2 

July e  
7.0 
2.7 
4.3 

-1.1 
-1.3 

.8  -2.3 
-1.2 
-1.6 
.8  -0.3 
0.9 
.1 
-0.2 

2.3 

Memo:
Assets
June
788.3
140.2
648.1

721.2
50.7
100.7
47.0
239.3
283.5

e  Estimate.
Source:  Investment  Company  Institute.

Business  Finance

Businesses  reduced further  their  use  of  capital markets  in

July.  Public  bond  issuance by  nonfinancial corporations  slowed  to  a

$5 billion  rate  last month  from the  $7-1/4  billion  pace  averaged

over the  previous  two months.  The  falloff  in July  owed  in  large

part  to  a slide in  junk bond  issuance.  Gross  issuance in  this

sector was  estimated  at  $1 billion in July--the  lowest  monthly total

III-9

since  the  junk market  revived, in  mid-1991,  Junk  yield  spreads  over

Treasuries  widened  about  15  basis  points  in  July  but  have  since  come

back  in.  In  general,  spreads  over  Treasuries  remain  on the  narrow

side.

Ratings  changes  by Moody's  in the  second  quarter  continued the

general  pattern  seen  over  the past year.  While  the financial  sector

experienced  no  downgrades  and twenty-one upgrades--ten  of  these  for

bank holding companies--downgrades  in  the nonfinancial  sector

outnumbered  upgrades  by  a factor of three to  two.  Perhaps  most

notable  among the  upgrades  was  that  of  Chrysler  Corporation,  which

jumped  two notches  from Baa2  to A3.  In  a departure  from the  recent

pattern  of  ratings  changes,  downgrades  outnumbered upgrades  for

speculative-grade  industrial  firms.

Gross  public  equity  issuance  by nonfinancial  corporations

slowed  to  $1.7  billion  in July,  half of June's  pace and  one  of the

lowest  monthly totals  in the  current business  expansion.  In  keeping

with the  recent  patterns,  the number  of  IPOs  brought  to  market has

continued  high, but  prices  and  volumes  of  IPOs  have  come  in well

below issuer  expectations.  Issuance  by financial  corporations  in

July apparently totaled  a moderate  $3.2  billion,  nearly half  of

which was  accounted  for  by  several  large REIT  offerings.  As  a

result  of the  falloff  in  gross  equity issuance  and  an  increase  in

stock  repurchases,  it  now appears  likely that  net  equity issuance

will  turn negative this  quarter.

Merger  and  takeover  activity  seems  to  be distinctly on the

rise,  with  implications  for  share  retirements.  Repurchases  in  the

quarter thus  far have  been boosted by the  employee buyout  of  United

Airlines.  Prospective mergers  and  acquisitions  include  the takeover

of Gerber  by  Sandoz  and  bids  for  QVC  and a large  pharmaceutical

III-10

GROSS  OFFERINGS  OF  SECURITIES  BY U.S.  CORPORATIONS 1
(Billions of dollars;  monthly rates,  not  seasonally adjusted)

1994

Type of  security 

1992 

1993 

Q1 

Q2 

Mayp 

Jun 

Jul p

All U.S.  corporations 

Stocks 2  
Bonds 

40.84 
7.04 
33.80 

53.42 
9.65 
43.77 

53.12 
8.40 
44.72 

41.87 
6.56 
35.30 

43.90 
3.93 
39.96 

44.83 
8.20 
36.63 

24.32
4.85
19.47

Nonfinancial  corporations
Stocks 2  

Sold  in  U.S. 
Utility 
Industrial 

Sold abroad 

Bonds 

Sold  in  U.S. 
Utility 
Industrial 
Sold  abroad 
By quality 3

Aaa  and Aa 
A and  Baa 
Less  than  Baa 
Unrated or  rating  unknown 

Financial corporations
Stocks 2  

Sold in  U.S. 
Sold abroad 

Bonds 

Sold  in  U.S. 
Sold abroad 
By quality 3

Aaa and Aa 
A and Baa 
Less  than  Baa 
Unrated or  rating  unknown 

4.42 
4.03 
.87 
3.16 
.39 

13.67 
12.83 
5.33 
7.50 
.84 

2.18 
7.74 
2.86 
.09 

2.62 
2.51 
.11 

5.32 
5.12 
1.06 
4.00 
.19 

16.20 
15.56 
7.34 
8.22 
.64 

2.56 
8.71 
4.17 
.09 

4.61 
4.16 
.45 

4.58 
4.02 
.65 
3.37 
.56 

11.07 
10.33 
4.57 
5.76 
.74 

.80 
5.60 
3.92 
.00 

3.81 
3.54 
.27 

4.42 
3.19 
.44 
2.75 
1.23 

6.50 
5.63 
1.84 
3.79 
.87 

.59 
3.01 
1.98 
.00 

2.15 
1.97 
.18 

2.44 
2.23 
.37 
1.86 
.21 

6.85 
5.89 
1.71 
4.18 
.97 

.65 
2.64 
2.46 
.00 

1.50 
1.38 
.12 

5.25 
3.69 
.77 
2.92 
1.56 

7.53 
6.67 
2.26 
4.41 
.87 

.92 
4.00 
1.73 
.01 

2.95 
2.75 
.20 

1.68
1.23
.08
1.16
.45

5.10
4.50
1.20
3.30
.60

.26
3.26
.98
.00

3.17
2.28
.89

20.13 
18.67 
1.46 

27.57 
25.01 
2.56 

33.65 
29.28 
4.37 

28.81 
24.59 
4.22 

33.11 
26.90 
6.21 

29.10 
25.09 
4.00 

14.37
13.00
1.37

1.55 
6.77 
.31 
.04 

1.78 
8.99 
.49 
.08 

3.31 
11.24 
.66 
.02 

3.99 
9.67 
.17 
.11 

3.89 
11.86 
.15 
.03 

2.16 
10.80 
.20 
.20 

2.71
4.52
.20
.01

1.  Securities  issued  in  the private placement market are not  included. Total

reflects  gross  proceeds  rather  than par value  of  original  discount  bonds.

2.  Excludes  equity  issues  associated with equity-for-equity  swaps  that  have

occurred  in  restructurings.

3.  Bonds  categorized according  to Moody's  bond ratings,  or  to  Standard & Poor's

if  unrated by Moody's.  Excludes  mortgage-backed and asset-backed bonds.

p  Preliminary.

III-l1

firm.  Merger activity this  year,  however,  has  not  yet  reached  the

levels  seen  in  the late  1980s.  Until  recently, much  of the  activity

had  been financed  with  stock-for-stock  swaps  and  therefore  had  only

a relatively  small  impact  on  equity  retirement  by  nonfinancial

corporations.

Amid  positive second-quarter  earnings  reports,  major  stock

price  indexes  have  moved  up  from the  lows  posted  at  the  beginning  of

July, with most  indexes  rising  2-1/2  to  3-1/2  percent  over  the

intermeeting  period.  Among the  industrials,  the  basic materials

group  showed  the  strongest  gains,  rising about  5 percent  during this

period.  Second-quarter  earnings  reports  so  far  suggest that

operating  earnings  of the  firms  making up  the  S&P  500  have  climbed

about  15  percent  from a year  earlier,  exceeding most  analysts'

expectations.

State  and  Local  Government  Finance

Gross  issuance of  long-term tax-exempt  debt  was  just  $12-1/2

billion  in  July.  continuing the  second  quarter's  relatively  sluggish

pace.  The  July figure  was  boosted  by $4 billion  in  revenue

anticipation warrants  (twenty-two month maturity)  issued by

California.  Short-term issuance was  nearly  $6-1/2  billion,  buoyed

by  $3 billion  in California  revenue  anticipation notes.  Through

July,  long-term issuance  is  down  40  percent  from the  comparable

period  last  year,  depressed by the  sharp  falloff  in advance  and

current  refundings.  The  decline  in  refunding volume owes  mostly  to

the  reduction in  bonds  eligible  to be  advance  refunded. 

News

concerning municipal  securities  has  continued to  be  dominated by

California.  Passage  of  a budget  paved the way for  more  borrowing,

narrowly averting the need to  issue  IOUs.2  Although the  state

2. The  controversial  budget is  balanced  only through  the
unrealistic  assumption that  the  federal  government will  pay the
state  a total  of  $3.6  billion  spread  out  over  1995  and  1996  to  cover
the  state's  costs  of  providing  services to  illegal  immigrants.

III-12

issued  securities  totaling  $7 billion  in a single  week,  consisting

of  both the warrants  and  notes,  they were well  received.  Almost  all

of  the warrants  were  credit-enhanced  through letters  of  credit

provided by  an  international  consortium of  banks.  The  banks

provided the  letters  of  credit  only  after the  budget included  a

provision that  forces  spending  cuts  if  a deficit materializes.  S&P

and  Moody's  gave  the credit-enhanced  warrants  their highest  credit

rating.  The notes  also  received the  highest  ratings,  reflecting

high expected  cash  flow coverage  over  their  short  duration.

GROSS  OFFERINGS  OF  MUNICIPAL  SECURITIES
(Monthly rates,  not  seasonally  adjusted,  billions  of dollars)

1994

Total  offerings 1  

Total tax-exempt 
Long-term  2 
Refundings 
New capital 

Short-term 

1992  1993 
21.8  27.8 
21.2  27.1 
17.9  23.3 
7.9  15.7 
7.6 
3.8 

10.0 
3.3 

Junep  Julyp

Q1  Q2  May 
18.5  16.4  13.8  24.4  18.9
17.7  16.0  13.6  23.7  18.8
15.5  12.4  12.4  14.8  12.4
2.1
5.1 
9.7  10.3
6.4
8.9 

3.4 
9.0 
3.6 

3.3 
9.1 
1.2 

7.4 
8.1 
2.4 

Total  taxable 

.6 

.7 

.8 

.4 

.2 

.7 

.1

1. Includes  issues  for  public  and  private  purposes.
2. Includes  all  refunding  bonds,  not  just  advance  refundings.
p  preliminary.

At  the  same  time,  Moody's,  S&P,  and Fitch  all  downgraded  $18.4

billion in  California  long-term  general  obligation  debt  on  July  18.

The  S&P  downgrade  was  from A+  to  A and Moody's  was  from Aa to  A.  In

related  actions,  S&P  lowered the  ratings  of more than  $5 billion  of

other California  debt,  including  $273  million  of  California State

University System  revenue  bonds  and  $3.2  billion of  appropriation-

backed  debt  issued through the  Public Works  Board,  the  Los  Angeles

State  Building Authority,  and  the  San Francisco  State  Building

Authority.

III-13

The  ratio  of yields  on  tax-exempts  to  those on  Treasuries  has

edged  down  since  the  last  FOMC meeting  and  is  near  its  lowest  levels

of  the  year.  The  yield  ratio  remained  especially  low  at  the  short

end,  owing in  part to  strong  demand  from tax-exempt money  market

funds  and  from bond  mutual  funds,  which have  added to  their  short-

term holdings  perhaps  to  hedge  against  a further  rise  in  interest

rates.

Treasury  and  Sponsored Agency Financing

The  staff  anticipates  that the  $56  billion  fiscal  deficit  in

the  third  quarter  will  be  financed  primarily by $40  billion of

marketable  borrowing.  The  swing  in marketable  borrowing,  from  a

thirteen-year  low of  $8 billion  in the  second  quarter  to  a level

more  in  line with  recent  experience, will  remove the  support  that

the  Treasury market has  lately enjoyed  from  low supply.

At  the midquarter  refunding, the Treasury  announced that  its

experiment  with single-price auctions  at  two-  and  five-year  note

auctions  will  be  continued indefinitely.  After  twenty-three  rounds

of  experimentation, the preliminary  evidence  on  the new  auction

technique  was  judged  by Treasury  officials  to  be  "neutral to

slightly  positive. " 3  The  Treasury also  announced that  a new 30-

1/4-year  bond would be  auctioned  rather  than a 30-year  bond,  with

3. On the  neutral  side,  at  single-price  auctions,  the markups  of

auction average  rates  over when-issued  rates  at  the times  of
auctions--a measure  of the premium that market  participants  extract
from the  Treasury for  bearing  the uncertainty of bidding  at
auctions--have differed  little between  single-price  and
discriminatory-price auctions.  On  the  positive  side,  prices  have
moved  less  after  single-price  auctions  than  after  discriminatory-
price  auctions,  consistent  with the view that  more information  is
revealed  prior to  the  auction under the  single-price  format.

III-14

TREASURY  FINANCING 1
(Total for  period:  billions  of  dollars)

Item 

Q2 

Q3 p  

Jul. e  

Aug.p  Septp

1994 

1994

Total  surplus/deficit  (-) 

.6 

-56.1 

-38.0 

-32.2 

14.1

Means  of  financing  deficit:

Net  cash  borrowing/repayments(-) 

Nonmarketable 
Marketable 
Bills 
Coupons 

7.7 
-. 5 
8.2 
-22.7 
30.9 

39.5 
-2.1 
41.6 
2.1 
39.5 

-4.3 
-3.3 
-1.0 
5.9 
-6.9 

50.8 
.7 
50.1 
9.4 
40.7 

-7.0
.6
-7.6
-13.2
5.7

Decrease  in  the  cash balance 

-6.4 

2.7 

30.7 

-14.5 

-13.6

2
Other 

-2.0 

14.0 

11.6 

-4.1 

6.4

Memo:
Cash  balance,  end  of  period 

51.0 

48.3 

20.3 

34.8 

48.3

1. Data reported  on  a payment  basis.
2.  Includes  checks  issued less  checks  paid,

transactions.

accrued items,  and other

p--projected.
e--estimated.

Note:  Details may not  add  to  totals because  of  rounding.

NET CASH BORROWING  OF  FEDERALLY SPONSORED  CREDIT  AGENCIES1
(Billions of  dollars)

Agency 

1993 

Q3 

Q4 

1994 
Q1 

Apr. 

1994
May 

June

FHLBs 
FHLMC 
FNMA 
Farm Credit  Banks 
SLMA 
FAMC2 

5.4 
17.1 
19.3 
-.1 
-.1 
0 

8.9 
-2.7 
5.3 
1.5 
1.0 
0 

5.7 
12.9 
15.3 
-.7 
1.3 
0 

6.2 
2.7 
2.4 
0.2 
3.2 
0 

3.4 
5.7 
4.3 
-0.1 
1.5 
0 

--
2.1
4.7
1.2
2.1
0

1. Excludes mortgage  pass-through  securities  issued  by  FNMA

and  FHLMC.

2. Federal  Agricultural Mortgage  Corporation.

III-15

the  goal  of  increasing the  liquidity  and the  flexibility  of the

strips  market.  Since  last  year,  when the  Treasury  began  auctioning

long-term  bonds  semiannually rather  than  quarterly, the  coupon

payment  dates  of  these issues  have  been  concentrated  in February  and

August.  The Treasury  hopes that  by  spreading  coupon payments  across

four dates,  including  May and November,  long-term bonds  will  be  more

heavily  demanded by  investors  for  defeasance  purposes  or for

constructing  synthetic  instruments.

Mortgage  Markets

Interest  rates  on  conventional mortgages  have  registered mixed

changes  over the  intermeeting  period.  In the  primary market,  the

average  commitment  rate  on thirty-year  fixed-rate  loans  is

unchanged,  on net,  but  initial  ARM rates  have  edged up  8 basis

points.  Spreads  of ARMs  to  Treasuries  remain tight,  as  many

lenders,  especially thrifts,  continue  to price  ARMs  aggressively.

Although the  FRM-ARM spread  has  narrowed  from its  all-time  high  in

April,  by  historical  standards it  remains  fairly wide.

The  FRM-ARM  initial  rate  spread  is  an  important  determinant  of

borrowers'  demands  for ARMs,  as  is  the level  of  FRM interest  rates

(chart).  With  rates  on  FRMs  remaining well  above their  lows  of  last

fall,  the  wide  initial  rate advantage  of ARMs  has  contributed to  a

steady  increase  in the ARM share  of  conventional  loans  closed  at

major  institutional  lenders.  According to  Federal  Housing  Finance

Board  data,  the ARM share  of all  conventional  home  purchase

mortgages  closed  in  June was 43  percent,  its  largest  share  since

June  1989.  At  thrift  institutions,  the ARM  share  in  June was

71  percent,  compared  with  shares  of  27  percent  and  44  percent

respectively at  mortgage  companies and  commercial banks.  Thrifts

reportedly have  been  offering very  competitive  starting  rates  on

III-16

ARM  Origination  Proportion  and  FRM-ARM  Spread
(Monthly;  not seasonally adjusted)

Basis Points

Percent

1984 

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

Percent

ARM  Origination  Proportion and
FHLMC  Thirty-Year Conventional  FRM  Rate
(Monthly; not seasonally adjusted)

Percent

FRM  Rate

1984 

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993

1994

III-17

ARMs  and  thus  have  been  gaining market  share  in mortgage

originations  from  commercial  banks  and  mortgage companies.

Available  data  on mortgage  lending  activity in the  third

quarter  suggest  little  pickup  from  the  slower  second-quarter  pace.

Adjusted for  thrift  acquisitions,  real  estate loan  growth  at

commercial  banks  appears  to  have  edged up  in  July to  about  a 4-1/2

percent  annual  rate.  Meanwhile,  the  Mortgage Bankers  Association's

index  of applications  to  purchase  new  and  existing  homes is  off

about  10  percent  since  late  June,  and  the  MBA's  refinancing index

remains  near  historical  lows.

Given the  drop-off  in  gross  mortgage  loan  originations  in

recent months  and  the  rising popularity  of  ARMs,  gross  issuance of

agency  pass-through securities has  slowed  sharply  from the  record

$66  billion  pace  set  last  December to  $24  billion  in June  (table).

Historically,  issuance  of  agency  pass-through  securities  has  shown  a

strong  inverse  correlation with the  level  of  FRM interest  rates

(chart),  owing  in part  to  variations in  the  appeal  of  ARMs.  Thus,

in  the  current  environment  of higher  long-term interest  rates  and

lower  refinancing  activity,  some  drop-off in  gross  pass-through

issuance is  to  be  expected.

Among  loan  categories, much  of the  increase in  pass-throughs

outstanding has  been  in  the  conventional market,  which  continues  to

gain  market  share  at  the  expense  of  government-backed  FHA and  VA

loans.  Legislation has  passed the House  that  would  increase  FHA

loan  limits,  making FHA  insurance  available to  more  borrowers  and

possibly  boosting GNMA market  share.  The  current  loan  limits  are

$67,500  in  most  parts  of  the  country  and  up  to  $151,725  in  certain

high-cost markets.  The  increases  in the House  bill  would  raise  the

III-18

ISSUANCE  OF  MORTGAGE-BACKED  SECURITIES
(Monthly averages;  billions of dollars;  not  seasonally adjusted except  as  noted)

Pass-through  securities 
Federal  agency 

Multiclass  securities
Federal  agency

Period 

Total1 

1990 
1991 
1992 
1993 

1993:Q3 
:Q4 
1994:01 

:02  p 

1994:Apr 
May 
Jun p 

20.1 
23.7 
40.0 
48.6 

54.3 
59.0 
55.1 
33.6 

44.1 
31.5 
25.1 

Fixed- 
rate1  backed1  agency2 

Non- 

ARM- 

FNMA  FHLMC 

GNMA 

Total  REMICs  REMICs  REMICS  STRIPs 

Non-
agency3

17.2 
20.2 
34.7 
42.3 

46.5 
52.1 
47.2 
27.4 

36.3 
25.5 
20.4 

2.2 
1.9 
3.2 
4.6 

5.3 
5.1 
6.2 
4.8 

5.8 
5.0 
3.7 

.6 
1.6 
2.2 
1.7 

2.5 
1.8 
1.7 
1.4 

2.1 
1.0 
1.0 

10.6 
18.1 
30.4 
37.0 

43.7 
44.4 
37.2 
17.9 

32.7 
13.6 
7.4 

5.1 
8.4 
12.9 
14.0 

17.3 
15.9 
10.9 
4.7 

8.9 
2.9 
2.3 

3.4 
6.0 
10.9 
11.9 

12.6 
17.7 
13.8 
7.3 

14.5 
5.2 
2.1 

0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 
.2 

0 
0 
.5 

.8 
1.1 
1.3 
4.9 

6.7 
3.8 
4.0 
2.4 

5.1 
2.1 
0 

1.4
2.6
5.3
6.2

7.1
7.0
8.5
3.4

4.3
3.5
2.5

1.  Seasonally  adjusted.
2. Collateralized by adjustable-rate mortgages.
3. Collateralized by fixed-rate mortgages.
p Preliminary.  r Revised.
Note:  Details may not  sum to totals  because of  rounding.

Percent

Issuance  of Agency  Pass-Through  Securities  and
FHLMC  Thirty-Year Conventional  FRM  Rate
(Monthly;  not seasonally adjusted)

Billions  of  dollars

Pass-Through  Security Issuance

1985

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991

1992 

1993

III-19

low-cost  limit  to  $101.575  and  the  high-cost  limit  to  $172,678.  The

Senate  has  yet  to  act  on  this  legislation.

Issuance  of  agency multiclass  securities  declined  further  in

June, with  REMIC  production  falling  to  about  $5 billion,  down  from

$8  billion  in May  and  the  all-time  high  of nearly  $41  billion  in

December  1993.  The  decline  in REMIC  issuance  owes  largely  to  the

drop  in  pass-throughs;  however, with reports  continuing to  circulate

about  losses  on  derivative investments,  it  may  also  reflect

investors'  lingering  concerns  about  the  market  value  and  liquidity

of  certain specialized  tranches.  Apparently, turmoil  in the  MBS

market  has  had  little  feedback to  the  primary market,  as  spreads  to

Treasuries  remain  relatively tight.

Consumer Installment  Credit

Buttressed  by a fourth  consecutive  month  of  rapid  increase  in

June,  consumer  installment  credit  during the  second  quarter  recorded

its  strongest  quarterly gain  in  the current  economic  expansion.  At

a  15-1/2 percent  annual  rate,  growth  in the  second  quarter  climbed

to  the  15-to-20  percent  range  attained  at  some  point  during most

previous  expansions  (chart).  Such  levels  were  reached  sooner  in

past  upswings,  but  an unusually  slow pickup  in  spending  on  consumer

durables  in the  early  stages  of this  expansion  held  down  consumer

credit  growth.  Since  late  last  summer,  however,  outlays  for  autos

and  other  durable  goods have  strengthened,  providing  a significant

boost to  credit  expansion.  The  June  increase  of  15-1/2  percent

reflected continuing  strength in  auto  and  revolving credit.  Slower

but  still  hefty  growth was  evident  in the  volatile  "other" category,

consisting  of  personal  cash  loans,  boat  and mobile  home  loans,  home

4.  It  is  unclear  by how much the  new  limits would  boost  FHA
market  share.  FHA  insurance  fees are  considerably higher  than
private mortgage  insurance fees.  Consequently,  even though more
borrowers would  fall  within the  upward  revised  FHA  limits,  those who
met  the  underwriting  requirements  of  the  conventional loan market
presumably  would  still opt  for  private  mortgage  insurance.

III-20

GROWTH  OF CONSUMER CREDIT
(Percent change:  seasonally  adjusted  annual  rate)

Type  of  credit 

1994 

1994 

Memo:
Outstanding
June  1994
(Billions

1992 

1993 

Q1 

Q2p 

May r 

Jun  p 

of  dollars)

Installment 

Auto 
Revolving 
Other 

.2 

-1.0 
4.8 
-3.4 

9.0 
9.2 
11.9 
5.4 

10.9 
9.1 
15.6 
7.0 

15.9 
18.5 
17.9 
10.1 

16.6 
15.7 
16.6 
17.9 

15.6 
18.8 
15.5 
11.6 

Noninstallment 

6.3 

-5.5 

4.2 

-16.6 

-22.3 

-15.4 

Total 

.6 

8.0 

10.4 

13.9 

14.3 

13.8 

849.6
301.2
312.6
235.9

51.0

900.6

r 

Revised. 

p  Preliminary.

INTEREST RATES  ON CONSUMER LOANS
(Annual percentage  rate)

Type  of  loan 

1991 

1992 

1993 

11.1 
15.2 
18.2 

9.3 
14.0 
17.8 

8.1 
13.5 
16.8 

1993 
Nov. 

7.6 
13.2 
16.3 

Feb. 

7.5 
12.9 
16.1 

1994
May 

7.8 
13.0..
16.2 

June

...

...

At  commercial  banks1
New  cars  (48 mo.) 
Personal  (24  mo.) 
Credit  cards 

At  auto  finance  cos.

New cars 
Used  cars 

12.4 
15.6 

9.9 
13.8 

9.5 
12.8 

9.0 
12.4 

8.9 
12.2 

9.9 
13.5 

10.0
13.8

1. Average of  "most common" rate  charged  for  specified  type and  maturity during

the  first  week of  the  middle month of  each  quarter.

2. For monthly  data,  rate  for  all  loans  of each type  made during the month

regardless  of maturity.

Note:  Annual data  are  averages of quarterly data  for  commercial bank  rates  and

of monthly data  for  auto  finance company  rates.

CONSUMER  INSTALLMENT CREDIT

Quarterly 

(Percent  change, seasonally adjusted annual  rate) 

Percent

1964 

1970

1976 

1982

1988 

1994

III-21

improvement  loans,  and  other  specialized loans  to  finance  consumer

durables.  Consistent  with  these  figures,  some  banks  reported

strengthening  of  consumer  loan demand  in the  August Bank Lending

Practices  Survey.

Of the  three  components  of  installment  credit,  revolving credit

has  shown the most  consistent  strength  over the  past  year  and  a

half.  Growing  acceptance  of  credit  cards  as  a means  of  payment  has

likely  boosted the  growth  rate  of revolving  credit  by  several

percentage  points.  For  example,  credit  cards  are  more frequently

being used  for  the  purchase  of  groceries, the  payment  of college

tuition, and,  in  some  states,  the  payment  of taxes.

One  reason  for the  greater  use  of  credit  cards  for  such

payments  is  the  proliferation  of  programs that  tie rebates  and  other

rewards  to  the  volume  of charges  made  to  an  account.  Prominent

among  such programs  are  those that  award  credits  toward  "free"

airline  tickets  and  toward  automobile purchases.  Airline  cards  have

existed  for  several  years,  but  their use  has  reportedly  intensified

in  the  past  two years.  General Motors  initiated a program in

September  1992,  in  partnership  with a bank  subsidiary  of Household

International,  that  grants  up  to  $500  per  year  in discounts  toward

the  purchase  of  a new General Motors  car.  At the  end  of June,

receivables  under  this  program totaled  $5.8  billion, accounting  for

10  percent  of  the increase  in  revolving credit  outstanding  since

September  1992.  Ford  launched  a similar  program with  Citibank in

February  1993,  apparently  also with  good results.  Apple  Computer

and  some  gasoline  companies  have  recently  initiated cards  with

volume  incentives.  Because  these  plans  provide  the customary  "grace

period"  of  twenty-five  to  thirty  days  during which  no  interest  is

assessed  if  billed amounts  are  paid  in  full  by  the due  date,

cardholders  can  generate  a high volume  of charges  without  incurring

III-22

any  interest  cost.  Such  usage  raises  the measured  level  of  consumer

credit.

Rising market  interest  rates  have  probably had  only  little

restraining  effect  on  consumer  credit  to  date,  partly because  rate

increases  on  consumer loans  have  a relatively small  impact  on

monthly  payments  and  also  because  consumer rates  generally  have

risen  less  than market  rates.  The Bank  Rate Monitor  indicates  that

rates  on new-car  loans  at  banks  rose  about  3/4  percentage  point  from

the  end  of  January to  the  end of  July,  less  than half the  increase

in  yields  on  three-year Treasury  notes.  Over  the  same  period,

credit  card  rates  have  apparently risen very little.

APPENDIX

The  August  Senior Loan Officer  Opinion  Survey  on
Bank Lending  Practices

The  August  1994  Senior  Loan  Officer Opinion  Survey  on  Bank
Lending  Practices  posed  questions  about  changes  in  bank  lending
standards  and  terms,  changes  in  loan  demand by businesses  and
households,  the maturity  of  banks'  holdings  of  securities,  net
borrowing  from  banks'  offices  abroad,  and  the effects  of  the  Credit
Availability Program.

The results  show a continuation  of the  easing  of  terms  and

standards  on  loans to  both  businesses  and  households found  in  the
last  several  surveys,  although at  a somewhat  diminished pace.
Respondents  eased  terms  and  standards  on commercial  and  industrial
loans  to  firms  of  all  size categories,  with more  banks easing  for
middle-market  firms than  for  larger  and  smaller  firms.  As  in  the
February and  May  surveys,  the  responses  indicated  a slight  easing of
standards  for  commercial  real  estate  loans.  Respondents  reported an
increased  willingness  to make  loans  to  individuals  and,  on net,  a
slight  easing in  standards  for  home  mortgage  loans.  Demand  for
business  loans  increased  over the last  three months  at  a significant
fraction  of  respondent  banks,  although  slightly  off the  record
numbers  reported  in  the May survey.  Demand for  credit  from
households was  mixed  across  types  of credit:  demand  for  mortgages
declined  significantly;  demand for  home equity  lines  of credit
declined  slightly,  on  net;  and  demand for  consumer  installment  loans
went  up.

Special  questions  on  the  survey  addressed the  average  remaining

maturities  of banks'  holdings  of  securities.  The median  responses
indicate  an  average  remaining maturity of  just  under three  years  for
banks'  investment  account  assets  that  are  classified  as  available-
for-sale;  three  and  a half years  for  investment  account  securities
classified  as  held-to-maturity;  and  two  and  a half years  for trading
account  securities.  Additional  questions  examined the  recent  run-up
in  net  borrowing  from  overseas  offices  by domestic  banks  and  by
branches  and  agencies  of  foreign banks.  About  half the  respondents
reported  increasing  such borrowing  over  recent  periods.  Most  banks
attributed  the  increase  to lower  interest  rates  abroad.  The most
popular  source  for  the borrowing was  the  eurodollar market  and the
most  popular maturity was  under three months.  Special  questions
also  addressed  the effects  of the  Credit Availability Program  (CAP).
Little evidence  of  an  effect  on  loan terms  and  standards  or  loan
volume  was  found.

Lending  to  businesses

Commercial  and  industrial  loans  other  than  for mergers.
Between  5 and  10  percent  of  domestic  respondents,  on  net,  reported
some  easing of  credit  standards  for  firms  in  all  size  categories,
with the  greatest  easing  reported  for middle-market  firms  and  the
least  for  large  firms.  The  number of  respondents  who  eased  was off
slightly from the  levels  found in  the May and February  surveys.
Also,  for  the first  time  since  late  last  year,  several  banks
reported tightening  standards.  Lending  standards  at  foreign
respondents were  essentially unchanged.

Many banks  responded that  they had  eased  loan  terms over  the

last three months.  Specifically,  about  half the  domestic
respondents  eased  spreads  of  loan rates  over base  rates  and  the  cost
of  credit  lines  for  large and  middle-market  borrowers  while under  a
quarter  eased these  terms  for  small  borrowers.  Smaller, although
still  considerable numbers  of banks  eased other  terms,  including

III-A-2

credit  line  size,  loan  covenants,  and  collateralization.  The
fraction  of  foreign  respondents  that  eased  terms was  similar  to  that
for  domestic banks.  The main  reason given  by  respondents  for  easing
was  increased  competition  followed by  a more  favorable  economic
outlook.

Commercial  real  estate loans.  Domestic  respondents  indicated

that  credit  standards  for  commercial  real  estate  loans  eased
slightly,  on net.  Only a few banks  indicated any  change  in
standards  for  commercial  office  buildings,  with  one more  bank having
eased than tightened.  The  results  were about  the  same  for  other
forms  of  commercial real  estate.  The  February and  May  surveys  also
found  evidence  of  a slight  easing.

Demand.  Demand  for  business  loans  strengthened over  the  last

three  months at  a significant  fraction  of  respondent  banks.  Between
a fifth  and a third  of  banks  reported  increased  demand  from firms  of
various  sizes, with  the  largest  fraction  reporting  increased  demand
from middle-market  firms.  These  fractions  are  slightly off the
record  levels  reported  in the  previous  survey,  but  still  indicate
strong  demand  for  business  loans.  Banks  attributed the  increased
demand largely  to  increases  in customers'  inventory  financing  needs
and  expenditures  on  plant  and  equipment.  Surprisingly few banks
attributed the  increased  demand to  reductions  in nonbank  financing,
although this  may be  because  banks  are more  aware of  the  purpose  of
a loan  than their  customer's  alternative  sources  of  funds.

Lending  to households

Respondents  were  also more  willing to  make  consumer  and
residential  mortgage  loans.  About  20  percent  of the  respondents
were more  willing now than  three months  ago  to  make  consumer
installment  and home  equity  loans.  On net,  only a few banks  eased
standards  for  approving mortgage  applications  for  purchasing homes.

With  respect  to  the  demand  for  household  credit,  the  survey

results  were mixed  across  types  of  credit.  As  in May,  respondents
experienced  a significant  decline  in demand  for  residential
mortgages,  with over  half the  banks,  on net,  reporting  a decline  and
several  banks  reporting a substantial  decline.  Demand  for home
equity  lines  of  credit  decreased  at  some  banks  and  increased  at
others;  on net,  less than  10  percent  of the  banks  experienced  a
decrease.  Demand  for  consumer  installment  credit  increased, on  net,
with  about  20  percent  of  the  respondents  indicating  an  increase  in
demand.

Securities

At the  beginning  of  1994 banks,  in  accordance  with  financial

accounting  standard  115  (FAS  115),  began  marking to  market  those
securities  in  their  investment  portfolio  that  are  classified  as
available  for  sale.  The August  survey  asked the  respondents  for  the
average  maturities  of  the three  classifications  of securities:  held
in  investment  accounts  and  classified  as  available  for  sale, held  in
investment  accounts  and classified  as held  to maturity,  and held  in
trading accounts.  The  survey  responses  indicate that  the  maturities
of  banks'  portfolios  are  quite different  across  banks,  with  several
banks  indicating average  maturities of  less  than two years  and many
indicating maturities  of  greater  than five  years.  Overall,  the
median  average  maturity of the trading  account  was  shortest,  two  and
a half  years;  followed by  the available-for-sale  securities  in the
investment  account,  just  under  three years;  and the  held-to-maturity

1. As  in May, increased  competition was the most  common  reason

provided  for  easing,  even  though it  was not  listed  as  a reason  for
easing of terms  and  standards.

securities  had  the  longest  average  maturity, about  three  and  a half
years.

III-A-3

Borrowing  from abroad

Since mid-1993,  U.S.  domestic  banks have  significantly

increased their  net  borrowing from their  non-U.S.  offices  and
international  banking  facilities  (I.B.F.).  Since  mid-1991,  branches
and  agencies  have  significantly  increased their  net  borrowing  from
their  parent  bank, their  parent  bank's  non-U.S.  offices  and  their
I.B.F.  Questions  on  the  August  survey  explored the  reasons  for  and
the  characteristics of this  increase  in  borrowing  from  abroad.
About  half of the  domestic  and  foreign  respondents  indicated that
they had  increased this  source  of  funding.  The  most  frequently
cited  reason  for the  increase was  lower  interest  rates  abroad.  The
responses  indicate  that  banks  avoid  currency  exposure  in  the
transactions by borrowing  primarily  in  the  eurodollar market.
Virtually  all  of  the  domestic  respondents  indicated that  they most
commonly borrowed  at  maturities under  six months,  with almost  two-
fifths  of  respondents  indicating  an overnight maturity  and  a like
amount  indicating  other maturities  under  three months.  All  of the
foreign  respondents  indicated that  they  most commonly  borrowed  at
maturities  under  six months.

Effects  of the  Credit  Availability Program

In  March  1993,  the Credit  Availability Program  (CAP) was
announced.  The  CAP  included the  following  initiatives:  regulatory
changes  allowing the  strongest banks  and thrifts to  make and  carry  a
limited  portfolio  of  small  business and  farm  loans with minimal
documentation, reductions  in  the  appraisal burden  on loans  secured
by real  estate,  changes  in  the  rules  for  financing  the  sale of  OREO,
clarification  of  the use  of the  category  other  assets  especially
mentioned, and  improvements  in the  examination  process.  The August
1993  survey  asked the  domestic  respondents  a series  of  questions
about  the effects  of  the CAP  and  found that  it  did not  have  a
substantial  effect  on the  supply  of  credit  to  small  and medium-sized
businesses.  At  that  time,  many  respondents  anticipated that  the
reductions  in  the  appraisal  burdens,  which  had not  yet  been
implemented, would have  a substantial  effect.  Recently bank
regulatory  agencies  increased  from $100,000  to  $250,000  the
threshold  level above which the  services  of  an  appraiser  are
required for  loans  collateralized with real  estate.  They  have  also
exempted  from appraisal  requirements business  loans  of  $1 million or
less  where  the  sale  of,  or  rental  income  derived  from, the  real
estate  taken  as  collateral is  not the  primary source  of repayment.
The current  survey asked domestic respondents  if  these changes
affected their terms  and  standards  and loan  volumes.  Both  changes
had  allowed  less  than  20  percent  of  respondents  to  ease  lending
terms  and  standards  and  resulted  in  increased lending volume  at  less
than  10  percent  of  respondents.  Even  fewer banks  indicated a change
in terms  and  standards or  loan volume  resulting  from the  other
initiatives  of the  CAP.  Over  three  quarters  of the  respondents said
that none  of the  initiatives  had  any  effect  on  their bank's  lending
to  small  and  medium-sized businesses.  Among  those banks that  stated
the CAP  had  had some  effect, most  selected  improvements  in  the
examination  process  as  having had the  largest  effect.

INTERNATIONAL  DEVELOPMENTS

INTERNATIONAL  DEVELOPMENTS

U.S.  International  Trade  in  Goods  and  Services

In  May,  the  U.S.  trade deficit  in  goods  and  services  widened

slightly  from what  was  recorded  in  April;  for  April-May  combined,

the  deficit  was  larger  than in the  first  quarter  by  $9 billion  at  an

annual  rate  and was  significantly  larger  than  at  any  time  since

1988.  Data  for  June  will  be  released  on  August  18.

NET  TRADE  IN  GOODS  & SERVICES
(Billions of  dollars,  seasonally  adjusted)

Year 
1993 

93Q4 

Quarters 
94Q1 
(annual rates) 

94Q2e 

Real  NIPA 1/
Net  Exports  of  G&S 

-73.9 

-82.2  -104.0  -113.4

Nominal  BOP
Net  Exports  of  G&S 

Goods,  net 
Services,  net 

-75.7 
-132.6 
56.8 

-79.9  -97.1  -106.2 
-132.7  -147.8  -164.5 
58.2 

50.8 

52.8 

Mar 

Months
May
Apr 
(monthly rates)

-8.5 

-6.9 

-9.2
-11.5  -13.3  -14.1
4.9

4.8 

4.6 

1/ In  billions  of  1987  dollars,  SAAR.
e/ BOP  data  are  two  months  at  an  annual  rate.
Source:  U.S.  Dept.  of  Commerce,  Bureaus  of Economic  Analysis and
Census.

Exports  of  goods  and  services  were  about  the  same  in  May  as  in

April with  increased  shipments  of  machinery  and  industrial  supplies

offset by  reduced  exports  of  aircraft  and  gold.  For the  two  months

combined,  exports  were  stronger than  in  the  first  quarter  by  11

percent  at  an  annual  rate;  increases  occurred  in  both  goods  and

services with the  sharpest  rises  recorded for  machinery  (especially

to  Canada,  the  United  Kingdom, and  expanding markets  in  Asia),

automotive  products  to  Canada and  Mexico,  industrial  supplies

(largely chemicals,  aluminum, and  paper),  and  travel  and

transportation receipts  from foreigners.

Imports  of  goods  and  services  were  slightly higher in  May than

in April;  most  of  the  rise  was  in  oil  (higher prices)  and  consumer

IV-I

IV-2

U.S.  International Trade  in  Goods  & Services

Net  Exports  of  Goods & Services

Bii$.  SAAR

Real NIPA  Goods & Services

Ratio  Scale,  Bil  87$, SAAR

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

Selected Exports

Bil  87$.  SAAR

Selected  Imports

Bil  87$,  SAAR

Machinery  Ex  Computers

-
------.  Automotive
-

ind.  Supp.  (Nonag Ex Gold)

-

Machinery  Ex  Computers

--- ---- Automotive

-Consumer Goods

"

---
1 
I, 

1991 

1992 

iI  lli iiI  lli ll
1

1993 

1991

1992

1993

1994

IV-3

U.S.  EXPORTS  AND  IMPORTS  OF  GOODS  AND  SERVICES
(Billions of dollars,  SAAR,  BOP  basis)

Quarters 

Months

Levels 
94Q1  94Q2e/ 

$Change  1/ 
Q1 

Q2e/ 

Levels 

$Chg 1/

Apr 

May 

May

Exports  of  G&S 

656.8  674.6 

-8.3 

17.8 

673.8  675.3 

1.5

Goods  Exports 
Agricultural 
Gold 
Computers 
Other  Goods 

472.1  485.0 
43.9 
7.3 
31.0 
387.7  402.7 

43.7 
9.4 
31.3 

Aircraft  & Pts 
Semiconductors 
Other Cap  Gds 

34.2 
23.5 

33.6 
23.8 
105.6  111.7 

Automotive 
to  Canada 
to  Mexico 
to  ROW 

54.4 
29.0 
7.9 
17.5 

55.6 
30.7 
8.3 
16.6 

Ind  Supplies 
Consumer  Goods 
All  Other 

96.2  100.8 
55.4 
56.8 
20.5 
18.4 

-6.6 
-1.6 
-3.8 
0.7 
-2.0 

-0.2 
2.8 
-0.1 

-0.6 
-0.4 
-0.5 
0.2 

-0.2 
-1.5 
-2.1 

12.9 
0.2 
-2.1 
-0.3 
15.0 

-0.7 
0.3 
6.1 

1.2 
1.8 
0.3 
-0.9 

4.6 
1.4 
2.1 

484.5  485.4 
45.1 
6.0 
31.5 
402.6  402.8 

42.8 
8.5 
30.6 

37.4 
23.4 

29.7 
24.1 
109.5  113.8 

56.7 
31.5 
7.9 
17.2 

54.6 
30.0 
8.6 
16.0 

98.3  103.3 
57.8 
55.9 
19.6 
21.4 

0.9
2.3
-2.5
0.9
0.2

-7.7
0.7
4.3

-2.1
-1.6
0.7
-1.2

5.0
1.8
-1.8

Services  Exp 

184.7  189.6 

-1.7 

4.9 

189.3  189.9 

0.6

Imports  of  G&S 

753.8  780.8 

8.8 

26.9 

776.2  785.4 

9.2

Goods  Imports 

Petroleum 
Gold 
Computers 
Other  Goods 

619.9  649.4 
47.8 
6.1 
44.0 
527.7  551.5 

41.6 
8.8 
41.8 

Aircraft  & Pts 
Semiconductors 
Other  Cap  Gds 

11.3 
23.1 
94.4 

12.4 
23.7 
97.4 

Automotive 

from  Canada 
from Mexico 
from ROW 

108.1  113.9 
40.0 
14.1 
59.8 

36.9 
13.4 
57.8 

Ind  Supplies 
Consumer  Goods 
FFB 
All  Other 

101.3  105.8 
137.8  143.7 
30.1 
24.3 

29.4 
22.5 

8.5 
-6.0 
-1.2 
1.5 
14.2 

-1.1 
1.3 
5.6 

2.2 
-1.1 
0.4 
2.9 

5.4 
-0.2 
0.5 
0.4 

29.5 
6.2 
-2.7 
2.2 
23.7 

644.6  654.3 
49.1 
6.0 
44.4 
548.1  554.8 

46.6 
6.3 
43.6 

1.1 
0.7 
3.1 

5.8 
3.1 
0.7 
2.0 

4.5 
6.0 
0.8 
1.9 

12.3 
23.8 
97.0 

12.5 
23.6 
97.8 

113.9  113.9 
40.0 
40.1 
14.3 
13.8 
59.6 
60.0 

104.7  106.9 
142.1  145.3 
30.4 
24.4 

29.9 
24.3 

9.7
2.5
-0.3
0.8
6.7

0.2
-0.2
0.8

-0.0
-0.1
0.5
-0.4

2.2
3.2
0.5
0.0

Services  Imp 

133.9  131.3 

0.3 

-2.6 

131.6  131.1 

-0.5

Memo:

Oil  Qty  (mb/d) 

9.00 

9.27 

-0.24 

0.28 

9.38 

9.16 

-0.22

e/ Average  of  two months.
1/ Change  from previous  quarter  or month. 
Source:  U.S.  Dept.  of  Commerce,  Bureaus  of  Economic  Analysis  and  Census

IV-4

goods.  For  the  two  months  combined,  imports  were  higher  than  in  the

first  quarter  by  15  percent  at  an  annual  rate.  The  increase was

spread  about  evenly among  all  major  merchandise  trade  categories;

service  payments  to  foreigners  declined  slightly.  Higher  imports  of

machinery  and  non-oil  industrial  supplies  (especially metals)

reflected  the  strength  of  U.S.  expenditures  on  business  equipment

and  construction  supplies.  The  rise  in  imported consumer  goods  was

largely  in  durable  items  such as  household  goods  and  recreational

and  home entertainment  equipment,  and  appears  to  have  contributed  to

a sharp  run-up  in U.S.  retail  inventories.  Two-thirds  of  the

increase  in  imported  consumer  goods  in April-May  came  from  China.

In May,  the  quantity of  imported  oil  declined  for  the  second

consecutive  month.  Nonetheless,  for  April/May  combined  imports

averaged a bit  above  the first  quarter  rate  as  a decline  in

consumption was more  than  offset  by an  increase  in  U.S.  stocks.

Preliminary Department  of  Energy  statistics  suggest  that  in  June  oil

consumption  increased  sharply with  the onset  of the  driving  season,

likely  pushing  imports  above 9.5  mb/d.

Prices  of  U.S.  Imports  and  Exports

Prices  of  imported  oil  have  continued  to  rise,  climbing more

than  $1.00  per barrel  in May as  OPEC  production  remained  roughly

unchanged  in the face  of  increasing oil  demand,  both in  the  United

States  and  abroad.  For April-May  on average,  the  price  of  imported

oil was  11  percent  (NOT an  annual  rate)  higher than  in the  first

quarter.  Since  the  June  Greenbook, West  Texas  Intermediate  (WTI)

spot  and  futures  prices  have  risen  on  balance  in  response  to  unrest

in  Nigeria.  Spot  WTI  peaked  in  early August  at  almost  $21.00  per

barrel,  and  is  currently  trading at  [$18.55]  per  barrel.  These

developments  should  lead  to  further  increases  in  import  prices  in

July  and  August.

IV-5

PRICES  OF U.S.  IMPORTS  AND EXPORTS
(percent change from previous period)

Merchandise  Imports

Oil
Non-Oil

93Q4 

Quarter
9401
(annual  r

-0.7

-24.3
2.0

-2.1
-30.2
1.3

Months

s 

9402 

Apr 

May 
(monthly rates)

Jun

ates) 
----- BLS  Prices----------------
0.7 
0.7
5.1 
4.4
0.3
0.3 

7.3
63.8
2.8

0.9 
8.3 
0.2 

Foods,  Feeds,  Bev.
Ind Supp Ex Oil
Computers
Capital Goods Ex Comp
Automotive Products
Consumer Goods

5.9
-0.9
-6.1
2.3
6.9
0.9

0.8
5.4
-5.1
-0.1
2.0
-0.1

15.8
4.2
-6.6

2.7
2.6
1.0

1.4
0.5
-0.2
0.2
0.3
0.2

1.8
-0.2
-0.9

0.1
0.3
0.2

Memo:

Oil  Imports  ($/bbl)

14.09 

12.67 

14.12 

13.57  14.67

Merchandise Exports

Agricultural
Nonagricultural

Ind Supp Ex Ag
Computers
Capital Goods  Ex Comp
Automotive Products
Consumer Goods

0.5
8.2
-0.6

-4.0
-6.9
2.3
1.3
0.7

4.1
19.9
2.2

7.8
-10.0
0.9
1.5
0.8

1.4
-7.5
2.9

9.4
-6.4
-0.3
1.1
0.3

0.0
-2.2
0.4

0.9

-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0.2

0.4 
1.4 
0.2 

0.6
-0.8
-0.1
0.2
0.1

2.1
0.5

-0.2

0.3
0.0
-0.1

0.0
-2.1

0.3

1.2
-1.0
0.2
0.0
-0.2

-------- Prices  in  the NIPA Accounts--------

Fixed-Weight

Imports  of  Gds & Serv.

Non-oil  Merch Ex Comp

Exports of  Gds  & Serv.
Nonag Merch Ex  Comp

-2.8
0.5

4.4
2.9

Oil  Prices

-- 
-

Spot WTI
Import  Unit Value

$ per bbi

1987 

1988

1989

1990

1991 

1992

1993

1994

IV-6

Prices  of non-oil  imports  rose  0.3  percent  in  June,  about  the

same  rate as  in  four  of  the  previous  five  months.  In  the  second

quarter  on  average,  prices  (BLS) rose  2.8  percent  at  an  annual  rate;

while  increases  were  recorded  in  all  major  end-use  trade  categories,

the  largest  rise  was  in  foods.  Two  aspects  of  non-oil  import  price

developments  are worth noting  -- price increases  in  recent months

are  a bit  stronger than  a year  earlier,  and  prices  (fixed-weight

excluding  computers)  now have  risen  in five  consecutive  quarters  (at

an  average  annual  rate  of  2.4  percent);  the  last  period  of  sustained

import  price  rise  was  1987-88.

Prices  of agricultural  exports  fell  in  June  bringing  the

decline  in  the  second  quarter  to  7.5  percent  at  an  annual  rate.

This  was  the  first price  decline  recorded  since  the  second  quarter

of  1993  and  reflected,  in  part,  an  improvement  in crop  conditions.

In  June,  prices  of  nonagricultural  exports  rose  for  the  sixth

consecutive month.  The  increase  in  the  second  quarter was  slightly

more  than in  the first  quarter, but  was  still  less  than  3 percent

AR.  Price  increases were  recorded  in most  major  trade  categories,

led  by  a rise  in industrial  supplies.  Slightly  offsetting this

increase  was  a decline  in  the  price  of  exported  capital  goods.

U.S.  International  Financial  Transactions

Foreign  official  assets  in the  United  States  rose  by  $13

billion  in  June,  largely  as  the  result  of  central  bank  efforts  to

stabilize the  foreign  exchange  value  of  the  dollar.  (See line  1 of

the  Summary of  U.S.  International  Transactions  table.)  Partial

information from the FRBNY  suggests  that G-10  holdings  rose  by  a

further net  $6 billion in  July.  For the  second  quarter  as  a whole,

large  increases  in holdings  by  the  G-10  countries  were  offset

somewhat  by  reduced  holdings  of  several  OPEC  countries  and Mexico.

IV-7

SUMMARY  OF  U.S. 

INTERNATIONAL  TRANSACTIONS

(Billions  of  dollars,  not  seasonally  adjusted  except  as  noted)

SQuarter 

Year 

1993 

1994 

Month

1994

1992 

1993 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Apr. 

May  June

38.3
4.8
4.9
28.6

70.0
29.8

-5.1
45.3

18.5
9.1
-3.1
12.1

23.0
4.7

-. 9

19.1

10.6
10.9
-2.3
2.0

7.5
15.3
-4.4
-3.3

-14.0

.6
-2.0
-12.7

8.5
6.4
-1.3
3.4

13.0
8.3
-1.2

5.9

3.9 

-. 7

-.5 

-. 7 

-. 1 

3.5

.5 

1.7 

1.3

35.6 

13.6

20.2 

5.3 

35.3 

38.2

16.6 

10.6 

11.1

68.1

37.4
34.3
-3.7

106.8
25.6

61.6

19.6

21.4
3.6

14.9

2.8

46.6

8.3

26.1

12.2

31.1

9.4

14.6

7.0

6.6
-7.3

15.1
-1.3

-9.6

11.7

-10.4

2.3

-1.5

7.7

2.5

1.6

4.4
-4.5

10.3

-1.4

-47.9
-15.6
-32.3

-124.3
-61.0
-63.3

-42.0
-21.6
-20.4

-31.6
-10.7

-20.9

-26.4
-7.9

-18.6

-16.5

-5.8

-10.7

-6.7 
-5.5 
-1.2 

-4.1 
-.1 
-4.0 

-5.7

-.2

-5.5

Official  capital

1. Changes  in  foreign official  reserve

assets  in U.S.  (+ - increase)

a. G-10  countries
b. OPEC countries
c. All  other countries

2. Changes  in U.S. official  reserve
assets  (+ - decrease)

Private  capital
Banks

3. Change  in net  foreign positions of

banking offices in  the  U.S.

Securities

3

4. Foreign net purchases of
U.S.  securities  (+)
a. Treasury securities
b  Corporate and other bonds
c. Corporate stocks

4

5. U.S. net purchases  (-) of

foreign securities

a. Bonds
b.  Stocks

Other  flows  (quarterly data,  s.a.)

6.  U.S. direct investment  (-) abroad
7. Foreign direct  investment in U.S.
8.  Other  (+ =  inflow)

6

-41.0
9.9

18.1

-57.9
21.4
53.9

-6.3 

-22.7

-20.4

3.0 

8.1

8.1

22.0 

-1.5

-11.0

n.a. 
n.a.  n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a.  n.a. 
n.a.  n.a.  n.a. 

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

U.S.  current  account  balance  (s.a.)

-67.9  -103.9

-27.9  -30.6  -31.9 

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.  n.a.

Statistical discrepancy  (s.a.)

-17.1 

21.1

-8.4 

4.0 

4.7 

n.a.

n.a.

n.a. 

n.a.

1. The sum  of official  capital,  private
discrepancy is  zero.  Details  may not sum

capital,  the current  account balance, and the statistical
to totals  becuse  of  rounding.

2. Changes in  dollar-denominated positions of  all  depository  institutions and bank  holding companies
plus  certain transactions  between broker-dealers and unaffiliated foreigners  (particularly borrowing and
lending  under  repurchase  agreements). 
Includes  changes  in  custody  liabilities  other than  U.S.  Treasury
bills.

3. Includes  commissions on securities  transactions and therefore  does not match exactly the  data on

U.S. international  transactions  published by the  Department  of  Commerce.

4. Includes  Treasury bills.
5. Includes  U.S. government agency bonds.
6. Transactions  by  nonbanking concerns  and other banking  and official  transactions not shown elsewhere

plus  amounts resulting from adjustments made by the Department  of  Commerce  and revisions in  lines  1
through 5 since  publication of  the quarterly data in  the Survey of  Current  Business.

n.a. Not available. 

* Less  than  $50  million.

IV-8

Large  net  capital  inflows  through  banks  (including RPs  by

nonbank  securities  dealers)  continued  in  June  (line 3). 

During  the

second  quarter,  both U.S.  and  foreign-based  banks  relied  on  net

borrowings  from  their  own  offices  outside  the  United  States  as  an

important  source  of funds.  In  addition,  $16  billion  of  the  $38

billion  inflow was  accounted  for  by  swings  in  RP  transactions  of

nonbank  securities  dealers.  Moreover, the  Brazilian  debt

restructuring  in April  resulted  in  a shift  of  about  $5 billion  from

reported  bank  claims  to holdings  of  securities.

Private  foreign net  purchases  of U.S.  securities  (line  4) were

modest  in June  and  amounted to  only  $6.6  billion in  the  second

quarter  as  a whole.  Net  purchases  of U.S.  corporate  and  government

agency bonds  (line 4b)  were  very  strong,  particularly  in June,

reflecting  in  part  settlement  for  the  large  volume of  Eurobonds

issued by  U.S.  borrowers  in May.  In  contrast,  private  foreigners

sold  U.S.  Treasury  securities  net  (line 4a)  during the  quarter.

Large net  sales  of Treasury  securities  were  recorded  for  the  British

West  Indies  and  Bermuda.  (It appears  that  some  of  the  proceeds  from

these  sales  probably were  lent back  to  U.S.  nonbank  securities

dealers;  net  liabilities  of  U.S.  nonbank securities  dealers  to

nonbanks in  the  British West  Indies  and  Bermuda  increased by  $10.2

billion  in the  second  quarter.)  In  contrast,  Japanese  residents

were  recorded  as  having bought  over  $10  billion  in  U.S.  Treasury

securities  in  the  second  quarter.  In  addition, private  foreigners

reduced  their  holdings  of U.S.  corporate  stocks  (line 4c)  in  the

second  quarter,  as  stock  prices  remained  below the  highs  reached

earlier  in the  year.

U.S.  residents  continued  to  add to  their holdings  of  foreign

stocks  in  the  second  quarter  (line 5b),  but  increases  in  holdings of

foreign bonds  (line 5a)  were  far  more modest.  Net  purchases  of

IV-9

stocks  in  Japan accounted  for  about  40  percent  of  total  net

purchases  in the  second  quarter,  in  contrast to  more  than  50  percent

in  the  first  quarter.  Net  purchases  of  foreign  bonds  were  held  down

in  the  second  quarter,  as  they were  in  the  first  quarter,  by very

large  sales  to  the  United Kingdom  in  the  last  month  of  the  quarter.

Through  the  first  six months  of  1994,  U.S.  residents  have  sold  net

$23  billion  in  foreign bonds  to  the  United Kingdom.  In  contrast,

U.S.  residents  made  large  net  purchases  of  foreign  bonds from  the

rest  of  Europe  and  Brazil  (the latter  in  connection with Brazil's

debt  restructuring).

Net  shipments  of  U.S.  currency abroad  by  banks  reporting  to

the  FRBNY  picked  up  from  $5.1  billion in the  first  quarter  to  $8.2

billion  in  the  second  quarter.  Of  the  total  so  far  this year,  $8.2

billion  net  has  been  shipped  to  Russia.

BEA is  continuing its  efforts  to  estimate  changes  in  foreign

holdings  of U.S.  currency, but  no  data were  incorporated  in  the U.S.

International  Transactions Accounts  in  this June's  revisions.  BEA

did  revise  its  estimates  of  credit  extended by banks  outside  the

United  States  to  U.S. nonbanks.  As  with data  on  the  Eurodeposits  of

U.S.  nonbank  residents,  BEA is  now using data  from  the  BIS,  Federal

Reserve,  and  other central  banks  instead  of the  notoriously

inadequate  components  from the Treasury  International  Capital  (TIC)

reports.  (See lines  4 and  5 of  the  International  Banking Data

table.)

IV-10

INTERNATIONAL  BANKING  DATA  1/
(Billions  of  dollars)

1991 
Dec. 

1992 
Dec. 

1993 

1994

Sept. 

Dec. 

Mar. 

May 

June 

July

-35.8 

-71.6

-114.6 

-122.1 

-157.5 

-177.3 

-175.4 

-191.0

12.4

12.5 

4.2

-15.1 

-29.5 

-29.9 

-41.0

-48.3 

-88.6

-127.1 

-126.3 

-142.4 

-147.9 

-145.6 

-150.0

23.9

24.8

21.4 

21.8

21.4 

22.4 

22.2 

22.4

n.a.

n.a.

95.9 

90.9

88.6 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a.

102.9

90.0

77.0 

77.8

75.1 

72.1 

73.6 

79.3

1. Net claims  of  U.S.
banking  offices
(excluding IBFs)
on own  foreign
offices  and  IBFS
a. U.S.-chartered
banks
b. Foreign-

chartered
banks

2. Credit extended to

U.S.  nonbank
residents
a. By foreign

branches of
U.S.  banks

b. By Caribbean

offices  of

foreign-chartered
banks

3. Eurodollar holdings
of  U.S. nonbank
residents

a. At all U.S.-chartered
banks  and  foreign-
chartered banks  in
Canada  and the

United Kingdom

b. At the  Caribbean

n.a.

n.a.

82.4 

79.2

84.2 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a.

offices  of
foreign-chartered
banks

MEMO:  Data as  recorded in the
4. Credit extended to

U.S.  nonbank
residents

U.S.  international transactions accounts
206

195 

201 

183 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a.

5.  Eurodeposits  of  U.S.

271 

255

252 

253

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a.

nonbank residents

1. Data on  lines  1 through 3 are  from Federal Reserve sources  and  sometimes differ  in timing  from the

banking data  incorporated in  the U.S.  international transactions  accounts.

Lines  la,  lb,  and 2a are  averages of  daily data  reported on the FR 2950  and FR 2951.
Lines  2b and  3b are end-of-period data reported quarterly on the FFIEC 002s.
Line 3a  is an average of  daily data  (FR 2050)  supplemented by the FR 2502  and end of  quarter  data supplied

by the Bank of  Canada and the Bank of  England.  There is  a break in  the series  in April 1994.

Lines  4 and 5 are end-of-period data estimated by BEA on the basis  of data provided by the BIS, the Bank

of  England, and the FR  2502 and FFIEC  002s.  It includes  some foreign-currency denominated deposits  and
loans.  Source:  SCB

Foreign  Exchange Markets

IV-11

The  weighted-average foreign  exchange value  of  the  dollar  has

shown  little  net  change  on balance  since  the  July 5 FOMC meeting.

Over  this  period,  the  dollar has  depreciated  about  1-1/2  percent

against  the  mark and  risen  about  1 percent  relative  to  the yen.  The

dollar  declined  in  early July,  apparently  reflecting market

perceptions that  U.S.  officials  were not  concerned  over  the  dollar's

value,  or  perhaps  even were willing  to  look favorably  on  dollar

depreciation as  a way  of  creating  pressure  in  trade  negotiations

with  Japan.  However,  the  dollar  recovered  these loses  later  in  the

month  following  statements  of  concern  over  the  dollar by  Chairman

Greenspan and  Treasury  officials.  On  July  20,  Chairman  Greenspan  in

his  Humphrey-Hawkins  testimony indicated  that  the weakness  of  the

dollar was  a concern  and had  recently been  a focus  of Federal

Reserve  policy.  The  next  day  Treasury Under  Secretary  Summers

stated  that  the  Administration wanted  the  dollar  to  strengthen  in

value  and  that  a dollar  decline  had  potentially  adverse

consequences.  The  July 31  announcement that  the  Unites States  was

starting trade  sanctions  proceedings  against  Japan  over

discriminatory government  procurement practices  for

telecommunications and  medical  equipment caused  only  a temporary

decline  of the  dollar  against  the  yen.

Since  the  July  FOMC  meeting, the  weighted-average of  short-term

interest  rates  in the  major  industrial  countries  has  risen about  15

basis  points while  U.S.  short-term  rates  have  declined  5 basis

points.  The  largest  individual  change has  been  in  Italy, where

short-term rates  have  risen  130  basis  points.  Most  of  this  rise

took  place  after  the  Bank of  Italy's  August  11  announcement  of  50

basis  point  increases  in  its  official  lending  rates  in an  attempt  to

provide  support  for  the  lira.  In  Canada,  the  three-month  rate  has

IV-12

declined  by  75  basis  points  in  response  to  an  easing  of  pressure  on

the  Canadian  dollar,  apparently  reflecting  some  lessening  market

concerns  over  the  outcome  of  the  upcoming  Quebec  provincial

elections.  Since  reaching  a peak  in  late  June,  Canadian  short-term

interest  rates  have  declined  about  100  basis  points,  reversing  about

one-third of  their  rise  of  earlier  in  the  year.  Short-term rates  in

the  United  Kingdom have  risen  50  basis  points  over  the  past  month.

Indications  of  strength in  the U.K.  economy  seem to  have convinced

market  participants  that  the  next  interest  rate  adjustment by  the

Bank  of  England is  likely to  be  an  increase.  Japanese  short-term

rates  have  edged  up  about  20  basis  points  over the  past month,

apparently  reflecting a growing  perception  that  the  Bank  of Japan  is

likely  soon  to  start  nudging  short-term interest  rates  higher as  the

Japanese economy  turns  around.

Short-term interest  rates  in Germany  have  shown almost  no  net

change  since  the  July FOMC meeting.  On  July  21,  the  Bundesbank

Council,  at  its  last meeting before  its  August  recess,  decided  to

keep  its  discount  and  Lombard  rates  unchanged  and  indicated  that  for

the following four  weeks  the  repo  transactions  through which the

Bundesbank provides  liquidity  to  the  German money  market would  be

conducted  at  a fixed  rate  of  4.85  percent.  In the  weeks  leading up

to  this  announcement,  the  repo  rate had  been  reduced  in

progressively  smaller  increments  to  4.88  percent.

The weighted-average of  long-term  interest  rates  in  the  foreign

industrial  countries has  increased  about  20  basis  points  since  the

July  FOMC meeting,  while  U.S.  long-term  rates  has been  about

unchanged  on  balance  over  this  period.  The  long-term  rate in

Germany has  risen about  25  basis  points  on  balance,  and  long-term

IV-13

WEIGHTED  AVERAGE  EXCHANGE  VALUE  OF THE  DOLLAR

March  1973  =  100

May 

June 

July 

August

INTEREST RATES  IN THE MAJOR  INDUSTRIAL  COUNTRIES

Three-month  Rates
August 12 

July 5 

Change

July 5 

10-year Bond Yields
August 12 

Change

Germany
Japan
United  Kingdom
Canada
France
Italy

Weighted-average

foreign

United States 

4.90
2.09
5.13
6.60
5.50
8.38

4.77

4.80

4.90
2.29
5.63
5.85
5.56
9.69

0.00
0.20
0.50
-0.75
0.06
1.31

4.94

0.17

4.75 

-0.05 

7.04
4.33
8.72
9.29
7.67
10.88

7.35

7.31

727
4.57
8.72
9.13
7.87
11.64

7.56

7.31 

023
024
0.00
-0.16
020
0.76

021

0.00

IV-14

rates  in  other  European  countries  have  also  generally moved  higher.

Nearly  all  of  the  increases  in European  long-term  rates  came  in  the

wake  of  the August  11  announcements  by  the  Swedish  and  Italian

central  banks  of  increases  in their  official  lending  rates.

Although these  moves  appeared  to  have  come  in  response  to

exclusively  internal  developments  unique to  Italy and  Sweden,  they

appear  to  have  reinforced market perceptions  that  the  next  short-

term interest  rate moves  in  a number  of  other European  are  also

likely  to  be in  an  upward direction,  and  touched  off  a sharp  rise  in

long-term  rates  throughout  Europe.  In  Japan,  the  long-term  rate  has

risen by  about  25  basis  points  over  the  past month,  apparently

reflecting  market perceptions  that  the Japanese  economy  is  starting

to  show  signs  of  reviving,  as  well  as  concerns  over  the  possible

impact  on  future interest  rates  of  the  widening  Japanese  budget

deficit.

The Desk has  not

intervened  over  this  period.

Developments  in  Foreign  Industrial  Countries

Monthly indicators  suggest  that  recovery  continued  in  the

second  quarter  in  the  major  foreign  industrial  countries.  The

moderate  recovery in  continental  Europe that  began  late  last  year

appears  to  have firmed, while  growth continued  at  a healthy pace  in

the United Kingdom and  Canada.  In  Japan,  where  signs  of  established

recovery  still  are tentative,  economic  activity  softened  somewhat

from the  strong  expansion  registered  in  the  first  quarter,  but

growth,  albeit  on  a weaker  pace,  continued.

In  the  United Kingdom  and  Canada,  unemployment  rates  in  the

second  quarter fell  from  rates  registered  in the  first quarter.

IV-15

Unemployment  in  western  Germany and  France  may have  peaked  in  the

second  quarter  as  rates  in June  edged  down  from May.  Nevertheless.

the  unemployment  rate  in every  foreign  G-7  country  remains  high  by

historical  standards.

Consumer  price  inflation remains  subdued,  especially  in  Canada

and  Japan where  excise  tax  cuts  and  yen  appreciation  respectively

have  lowered  year-on-year inflation  rates  to  zero.  However,  input

prices  in  the  United  Kingdom have  picked  up  in  recent  months.

Individual Country Notes.  In  Japan, second-quarter  data  suggest

that  GDP  growth likely  slowed  from  the  nearly 4 percent  (SAAR) pace

registered  in  the  first  quarter.  Industrial production  and  housing

starts  moved up  moderately  in  the  April-June  period,  and  the  index

of  leading  indicators  remained well  above the  boom-bust  demarcation

line  of  50.  Machinery  orders  in  May  and  June  regained  part  of  the

sharp drop-off  registered  in  April.  In  contrast,  new car

registrations  declined  sharply  in  the  second  quarter,  despite  the

pickup  in  June,  and  the  most  recent  measures  of  labor  market

tightness  -- particularly the  job  offers-to-applicants  ratio  --

showed  further  deterioration.

JAPANESE  ECONOMIC  INDICATORS
(percent change  from  previous  period  except where  noted,  SA)

Industrial  Production 
Machinery Orders 
New Car  Registrations 

Job  Offers  Ratio* 
Index Leading  Ind.* 
Business  Sentiment** 

1993 

Q4 
Q3 
0.1  -3.7 
0.4  -0.7 
1.6  -3.3 

1994
Apr. 

Q2 
Q1 
0.9  -1.9 
1.9 
6.9  -16.7  -23.1 
8.5  -7.5  -12.3 

0.71  0.66 

42.9  35.8 

0.66  0.64  0.66 

64.9 

n.a.  72.7 

-51 

-56 

-56 

-50 

-

May 
-1.2 
1.7 
-4.6 

0.64 

60.0 

Jun.
2.0
8.6
7.4

0.63
n.a.

*  Level  of indicator.
** Percent  of  manufacturing  firms having  a favorable view  of

business  conditions  minus  those with an unfavorable  outlook.

On  July  31,  the  United  States  identified  Japanese government

procurement  practices  for  telecommunications  and  medical  equipment

IV-16

as  discriminatory against  imports,  giving Japan  60  days  to  take

corrective  steps  or  face  the  risk of  higher  sanctions  on  some

exports  to  the  United  States.  This  development  added  temporarily  to

downward  pressure  on the  dollar against  the  yen,  exacerbating

concerns  that  the  rising  yen may  stifle  Japan's  nascent  recovery.

Notwithstanding the  roughly  10  percent  appreciation  of  the  yen

against  the  dollar  since  the beginning  of  the  year.  Japan's  trade

surplus  totalled  $126.5  billion  (SAAR) in  the  first seven  months  of

1994.  up  from  the  $119.6  billion  surplus  registered  in  all  of  1993.

This  increase  largely  reflects movements  in  dollar  prices  of

Japanese  exports  and  imports,  stemming in  part  from the  rise  in  the

yen.  Measures  of  the constant-dollar  value  of Japan's  trade,  based

on wholesale  export  and  import  price  indices,  indicate  that  the real

surplus  has  declined  thus  far in  1994  from its  1993  average.

In  western Germany,  available  data  suggest  that  recovery  likely

strengthened  further  in the  second  quarter.  Industrial  production

and  manufacturing  orders  posted moderate  gains,  and  the  rate of

capacity utilization  exceeded  80  percent  for  the  first  time  since

the  fourth  quarter  of  1992.  However,  retail  sales  in  the  second

quarter were  down  3.3  percent  relative  to  the  first  quarter.  In

eastern Germany,  industrial  production  (NSA) has  continued  to  show

strong  gains,  advancing  19.2  percent  during the  year ending  in  May.

WESTERN  GERMAN ECONOMIC  INDICATORS
(percent change  from  previous  period  except  where  noted,  SA)

Industrial  Production 
Manufacturing  Orders 
Capacity Utilization 
Unemployment Rate  (%) 

1993 

Q4 
Q3 
0.7  -0.4 
1.9  -1.1 
78.2  78.1 
9.0 

8.5 

Q1  Q2 
0.0 
2.6 

1994
May 
2.4  -0.1 
3.6  -0.1 

Jun. 
1.0 
2.2 

Jul.
n.a.
n.a.

79.4  81.5

9.2 

9.3 

9.3 

9.3 

9.2

Production Plans* 

-15.0  -8.0 

3.3 

7.7 

8.0 

9.0 

n.a.

* Percent  of manufacturing  firms  planning to  increase  production  in
the  next  three  months  minus  those  planning to  decrease  production.

IV-17

Growth of  the  targeted  monetary  aggregate  M3  has moderated

since  the  early  months  of  this  year  but  remains high.  In  June,

German  M3  increased  11.4  percent  (SAAR)  relative  to  the  fourth

quarter  of  1993,  down from  13.4  percent  in  May.  It  appears  unlikely

that  M3  will  fall  within its  official  target  range  of  4 to  6 percent

this  year.  In  its  mid-year  review on July  21,  the  Bundesbank

Council  reaffirmed  this  year's  target  range  for M3  growth.

First-quarter  GDP  growth  in France  recently was  revised  upward

to  2.8  percent  (SAAR) from an  initial  estimate  of  2 percent.  This

upward  revision was  largely  due  to  an  increase  in the  contribution

from inventories  and  a smaller  negative  contribution from business

fixed  investment.

FRENCH REAL  GDP
(percent change from previous  period,  SAAR)

GDP 

1992 
Q4/Q4 
0.6 

1993 
Q4/Q4 
-0.5 

1993 

Q3 
1.2 

Q4 
0.0 

1994
Q1
2.8

Total  Domestic  Demand 
Net  Exports  (contribution) 

-0.3 
0.8 

-2.0 
1.5 

-2.0 
2.5 

-1.6 

6.8
1.1  -3.4

Monthly indicators  suggest that  the  French recovery  continued

in  the  second  quarter.  Industrial production  rose  in  April and  May

due  to  stronger manufacturing output.  The  increase  in May was  small

relative  to  April  due  to  unseasonably cold weather  in April  that

contributed to  a temporary  rise  in  energy output.  Second-quarter

consumption  appears  to  have  been quite  strong  as  consumption of

manufactured  products  rose  sharply.  Survey data  for June  show that

business  confidence and  domestic  and  foreign  orders  continued  to

improve.  Employment  data  for  June  indicate  that  French unemployment

may have  peaked  in May--somewhat  earlier  than  expected.

FRENCH ECONOMIC  INDICATORS
(percent change from  previous  period except where  noted,  SA)

IV-18

Industrial  Production 
Consumption  of
Manufactured  Products 
Unemployment Rate  (%) 

1993 
Q3  Q4 
0.9  -0.5 

Q1 
0.8 

1994
Q2  Apr. 
n.a.  2.3 

May 
0.3 

Jun.
n.a.

1.9  -1.5 
11.9  12.3 

0.6 

0.2
12.5  12.6  12.6  12.7  12.6

1.4  1.8  -1.1 

* Roughly  1/3  of  total  real  consumption

In the  United  Kingdom,  preliminary data  show that  the  GDP

growth  rate  rose  in  the  second  quarter  despite  large tax  increases

that  took  effect  at  the  beginning  of April.  Although  oil  production

continued  to  boost  growth,  non-oil  output  also  grew  strongly  and  now

UNITED KINGDOM REAL  GDP
(percent change  from previous  period,  SAAR)

GDP 
Non-oil  GDP 

* preliminary

1992 
Q4/Q4 
0.3 
0.2 

1993 
Q4/Q4 
2.6 
2.2 

1993 

1994

Q3 Q4 
3.8 
2.9 

Q1 
3.0 
2.4 

Q2
2.7 
2.0 

3.6*
3.2

UNITED KINGDOM ECONOMIC  INDICATORS
(percent change  from  previous  period  except  where  noted,  SA)

Industrial  Production
Retail  Sales
Average  Earnings

1993

1.3 
1.0 
3.3 

1.4
0.8
3.1

Q1
0.9
1.1
3.8

1994

0.4
2.0 
0.0
1.0 
n.a.  3.8

Jun.
0.2
0.3
n.a.

Jul.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

Production Plans*  (%)
Consumer  Confidence**
Unemployment Rate  (%)

12.0
(%) -4.7

10.4

9.7
12.0
10.0

20.7
-7.7
9.8

20.3
-14.0
9.4

23.0
-10.0
9.4

22.0
-10.0

9.4

13.0
-6.0
n.a.

Input  Prices  (NSA)***
RPI  ex.  MIP  (NSA)****

5.4  -0.7  -3.0 
2.7 
2.7 
3.1 

0.6 
2.4 

0.9 
2.5 

2.2 
2.4 

2.9
n.a.

* 

Percent  of manufacturing  firms  planning  to  increase  production
in  the next  four  months minus  those  that  plan  to  decrease
production.  NSA.

**  Percent  of  individuals who  expect  the  general  economic  situation

to  improve  minus  those who  expect  it  to  worsen.  NSA.
***  Producers'  input  prices,  percent  change  from  year  earlier.
***  Retail  prices  excluding  mortgage interest  payment,  percent

change  from year  earlier.

IV-19

exceeds  its  previous  peak  in  the  second  quarter  of  1990.  Underlying

inflation continues  to  remain  subdued,  and  inflation  in  average

earnings  has  stabilized.  However,  input  prices  have  picked  up  in

recent  months.

In  Italy,  growth in  the  first  quarter  slowed  considerably from

the  strong  pace  registered  in the  fourth  quarter  of  1993.  Although

consumption  and  fixed  investment  rose  1.4  percent  (SAAR) and  7

percent  respectively,  total  domestic  demand  fell  as  government

spending  declined  and  inventories  continued  to  run  off.  For  the

eighth  consecutive  quarter,  net  exports  made  a positive contribution

to  growth.

GDP 

ITALIAN  REAL GDP
(percent change  from previous  period,  SAAR)

1992 
Q4/Q4 
-0.6 

1993 
Q4/Q4 
0.3 

1993 

Q3 
-2.5 

Q4 
3.8 

1994
Q1
0.3

Total  Domestic  Demand 
Net  Exports  (contribution) 

-2.2 
1.7 

-3.4 
3.8 

-4.8 
2.3 

3.3  -1.6
1.9
0.6 

Available  indicators  suggest that  the  recovery may  have  gained

momentum in  the  second  quarter.  Industrial  production  (NSA) posted

a strong gain  on a year-on-year basis,  and  capacity  utilization

moved up.  Consumer  confidence  soared  to  levels  not  reached  since  the

September  1992  ERM crisis,  and although  it  softened  as  the  quarter

progressed,  business  sentiment  remained  strong.  Car  sales were  up

from levels  registered one  year  ago,  and  machine  tool  orders

rebounded  sharply.  On the negative  side,  the  unemployment  rate  rose

further.

In an  attempt  to  prop  up  the  embattled  lira, which  recently

moved below 1000  LIT/DM  as  the  stability of the  Berlusconi

government  appeared more  precarious,  the  Bank  of  Italy  on  August  11

IV-20

surprised  financial markets  by  raising  the  discount  rate  1/2

percentage point  to  7-1/2  percent.

ITALIAN ECONOMIC  INDICATORS  (NSA)

Industrial Production* 
Capacity  Utilization  (%)  73.7  74.4  74.5  76.0  -- 
10.3  11.3  11.3  11.6  -- 
Unemployment Rate  (%) 

-

-

Q3 
-2.7 

Q4 
0.1 

Q1 
2.6 

Q2  Apr. May 
0.2 
6.1 
9.2 

Jun.
8.7

1993 

1994

Consumer  Confidence 
Business  Sentiment**  (%)  -3 

98.5  96.3  100.6  112.8  108.4  112.6  117.3

4 

19 

17 

25 

17 

8

*  Percent  change  from year  earlier  level.
** Percent  of  manufacturing firms  having  a favorable  view  of  business

conditions  minus  those with an  unfavorable  outlook.

Preliminary data for  Canada indicate  that  economic  activity

continued  to  expand  at  a robust  pace  in  the  second  quarter.

Strength  in  manufacturing industries  boosted  industrial  production

in April  and  May,  and  the  Index  of  Business  Confidence  reached  its

highest  level  in  15  years.  Employment  gains  remained  strong through

July.  Consumer  confidence  slipped,  however,  as  consumers  expressed

increased  caution  about  spending  plans  in  light  of  recent  steep

interest  rate  increases.  Consumer-price  inflation  remains  subdued.

Excluding  the  effects  of  recent  excise tax  cuts,  inflation in  the

second  quarter  averaged  1.4  percent  (year-on-year).

IV-21

CANADIAN  ECONOMIC  INDICATORS
(percent change  from  previous  period  except  where  noted,  SA)

1993 

1994

Industrial  Production 
Retail  Sales 
Consumer Attitudes 
-
Business  Confidence* 
Employment 
0.5
Unemployment Rate  (%)  11.4  11.1  11.0  10.7  11.0  10.7  10.3  10.2
Consumer  Prices** 

Apr. 
Q1  Q2 
0.5  n.a. 
1.3 
3.2  n.a.  -1.7 
4.5  -1.3 
8.8  12.3 
0.4  0.8 

Q3 
Q3 
1.0  1.2 
1.3  1.0 
-0.2  10.6 
-7.7  10.0 
0.2  0.3 

May 
0.7 
1.0 
--
-- 
0.5 

Jun.  Jul.
n.a.  n.a.
n.a.  n.a.

-- 
-- 
0.0 

-- 
0.1 

1.7  1.8 

0.2  -0.2 

0.6  0.0 

0.0 

n.a.

*  NSA.

* Percent  change  from year  earlier.

EXTERNAL  BALANCES
(Billions of  U.S.  dollars,  seasonally  adjusted)

Japan:  trade 

current  accnt 

1993 
Q4 
30.5 
30.6 

-

1994

Q2 
Q1 
31.3  30.9  11.6 
33.8  34.2  12.5 

Apr. 

May  Jun. 

8.5 
10.0 

10.7 
11.8 

Jul.
11.6

n.a.

Germany:  trade* 
current  accnt* 

14.4 
-3.4 

10.2 
-5.1 

n.a.  3.9 
n.a.  -1.0 

3.0 
-3.7 

n.a. 
n.a. 

n.a.
n.a.

France:  trade 
current  accnt 

U.K.:  trade 

current  accnt 

Italy:  trade 

current  accnt* 

Canada:  trade 
current  accnt 

5.5 
n.a. 

-5.0 
-2.7 

6.2 
6.4 

1.8 
-6.1 

2.8 
n.a.  n.a. 

n.a.  1.5 

-

1.3 

n.a. 
-- 

n.a.
-

-4.4 
-0.8 

n.a.  -1.1 
n.a. 

-- 

-1.6 
-- 

n.a. 
-

n.a.

6.9 
1.3 

n.a.  2.0 
1.4 
7.1 

2.7 
1.6 

n.a. 
4.2 

n.a.
n.a.

1.7 
-5.3 

n.a.  0.8 
n.a. 

-- 

-0.2 
-- 

n.a. 

n.a.

-

*  Not  seasonally  adjusted.
--  Data not  available on  a  monthly basis.

IV-22

Chart I

August 12.  1994

Industrial Production for Major  Foreign  Countries
Ratio  Scale, Seasonally Adjusted,  Monthly

1987=100

1987=100

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

130  -

France

-

United  Kingdom

120

110

100

\ 

I 

I 

!

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

I 

1991 

I 

1992 

I 

1993 

I

1994

1990 

Canada

130 

--

Italy

120

110

100

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

130

120

110

100

130

120

110

100

IV-23

Chart 2

August  12,  1994

Consumer  Price Inflation for Major  Foreign  Countries
Yearly  Percent Change

Japan

6 

-

W.  Germany

-

6

I 

I 

I 

L

I 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

1990 

1991 

1 

1 
1992 

I

1993 

1994

France

91

6

1 

I 

I 

I

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

*Excluding mortgage  interest payments.

Italy

9  F-

6

3

I 

I

I

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

Economic  Situation  in Other  Countries

IV-24

The  Mexican economy has  experienced  signs  of  economic  recovery,

as  export  performance  has  been  stimulated  by  NAFTA  as  well  as  a more

competitive  real  exchange  rate.  Uncertainty about  the  August  21

presidential  election contributed  to  strong  pressure on  the  peso  in

early July, but  this  pressure  abated  and  the  exchange  rate

subsequently  appreciated.  In  Venezuela, recently  imposed  foreign

exchange  and  price  controls  have caused  shortages  of  imported  raw

materials  and  a sharp  contraction  in  industrial  output  and  exports.

Brazil  has  implemented  a new stabilization  program  that  pegs  its

currency  to  the  U.S.  dollar,  and  monthly inflation  fell  from  50

percent  in  June  to  7.8  percent  in  July.  In  Argentina, the

unemployment  rate  has  reached  a record  high  of  10.8  percent  despite

strong  growth  in  industrial  production and  exports.

In  China,  output  growth  and  inflation  slowed  slightly  in  the

first half  of  1994,  and  the  trade  deficit  declined  sharply.

Taiwan's  industrial  output  in  June  was up  9.8  percent  (year/year),

while Korea's  second-quarter  industrial  production was  up  10  percent

(year/year).  In  Russia,  inflation  has  slowed  in  recent  months, but

the  fiscal  outlook has  deteriorated  due  to  an  increase  in  tax

evasion  and  an unexpectedly steep  decline  in  industrial  production.

Individual  country  notes.  In  Mexico,  new data  on  GDP  growth  is

expected  to  be  released  prior  to  the  August  21  presidential  and

congressional  elections.  First-quarter  real  GDP  growth is  likely to

be  revised  upward  to  nearly  1 percent  (year/year),  compared with  the

previous  estimate  of  0.5  percent.  Recent  sectoral  data  suggests

that  GDP  growth  may have  risen further  in the  second  quarter.

Signs  of  economic  recovery have  been  visible  in  the  growth  of

imports  (19.3  percent  higher in  January-May  1994  than  in  the  same

period  of  1993)  and  of  exports  of manufactured goods  (25  percent

IV-25

higher).  Total  exports  during  January-May were  up  17.3  percent  from

the  same  period  in  1993,  despite  a  14  percent  drop  in the  value  of

petroleum  exports.  The  cumulative  trade  deficit  reached  $7.3

billion,  up  $1.5  billion  from the  same  period  a year

earlier.Automobile  companies  are  responsible  for  a  substantial  share

of  increased trade,  as  production lines  at  Mexican  and  U.S.

facilities  are  restructured  under the  impetus  of  NAFTA.  Export

performance  in  recent months  has  also  been  stimulated  by U.S.

economic  expansion  and  a more  competitive  real  exchange  rate.  The

peso  depreciated by nearly  9 percent  against  the  dollar  from mid-

February  through  July, while  consumer  price  inflation  remained

steady at  about  0.5  percent  per  month  over  this  period.  At  the  end

of  July,  the  CPI was  6.8  percent  higher  than  a year  earlier.

In  early July,  uncertainty about  the  approaching  presidential

election  contributed to  strong  pressure  against  the  peso,  but  this

pressure  abated  and  the  exchange  rate  subsequently  appreciated.

As  shown  in  the  following  chart  on  Mexican  financial  markets,  the

peso/dollar exchange  rate  moved away  from the  "lower"  limit  of  its

fluctuation band,  and  was  0.6  percent  above  the  "lower" limit  on

August  11.  The  Mexico  City  stock  market  index  on August  11  was  33

percent  above  the  trough  recorded  in April,  but  remained  10  percent

below  last  February's  all-time high.  The  rate  on  one-month peso-

denominated Treasury bills  at  the  August  10  auction declined  further

to  15.2  percent, but  remained well  above  its  mid-February  low  of

8.8  percent.

In  Venezuela, the  Caldera  administration's  adoption of foreign

exchange  and  price  controls  has  disrupted  trade  and  economic

activity.  These  controls were  imposed by  emergency  decree  on  June

27  in  response  to  rapidly  deteriorating  inflation and  international

reserves.  Foreign  exchange markets  were  closed  for  two weeks  until

IV-26

RECENT  MEXICAN  FINANCIAL  INDICATORS

EXCHANGE  VALUE  OF THE  MEXICAN  PESO

FDaily

Peso/$

Jan 

Feb 

Mar 

Apr 

May 

June 

July 

Aug

1-MONTH  INTEREST  RATE  IN  MEXICO 
eekPercent

Weekly 

A

Percen

Jan 

Feb

June

July 

Aug

MEXICAN  STOCK  INDEX

January 3, 1994 - 100

Jan 

Feb

Mar 

Apr

June

IV-27

detailed  regulations  could  be  issued,  and  trading  resumed  in mid-

July  at  a single  official  rate  of  170  bolivars  per  dollar,  a

revaluation of  15  percent  from the  previous  free  market  rate.

Although foreign  exchange  purchases  for  foreign travel  and  debt

service  were  authorized by  the new Exchange  Control  Board,  importers

did  not  receive  approval  for  any  foreign  exchange  purchases  until

July  28.

Shortages  of  imported  raw materials  reportedly forced

widespread  plant  shutdowns  and  accelerated  vacations  during  July,

causing  a substantial  drop  in industrial  production.  Non-oil

exports  fell  an  estimated  50  percent  in July,  after  falling  20

percent  the  previous  month.  The flow of  imports  presumably  slowed

to  a trickle  in  July,  after  a 30  percent  drop  in  imports  over  the

previous  six months  due  to weak  economic  activity.  Foreign  exchange

reserves  increased by about  $900  million during July  to  an  estimated

$9.8  billion.  The  authorities have  indicated that  the central  bank

will  sell  importers  about  $300  million  per  month  in foreign

exchange,  about  half the  amount  required  to  finance  imports  at

January-June  levels.  Despite  the  evident  shortfall  in  the  supply  of

dollars,  the  government has  apparently succeeded  thus  far  in

suppressing a black market  inside Venezuela  by announcing heavy

fines  and  prison sentences  for  foreign exchange  violations.

However,  a small  parallel  market has  developed  across  the  border  in

Colombia, with bolivars  trading at  a discount  of  about  25  percent

below the  official  exchange  rate.

Price  controls  have been  imposed  on  over  100  basic  goods  and

services,  including  price  rollbacks  of  10  to  20  percent  on  some

products.  These controls  probably contributed to  the drop  in

industrial  output,  with only  partial  success  in  restraining

inflation.  The  consumer  price  index rose  6.3  percent  in  July, down

IV-28

from  9 percent  inflation  in  June,  but  still  more  than  twice  the

inflation  rate  of  3.1  percent  a year  earlier.  Government  officials

blamed July's  inflation  on  raw materials  shortages.  However,  the

recent  shift  to  a highly  expansionary monetary  policy has  probably

contributed  to  the  upward  pressure  on prices.  In  mid-July,  the

central  bank cut  its  discount  rate  to  45  percent,  from 73  percent

a week  earlier.

In  late  June,  an  emergency  oversight  board was  established  with

very broad  authority  over  the  banking system.  The  oversight board

may  instruct  a bank to  deposit  funds  in  another  bank,  and  may

confiscate the  assets  of  any bank that  fails  to  comply with board

directives.  In  early August,  the  authorities  took  over  Banco de

Venezuela,  the  country's  second-largest bank  and  the tenth  bank to

be  taken over  this  year.

Brazil's  implementation of  a new stabilization  program  has

caused  a sharp  drop  in  the  inflation  rate.  Under  the  Plan Real,  a

new  currency called the  real  was  introduced  on  July  1, and  the

central  bank  is  committed  to maintaining  the value  of  the  currency

at  no  less  than  one  dollar  per  real.  Confidence  in  the  new  plan has

been strengthened  by  the  central  bank's  large  holdings  of

international  reserves,  which exceeded  $40  billion at  the  end  of

May.  In  fact,  tight  monetary policy  in  July  generated  upward

pressure  on  domestic interest  rates  and  contributed  to  an

appreciation  of  the  currency to  $1.10  per  real  on  August  11.

Consumer  prices  (in real  terms)  rose  by  7.8  percent  in  July,

compared with  June's  inflation  rate  of  50  percent  under  the old

currency.  However,  the long-term  sustainability of the  plan depends

on  the  extent  to which  Brazil  reduces  its  fiscal  deficit  and  avoids

the  need  for  inflationary financing.  The  impact  of  recent  fiscal

adjustments  remains  unclear, despite  optimistic  government  claims.

IV-29

Brazil's  unemployment  rate  was  5.5  percent  over  the  first  six

half  of  1994,  down  slightly  from  5.7  percent  a year  earlier.  The

cumulative  trade  surplus  for  January-June  was  $7 billion,  roughly

unchanged  from a year  earlier.

In  Argentina,  the  unemployment  rate  has  reached  a record  high

despite  strong growth  in  industrial  production and  exports.  In

May's  semi-annual  survey,  urban  unemployment jumped  to  10.8  percent,

up  from  6.6  percent  in  1992  and  9.9  percent  in  1993.  Meanwhile,

industrial  production  during January-May was  up  6.2  percent  from a

year  earlier.  Faced  with  relatively high labor  costs  and  the

elimination  of tariffs  on  imported  capital  goods,  the  manufacturing

sector  has  cut  back its  work force  and  invested  heavily  to  achieve

higher  labor  productivity and  improve  its  international  competitive-

ness.  Unemployment  has  also  risen due to  layoffs  by  privatized

utilities  and  by provincial  governments  with more  stringent  budget

requirements.  The Menem  administration has  responded  to  higher

unemployment by  establishing job  retraining, by  changing  regulations

to  stimulate  employment  in  the construction  sector,  and  by  pushing

legislation to  increase the  flexibility  of work  arrangements.

The January-May  trade  deficit  widened  to  $1.8  billion, from

$140  million  a year  earlier,  reflecting moderate export  growth and

soaring  capital  goods  imports.  In  early August, Argentina and

Brazil  reached  agreement on  the  structure  of  external tariffs  of  the

Mercosur  customs  union, which  is  scheduled  for  implementation on

January  1, 1995.

Consumer  prices  in  July were  3.6  percent  higher than  a year

earlier.  However,  recent  polls  reveal widespread  perceptions that

the  benefits  of  low inflation and  rapid  economic  growth  have  not

"trickled down"  to  the  average  working family.  In early August,

IV-30

a constitutional assembly  gave  final  approval  to  reforms  that  will

permit  President  Menem  to  run  for  a second  term,  but  growing  public

discontent  has  clouded  the  prospects  for  his  reelection  next  year.

In  China,  output  growth  and  inflation  slowed  slightly  in  the

first  half  of  1994,  while  the  trade  deficit  declined  sharply.

Output  grew 11.6  percent  (year/year),  down  from  13.7  percent  a year

earlier.  Urban consumer  inflation  in  June  slowed  to  23  percent

(year/year),  down  from  February's  peak of  26  percent.  China  ran a

trade  deficit  of  $820  million  over  the  first  six months  of  1994,

down  from  $2.7  billion  a year  earlier,  as  export  growth  of  30

percent  outpaced import  growth  of  20  percent.

Foreign  direct  investment  in  China  during the  first  half  of

1994  was  $14.7  billion,  up  55  percent  from the  same  period  of  1993.

Foreign  exchange  reserves  reached  $32  billion  in  June,  up  sharply

from  $21  billion at  the  beginning  of the  year.  The  rapid  increase

in  official  reserves  reflects  the  shrinking  trade deficit,  large

capital  inflows,  and  the  influence  of  the  unified  exchange  rate

system  established  in  January.  The new  system has  provided  Chinese

enterprises with  more  stable access  to  foreign  exchange  and  has

reduced  the  incentive  to  hide  export earnings  abroad.

In  a July report  to  Congress,  the  U.S.  Treasury concluded  again

that  China's  manipulation of  its  foreign  exchange  system prevents

effective  adjustment  of  the balance  of  payments.  The  U.S.  Treasury

particularly objected  to  the  exclusion  of  foreign-funded enterprises

from the  new interbank  foreign  exchange market.

Taiwan's  industrial  production in  June  was  9.8  percent  higher

than  a year  earlier;  for the  first half  of  1994,  industrial

production was up  6.9  percent.  The January-July trade  surplus  was

$3.1  billion,  down from  $4 billion  a year  earlier.  Exports  rose  4.2

percent,  and  imports  grew 6.7  percent.  Foreign  exchange  reserves

IV-31

topped  $90  billion at  the  end  of  June,  boosted  by the  appreciation

of  the  yen  and  deutschmark.

In  Korea,  second-quarter  industrial  production  rose  about  10

percent  (year/year),  with particularly  strong  growth  in  the

automotive  and  electronics  sectors.  Although  the  central  bank has

pursued  a less-accommodative monetary  policy since  mid-February,

consumer  price  inflation  rose to  6.9  percent  (year/year) in  June,  up

from 4.3  percent  a year earlier.  The  unexpected jump  in  inflation

prompted  a further  tightening of  liquidity, and  the  three-month  time

deposit  rate  rose  to  14.5  percent  on August  9, up  about  200  basis

points  since  early June.

Merchandise  imports  during the  first half  of  1994  rose  14.6

percent  from  a year earlier,  while  exports  grew  by  11.4  percent.

The  current  account  deficit  rose  sharply  to  $2.7  billion  over

January-April,  up  from  $1.2  billion  a year  earlier.

On  July  1, the  government  changed  its  regulations  to  allow

small-  and  medium-sized Korean enterprises  to  sell  convertible  bonds

directly  to  foreign  investors.  Overseas  borrowing  had  previously

been  limited  mainly to  firms  engaged  in  producing  technologically

sophisticated manufactured  goods.  To  promote  greater  international

portfolio  diversification, the  government also  liberalized

restrictions  on  foreign  stock  purchases  by  domestic  residents.

In  Russia,  official  statistics  indicate  that  real  GDP  fell  17

percent  during the  first  half of  1994  (year/year),  while  industrial

production was  26  percent below  its year-earlier  level.  The  sharp

contraction in  output  has  been  exacerbated by  rising  fuel  and  raw

materials  prices,  growing  inter-enterprise arrears,  and  reduced

government  purchases.  However,  these  official  statistics  probably

overstate  the  actual  decline  in  economic  activity, due  to  incomplete

coverage  of  the  private  sector.  Russia's  largest  private  investment

IV-32

fund,  the MMM corporation, collapsed  in  late  July,  but  no  immediate

macroeconomic  impact was  evident.

Inflation  has  slowed  in  recent  months;  consumer  prices

increased by  4.8  percent  in  June  and  by  5.1  percent  in July,

compared  with  last  year's  average  rate  of  over  20  percent  per  month.

The  ruble  has  depreciated  at  a steady  rate  of about  1 percent  a week

since  late  February.  On  August  11,  the  MICEX exchange  rate  was  2108

rubles  per  dollar.  The  Central  Bank of  Russia has  progressively

lowered  its  refinance  rate  from  17.5  percent  a month  in April  to

12.5  percent  a month  in  early August,  but  the  rate  remains

substantially  higher  than monthly  consumer  price  inflation.

A large  shortfall  in  revenue  contributed  to  the  fiscal  deficit

of  about  10  percent  of  GDP  during  January-June, well  above  this

year's  target  of  7.2  percent  of  GDP  specified in  the  Systemic

Transformation Facility  (STF) arrangement  with  the  IMF.  The  revenue

shortfall  reflects  the  unexpectedly  steep  decline  in  industrial

production,  growing  tax evasion,  and  incomplete  implementation  of

revenue  enhancement  measures  outlined  in the  STF.




