==== GREENBOOK | 1994-12-20_FOMC19941220meeting.txt ====

Meeting of  the  Federal  Open Market  Committee Meeting
December  20,  1994

A  meeting of  the  Federal  Open Market  Committee was held in

the offices  of  the  Board of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System in

Washington, D.C.,  on  Tuesday, December  20,  1994,  at  9:00  a.m.

PRESENT:

Mr.  Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr.  Blinder
Mr.  Broaddus
Mr.  Forrestal
Mr.  Jordan
Mr.  Kelley
Mr.  LaWare
Mr.  Lindsey
Mr.  Parry
Ms.  Phillips
Ms.  Yellen

Messrs.  Hoenig, Melzer, and Moskow and Ms.  Minehan,
Alternate Members  of  the Federal  Open Market
Committee

Messrs.  Boehne,  1McTeer,  and Stern,  Presidents

of  the  Federal  Reserve  Banks  of  Philadelphia,
Dallas,  and Minneapolis  respectively

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn,  Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne,  Assistant  Secretary
Gillum, Assistant  Secretary
Mattingly, General  Counsel
Patrikis,  Deputy General  Counsel
Prell,  Economist
Truman,  Economist

Messrs.  Beebe,  Goodfriend, Lindsey, Mishkin,

Promisel,  Siegman,  Simpson,  Sniderman,
Stockton,  and Ms.  Tschinkel,  Associate
Economists

Ms.  Lovett, Manager  for  Domestic Operations,  System

Open Market  Account

Mr.  Fisher, Manager  for  Foreign Operations,  System

Open Market  Account

1.  Left before discussion  of  the economic  situation.

Mr.  Ettin,  Deputy Director, Division  of  Research

and Statistics,  Board of  Governors

Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs,  Board of  Governors
Mr.  Slifman, Associate Director,  Division of

Research  and Statistics,  Board of Governors

Ms.  Low, Open Market  Secretariat  Assistant,

Division  of Monetary Affairs,  Board of
Governors

Messrs.  Davis,  Lang, Rolnick, and  Rosenblum, Senior

Vice Presidents,  Federal Reserve  Banks  of
Kansas  City, Philadelphia, Minneapolis,  and
Dallas  respectively

Messrs.  Gavin and  McNees, Vice Presidents,  Federal

Reserve  Banks  of  St.  Louis and Boston
respectively

Mr.  Kuttner, Assistant Vice President,  Federal

Reserve  Bank of  Chicago

Mr.  Hilton, Manager,  Open Market  Operations,

Federal  Reserve Bank  of  New York

Transcript  of  Federal Open  Market  Committee Meeting of
December 20,  1994

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Would  somebody like  to  move  approval  of

the minutes  for  the meeting on November  15?

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.  So  move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Without  objection.  I recognize

President Jordan  for  a motion.

MR.  JORDAN.  Thank you, Mr.  Chairman.  I'd  like  to  nominate

Mark Sniderman  to be  an  associate  economist  of  the  FOMC.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Would somebody  like  to  second  the

motion?

approved.

SPEAKER(?).  Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Unless  I hear an  objection,  it's

Peter Fisher has  a number  of  interesting  things  to  discuss

this  morning.  Peter.

MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  [Statement--See Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Questions  for  Peter?  If  not,  shall we

go  on  to  Joan Lovett?

MS. LOVETT.  Thank you, Mr.  Chairman.  [Statement--See

Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Questions  for Joan?  Governor  Phillips.

MS.  PHILLIPS.  You mentioned that  the markets were  thinner  at

the  year-end  than they  usually are.  Would you expand on  that?

MS.  LOVETT.  It  has  been a disappointing  year for  a  lot  of

people  in  the  financial  markets.  We have had  some  sense  since
Thanksgiving  that many people are  just  hanging on  in the  hope  of
getting  through December  31.  If  they have done well  or have managed
to  do  all  right,  they want  to  finish  the year  in  that  position.  If
they haven't  done well,  they don't want  to  add  to their  losses.  As  a
result,  there has  been  a general  tendency for people  to  try to  take
cover.  This  gives  us  a hint  as  to  why we have had  abrupt moves  when
securities have  come  into  the  market  in clumps,  because people don't
feel  they necessarily have  the wherewithal  to  take  them  on.  If  they
do buy them,  they have to  re-route  them right  away or hedge  them with
something  equivalent.

MS.  PHILLIPS.  Is  this  causing more discounting  of  the  Orange
County paper  than  you might  ordinarily expect  if  they had been selling
that paper at  another  time  of  year?

MS.  LOVETT.  I think  that  in  the  Orange County  case there

probably are  several  influences  at  work.  It  was  helpful  that people
eventually were able  to  get  a handle  on  just what  the  county has.  In

12/20/94

the  first  day or  so,  people couldn't  get  any information  from Orange
County  on  almost  anything,  and I  think  that  is  what  caused the  biggest
market backup.  Since  that  time,  the  markets  have come back in many
cases  to  where  they were prior to  the  break of  the  news  or maybe  just
5 or  10  basis points  past that,  even with some  of  the  securities being
liquidated.  So  I think the  initial  move  occurred because  of  the  lack
of  knowledge of  exactly what was  going on  and what was  going  to
happen.  By the  same  token, markets  are  in  an atmosphere where  there
is  an FOMC  meeting and people  view interest  rates  as being  on  an
upward  trend.  If  you  could have picked a  time  for Orange  County  to
sell,  maybe  this  would not  have been the  time  you would have picked.

MS.  PHILLIPS.  Thank  you.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Would  somebody  like  to move  to  ratify

the  domestic  transactions  of  the  Desk  since the  last meeting?

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.  So  move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Without  objection.  Let's now move  on  to

Messrs.  Prell  and  Truman.

MR. TRUMAN.  [Statement--See  Appendix.]

MR.  PRELL.  [Statement--See Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Questions  for  either  gentleman?

MR. PARRY.  Mike, you  talked about  the  inflation  forecast  and

indicated  that  you made,  in  effect,  an  intercept  adjustment  in  the
forecast  to  carry  forward  the  favorable  experience that  we  seem to
have  had  in 1994.  Would you  talk  further  about  why we  have had that
favorable  experience  and why  it  might continue?  We may be  seeing
actual  growth  in  excess  of  potential.  As we  get  closer  to  capacity
isn't  there a risk  that we will  have  seen  a delay  in  the  typical
Phillips  curve  relationship?  If  it  were  to  reassert  itself  in  1995,
might  inflation  turn  out  to  be  a fair  amount  higher  than you indicated
in  the  forecast?

MR. PRELL.  That  is  a  risk I hinted at  in my remarks  about
the  late  1980s  experience.  I think  the  key  here  is  to  look back at
why we projected  the  inflation  that we  did  for  1994.  In essence,  we
were  concerned at  the  beginning of  the year  that  the  pattern of
expectations we were  seeing,  the  very buoyant  attitudes  and  so  on,  and
the  rapid growth at  the  end  of  last  year  were going  to  give us  a
stronger  price  increase  this  year  than would have been dictated by  our
analysis  of  where levels  of  resource utilization were.  Looking  back
now, we  see  a pattern  that  seems  reasonably consistent with  our
fundamental view of  the  Phillips  curve  picture.  We  did not  get  down
to  our  point  estimate  of  the  NAIRU until  this  summer.  Under  the
circumstances,  some  further  deceleration was  not  implausible.  We also
think that  perhaps we  underestimated the  cost  effects  in  the  medical
care  area.  We have  had  tremendous deceleration of  the  cost  of  medical
benefits,  and  this has  helped  to  tamp down  the  rate  of  increase  in
compensation.  I think  that  has  been a  surprise  that was  not  built
into  our  forecast and now appears possibly  to  have been a broad
element  that was  helping to  bring down  the  inflation  rate  this year.
We don't  see  that  contributing as  much going  forward.  We  think  there

12/20/94

will  still be  some  deceleration, but  it  will probably  taper off  to
some  degree.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Jordan.

MR.  JORDAN.  Mike,  there have been  a couple  of  threads  in  the

discussion  about  1994:  the Greenbooks  in  the past,  this  one,  and
your  remarks  now.  On  one  side, we have had a  lot  more growth  in
output  and employment  this  year than we--or  anybody--had been
anticipating and much larger  increases  in  short-term interest  rates
than had been expected.  In your remarks,  you made  reference  to
questions  about  the  demand damping  effects  of higher  rates.  The other
side  is  the greater underlying  strength of  the  real  economy.  Which
has  been  the  larger  contributing factor:  that  there  is  something  else
going  on  that  has  created more  strength on  the  real  side  than we had
anticipated  or,  as  has been  conjectured  in  the press,  that  monetary
policy  is  less  potent?  To  which of  these would you  subscribe?

MR. PRELL.  I don't  think one  can  rule  out  the possibility

that  the  interest  sensitivity  of  the  economy in  the  short  run may be
less  than  it  was.  Certainly, we have  felt  all  along that,  without  the
disintermediation  effects  of  Reg Q  ceilings  that  we got  decades  ago,
there wasn't  going  to  be  quite  the  abrupt  swing  toward restraint  that
previously accompanied  increases  in short-term market  interest  rates.
But we  are  still  learning.  Financial markets continue  to  evolve.  It
is  conceivable  that  the  lag  structure  is  different.  I just  don't
think we have enough  evidence  to  make a  strong  statement in  that
regard.  Part  of  what  has  happened  this  year has  been a  surprise  in
the  growth of  European  economies,  in particular, that  has  helped to
buttress  export  demand.  On  the  domestic  side, while  we  cited  a risk
repeatedly through  the year  that  inventory  investment  could be
stronger  than we were anticipating because businesses might  become
concerned about  the  availability of  supplies,  as  things  turned out,
that  seemed  to  be  a much more  dynamic  feature  in  the  economy  than we
had  anticipated.  There  is  a cyclical  dynamic  to  this.  As  inventory
investment  and exports  proved strong,  that  raised  aggregate demand  and
that  in  turn reinforced the  desire  for  inventories.  As we  got  more
production  and more  income,  that  raised  consumption.  So  this  is  a
process  that  feeds  on  itself  up  to  a point.

Going  forward,  it  is  critical,  as  I noted, that  these  levels

of  inventory investment  are  unsustainable.  If  the  economy  is  going  to
get  back  to  a growth  rate of  no more  than  the  long-run potential  rate,
there has  to  be  a drop-off  at  some  point.  The  question  is  when  that
drop-off  in  inventory investment  will  occur.  We  are  also  banking on
there being a  significant  lagged  effect  of  the  interest rate  increases
that have  occurred.  It  is  still  early, as  has  been discussed
repeatedly here.  As  estimated even  in  our current models,  the  lags
are  long  enough  so  that  we would  only begin  to  get  significant effects
now and  in  the  early part  of  next  year.  We  are  also building  in
further rate  increases,  which will  have  their effect more  in  the
latter part  of  1995  and  into  1996,  but we  think  these rate  increases
may reinforce  the  effects  in  the  shorter  run, too,  through  increases
in adjustable  rate mortgages  and even  adjustments  in  the  stock market.
If  short  rates  rise  as  much as we  have  assumed,  it  will  be more  and
more difficult  for households  to  get  enthusiastic  about  taking  on what
appear  to  be  some  risks  in  the  stock  and bond markets when  they can
get  sizable  real  returns without  risk  in  the  short  run.

12/20/94

MR. JORDAN.  There are  a couple  of  things  that  follow  from
your remarks  in  looking into  the  year ahead and  contrasting it  with
1994.  When I started looking at your  Greenbook forecasts  for  1995  and
1996,  on  one  side  I welcomed  the  continued discipline  that  comes  from
the  concern about  inflation and  the  overriding  desire  to  contain  it  to
achieve  our  longer objectives.  On  the  other  side,  though,  I was
reminded  of  the  feeling that  I have  had in conversing with employees
in  Cleveland  in  the  last  couple  of  months;  they keep  telling me  that
the  unusually warm weather  that  we have had in  October, November, and
December  is  not  good because  it means we  are  going  to  have an
unusually cold January, February, and March.  There  is  this  vindictive
weather god out  there  that  catches  up with us.  What  is  it  about  the
process  you  go  through  in putting  together the  forecast  that says  that
favorable  surprises  in  output  and employment  in one  period must  be
matched with unfavorable  developments  in  a subsequent period  such that
the  level  of  output  and  employment always  comes  out  approximately the
same  in  any given  forecast horizon?

MR.  PRELL.  In  fact,  we didn't  quite  get  back to  the
unemployment  level  in  our  prior forecast.  We  took  the  kinder, gentler
approach to  some  limited degree here  so  that  by  the  end of  the  period,
we  are  in  essence back  at  our point  estimate of  the NAIRU  as  it
currently  stands  rather  than somewhat  above  that.  This means  in
essence  that  we don't  see  any  disinflationary pressure  through  1996.
We merely stabilize  things.  That  is  the  design principle  here.  What
we have  attempted to  do  is  give you  a baseline  forecast  that  holds
activity to  a path  that  at  least  doesn't  let  inflation get  out  of
control  and  tries  to  tell  you whether  that  is  achievable  and how.
That  exercise involves  a great deal  of uncertainty, but  that  is  why
the  good news  in  terms  of  output  and  low unemployment  that we  have
recently experienced gets  offset  by bad news  of  slow growth and
increasing  unemployment  later  in  the  forecast.

MR. JORDAN.  Okay.  I expected  that  answer.  Let  me  follow up

on  it  because  it  raises  a big  concern  about  our  February meeting.
Some  time  between now and  that  meeting, we have  to  submit projections
to  you whose  so-called central  tendencies are  to  be  published in  the
Humphrey-Hawkins report.  What  I suspected to  be  the  case  and
confirmed when I  looked  it  up  is  that  the  numbers  in the  central
tendency  in  February are  almost  the  same, with  only slight
differences, as  the prior  December Greenbook projections.  The  central
tendencies,  which  of  course  exclude  the  outliers,  tend  to  be a  little
more  optimistic  than  the Greenbook  on  output,  a  little  lower on
unemployment--0.1  percent or  so--and a  little better  on  inflation.
But  there  is  not much  difference;  essentially,  the  central  tendencies
are  the numbers  in  the prior December's  Greenbook.  If  that  turns  out
to  be  what  happens  this  time,  I am concerned about what we  are  going
to  be  announcing publicly.  The Chairman has  to  go before
Congressional  committees  two  or three weeks  after  the  February meeting
and go public  with these  numbers.  The markets  expect  this  Committee
to  take  some  action  in February to  raise  the  funds  rate  again.  Then
the  Chairman  is  going  to  be  in  the position  of  saying  that  what we
expect  to  happen--actually I have never understood whether  it  is  what
we want  to  happen or what we predict  is  going  to  happen--is  that
output growth  is  going to  drop under  2 percent,  unemployment  is  going
to  rise,  inflation  is  going  to  rise,  and therefore  we will  jack up  the
funds  rate.

12/20/94

MR. PRELL.  I don't  know if  there  is  anything I can  say!  It

certainly occurred  to  me  that taking  these numbers  just as  they are
might provide  a somewhat unappealing  forecast  in  the  Humphrey-Hawkins
report.  But  this  forecast  is  not  so  far  from  the  consensus view among
economists  that  a little degree of  optimism, as you suggested,
wouldn't  put  it  in the  ballpark.  I don't  want to  prescribe what
people  should say here.  What we have  forecast  clearly is  a slight
uptick in  unemployment between now and  the  end of  next year,  a slight
uptick in  inflation, and growth  that  is  only modestly below most
people's  assessment  of  the  long-term trend.  We are  a little  bit
lower,  I think, than  the  consensus  forecast  at  this  point  for GDP
growth.  We are  lower  on  the  inflation  rate than  the  consensus
forecast.  I admit  that  these  are  differences, but we  think  they are
consistent.

MR. TRUMAN.  If  I could  add just  two points:  One  is--I'm not

sure  this  is  helpful--my impression that  the  Administration is  going
through much the  same  problem.  If  they  think that  the  NAIRU is  about
what we have  estimated  it  to  be,  they no  longer are  in a position  to
say growth will  slow down  to  potential  of  2-1/2 percent  because  in
that  case  they will  have built  in  a permanently higher  inflation and
lower unemployment rate.  I'm not  sure how  they will  square  that
circle.  In  terms of  comparing  the Committee's  forecast with  the
Administration's forecast,  there  may be  some  leeway on  that  score.  My
second point  comes  back to your  initial  question  on  the  effectiveness
of  monetary policy and whether  it may be  reduced.  In  today's  world,
of  course, we  tend to  assume  that  one  of  the  channels  of  monetary
policy is  through  the  exchange  rate.  That  is  why we  have model
results  that  suggest  the  overall  effect may be  the  same as  it  was  15
or  20  years  ago,  but  the  channels  have  changed with  the  relaxation of
Regulation Q.  I don't  know whether  you want  to call  it  an  exogenous
event,  or a favorable event,  or an unfavorable  event,  or  something
unrelated where  there has been  a breakdown  in monetary policy.  But,
of  course, with  the  dollar having gone down this  year rather than
going up,  which would have been your ex  ante  assumption, you do  have a
difference  that  could  either be  attributed  to a stronger  than  expected
"economy" in  some  sense  or a short  circuiting of  that channel  in  this
particular instance.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Further  questions?

MR. BLINDER.  I'd like  to  ask a question  of Mike  that  keys

off  of  where  he  finished with Jerry Jordan.  Yesterday in the
briefing, Governor Yellen asked Mike a question about  the  difference
in  the  forecasts attributable  to  the  tightenings  that  are embedded  in
the  Greenbook forecast  but not  yet acted  upon by the  FOMC.  She  cited
some  numbers  generated by the  staff  model.  Mike, you indicated  that
you didn't  really accept  those  numbers.  I'd  like  to  know--it  is
germane  to  the question  that  was  just asked--what would be  the
forecast  at  a constant  funds  rate or  the  difference  in the  forecast
between a constant  funds  rate  path and the  funds  rate  path embedded  in
the  staff  forecast?

MR. PRELL.  The  model  simulation we have done  using  a

constant  funds  rate has only  slightly more  growth  in 1995  and then
appreciably greater  growth  in  1996.

MR. BLINDER.  Right.

12/20/94

-6-

MR. PRELL.  By  the model's  assessment,  that  would add  several

tenths  to  the  inflation rate  in  1996.  So  in  that  sense,  the
difference here  is  one  of  stable  inflation at  slightly over  3 percent
versus  an accelerating price picture with the  inflation  rate moving up
into  the  mid-3 percent  range  by 1996.  I don't have  a basis  for
seriously  questioning  this  outlook.  I do  think  there  is  a  risk  in the
near  term that,  if  the  economy behaves anything  like what we  are
anticipating  and if  the  fed  funds  rate were  to  remain at  5-1/2
percent,  inflation expectations  could mount  in ways  that  wouldn't be
anticipated in  the  structure  of  our model.  It  is  manifest  that  the
market is  expecting as  much  tightening as  we have built  in,  if  not
more.  The recent  response  of  the  markets  to  the  tightening action
shows  that  they are  rather  sensitive  to  indications  that we  are  going
to  resist  inflationary  tendencies.  The  common  forecast  is  for
inflation  to  move up.  I'd  say  the  consensus  is  about  3-1/2  percent,
looking  at  the  Blue  Chip  forecasts  for  1995.  I think  there would be
considerable worry--unless  there are  clear  indications  the  economy has
weakened in  the  next couple  of months--if  the  Fed were not  to move  the
rate  up  significantly.

MR. BLINDER.  I wasn't pushing a constant-funds-rate policy;

I was  just  asking what  the  effects  of  that policy were, particularly
on  the  real  growth rate  and on  the  inflation  rate.  On  a  fourth-to-
fourth  quarter basis,  your  forecast  has  real  GDP  growth decelerating
from  4.1 percent  in  1994,  to  1.9  percent  in  1995,  and  then to  1.8
percent  in  1996.  If  you  accepted  what was  in  the  the  staff  model  and
you backed out  the  effects  of  the  coming  tightening,  that  1.9  percent
and  1.8  percent would  change  to  2.1  percent  and 2.5  percent.  Now, to
my way of  thinking  about  the  marginal  effect  of  new policy with
respect  to  timing, wouldn't  you expect  the  inflation  effects  to  be
zilch  in 1995,  pretty mild in  1996,  and  in  fact  mostly having an
impact  in  1997?  I am  talking  about  additional policy changes,  not
about  the  tightenings we have banked  already.

MR. PRELL.  I think  inflation mounts  because,  in  this

alternative, we are  running with an  unemployment rate  that  remains
below  the NAIRU  out  through  1996  and presumably into  1997,  so  we  are
getting an  accelerating picture.

MR. BLINDER.  Sure.  I'm  only talking  about  the  derivative.

MR. PRELL.  But  I  think  that  in  the near  term,  taking  into
account  exchange  rate  and  import price  effects  and  so  on,  the  model
begins  to get  additional  inflation  creeping  in within  1995  and
building  a bit.  It  is  very gradual  and probably undiscernibly
different.  That  again goes  back to  the  comment  I made  earlier.  It
could creep up  on you, and  sustaining  the  low unemployment  rate,  as
happened  in  the  late  1980s,  eventually does  build up  to  a  significant
pickup  in  inflation.  That  is  what  our  forecast has  been designed to
avoid.

MR. BLINDER.  I was  not  questioning any  of  that;  you
misinterpreted  the  question;  it  is  only about  the  marginal  effects  of
policy.  If  we  have passed through  the NAIRU, which  seems  reasonably
likely,  exactly what you  said ought  to be happening.  But  the  marginal
effect  on  inflation of  policy tightening  from today  forward,  to my way
of  thinking,  ought not  to be  on  this Greenbook page.  That  is  really
the  question.  Or  do you  agree with  that?

12/20/94

MR. PRELL.  I think it  would  show up certainly  in  the  tenths

column, but we are  talking  about a matter of a couple  of  tenths  over
the next  year or  year and a half.

MR. BLINDER.  Okay.

MR.  PRELL.  It  is  not  dramatic.  I would caution  that  in

thinking about  the  slowdown  in  the  economy,  one  does  not want  to  think
of  that  as  purely a  straight  interest  rate  effect.  Some  of  it  is  the
inevitable  reversal  of  that  cyclical  dynamic  in  the  inventory
investment  area  that  I talked  about.  Our  inventory equations,  just  as
other  forecasting tools,  don't work all  that  well,  so  it  is  not
something  I'd want  to  bank on  the model  to  capture.  This  is  a very
important  element  in  the  timing  of  the  deceleration as  we  see  it.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  This  reminds me of  a discussion  I

remember having  at  the CEA  in  1973  when  everyone was  talking about  the
small  inflationary effects  that  were  on  the  horizon--0.2  or  0.3
percent.  Our models  are  really gross  simplifications  of  the  real
world.  As  I've  indicated before,  simulations  on  reduced-form
structures, which without  appropriate  add-ons  give us  silly  forecasts,
should not be employed with a great  degree of  confidence  at  this
stage.  I think  our  capability of  doing  the  type  of  simulation  that
you  are  discussing here  is  really marginal.  We have  to  be  careful
about  reading  terribly much  into  it.  Just  remember,  it  is  the  same
econometric  structure  in  the model  that  engendered a  significant
slowing  in  the  second  half  of  1994,  which didn't  occur.  The
difference  is  the  add-ons  and  the underlying  structure  that  we don't
capture.  I'm not  saying  it  is  not  useful  to  discuss  what  the
potential  impacts  and  lags  are;  it  is  just  that  I hope  that  everyone
retains  a  large dose  of  skepticism  in  applying  these  types  of
structures.  President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER.  Mike,  how much  additional  fed  funds  increase  is

built  into your  forecast?

MR. PRELL.  We  have  the  funds  rate  moving up  into  the  6-1/2

or  7 percent  area by  early next  spring.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Any  further  questions?  Let's  move on  to

the  Committee discussion.  Let  me just  say,  incidentally,  that  I've
noticed at  the  last  couple  of  meetings  that  our  discussions  of
economic  conditions have  spilled over  into  an  awful  lot  of  policy at
this  point.  I request,  if  you  can possibly do  it,  that  you  stay with
an analysis  of  what you  see  and  leave  the  policy prescription  for  the
next  segment,  or we will  be  contaminating our  agenda here  in an
inappropriate  way.

MR. MCTEER.  Mr.  Chairman,  it  seems  though that  that would be
easier  to do  if  the  Greenbook based  its  projections  on where  policy is
currently.  What we  have  here is  a Greenbook that  assumes  a  further
tightening,  the  amount  of  which  is  unspecified.  So  that makes  it very
difficult  for us  to--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  I think  it was  specified  in the

Bluebook.

12/20/94

MR. PRELL.  It  is  specified and you  should have heard  through
your  research director what  the  specific numbers  were.  I apologize  if
there  was  a slip  in communications.

MR. MCTEER.  I must have missed it  when  I read the  Greenbook,
but  just now you  said a  6-1/2  to  7 percent  funds rate.  Surely,  it  was
one  or  the  other  or  6-3/4.  It  seems  sort  of  vague.

MR.  PRELL.  My point  is  that  we  think the  tightening needs  to

be  significant.  I  think a problem with  specific  numbers  is  that  they
imply a  false  sense  of  precision about what  it will  take.  Yes,  to
enter something  into an  econometric  model, we would write  down  6-3/4
percent.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  I acknowledge your issue but  still

request  that,  if  you possibly  can, you  stay on  this  side  of  the  fence.
President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN.  Let  me  just  kick  off  the regional  overview.

The  First  District  continues  to  expand  at  a moderate pace.  We have
had  a rate  of  job growth  for  the  region as  a whole  that  is  behind the
nation.  Our  unemployment numbers  are  about  the same,  and  as usual
there  are  all  sorts  of  variations by state, with Massachusetts  still
leading  the  pack and Connecticut  still  bumping  along.  Consumer  and
business  confidence  in  the region has  risen  sharply according  to both
recent  data and an increasing  amount  of  anecdotal  information.  On the
other hand, while District bank  lending has  grown  through  the  third
quarter,  the pace  of  its  growth  is  well behind that  of  the  nation as  a
whole.  And  if  you  compare  the districts,  the  First  District  is
lagging in  all  kinds  of  bank  lending.

Job  growth  continues  to  be  concentrated  in  services,

especially business  and  health  excluding hospitals.  Manufacturing
employment  continues  to  lag,  but  the  anecdotal  reports  from First
District  manufacturers  are  generally positive.  Strength  is  fairly
broad-based.  However,  there  continues  to  be  weakness  in  the  defense
area.

Most  of  our  manufacturing and  retail  contacts  report
increases  in  input prices,  though  their  comments  often  revolve  around
the  same  inputs,  largely paper  and wood products  in  our  area.  They
are  also  starting  to  report  increases  or planned  increases  in  selling
prices.  Larger  organizations, both  retail  and manufacturing,  seem to
indicate  that  the  downsizing  is  over.  About half  of  our  contacts
report  that  they are  going  to  be hiring  in  the new year.  If  they have
price  increases  in mind, they probably will  be putting  them  through
about the  beginning  of  the year.  There  are reports  of  wage  increases
in  the range  of  3  to  5 percent.  I think,  however,  that  the  high  side
of  this  range probably  reflects  some desire  in companies  that have
been  through downsizing  to reward  those people who  are  remaining.  I
don't think  that  is  necessarily  reflective  of  a  trend of  continuing  5
percent wage  increases.

Now  trying  to  stay  on the  right  side  of  this  fence,  with

regard to  the  Greenbook, we were more  optimistic generally speaking
when the  year began.  We  thought  there was  likely  to  be  a  lower  full
employment  level,  a  little more potential  for  growth,  and certainly no
inflationary risk of  any size.  We  saw balanced risks  at  that  time.

12/20/94

As  the  year has  gone  by, we along with  everybody else have been
impressed by  the  degree  to  which  the  data are  always  stronger  than we
expect.  I see  that  Boston  is  widely  thought  of  as  a dove  on  these
matters,  but  even  the most dovish  of  the people  at  the  Boston Fed now
believe  that  the  risks  are more  on  the  up  side.

Our  own  forecasts  are  now a bit  more pessimistic  than  the

Greenbook.  We  think  1995  will  have more  overshooting on  the
employment  side  and a greater risk of  inflation  than  is  embodied  in
the Greenbook.  If  this  doesn't  stray too  far  over  the  fence,  we  think
that  the  tightening in  the Greenbook  is  about  the minimum  that  is
needed.  [Laughter]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  That  is  like Babe  Ruth bunting a home

run.  [Laughter]

MS.  MINEHAN.  You handed me  a challenge.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Peter Fisher  has  an  announcement that  I

thought  we  ought  to  interpose.

MR. TRUMAN.  He's  not  here,  but  maybe  I can make it.  He  can

clarify the  facts  later, but  let  me  just  state  that  at  about  9:30,  the
Mexicans  did announce  that  they had moved  their  intervention band by
15  percent  and will  continue  to  crawl  that band by  four new centavos  a
day.  So,  they basically have  moved the  band by  15  percent.  We  don't
have any market  quotes--

MR. FISHER.  [Re-entering  the meeting]  Actually, we do.  The
peso  has  traded  at  3.83  to  3.86,  down  about  11  percent  from yesterday;
it  has  not  approached  the  outer band at  all.  Screens  in New York are
not  quoting  the Mexican  stock market, but  talking  to  people  in Mexico,
the  decision seems  to  have  been taken well  in Mexican markets.  Even
though  the ADRs--Mexican stocks  traded  in New York--were  down, reports
indicate  that  Mexican  stocks  are  trading up  in Mexico.  So,  the market
seems  to be  taking  it  well  in Mexico  so  far,  and  the peso  hasn't
traded  out  to  its  limit.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  If  you  are  going  to  do  15  percent, you

really want  the market  to  do  10  to  12  percent  on  its  own.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.  Sounds  just  about perfect.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Let's hope  it  doesn't happen  again.

MR. BLINDER.  The  first  35  minutes.

MS.  MINEHAN.  Right.  It's  not  over until  it's  over.

MR. BLINDER.  I take  the  longer  view, an  hour or  so!

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.  You'd never  be  a good  foreign

exchange  trader!

MR. BLINDER.  No!

MR. TRUMAN.  As  Peter mentioned in his  earlier  report,  one

problem with  their monetary policy is  that  they have an  auction  today

12/20/94

-10-

of  their tesobonos  and  another  auction tomorrow  of  their peso-
denominated debt.  Financial  market  reactions  will depend  on how  they
choose  to  play those auction  results.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  To get  good  results on  that  or  at  least

not disastrous  results  would be very helpful.  President Hoenig.

MR.  HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr.  Chairman.  The Tenth  District

economy continues  to grow at  a healthy pace and gains  remain spread
across  all  states  and  all  industries.  Our  bank directors  are  almost
uniformly positive  about  current conditions  and  the near-term outlook
for  our  region.  One  key  example comes  from  the  transportation
industry, where  reports  show strained  capacity resulting  from very
strong demand  for  shipments  of  coal,  autos,  building materials,  and  a
variety of  other products.  In almost  every part  of  the District,  we
continue  to  hear reports  of  shortages of  labor,  spanning  both skilled
and unskilled.  Consistent  with  these reports,  current  data show
nonfarm  jobs  in  the  District up  almost  3 percent  in  October  from a
year earlier,  about  equal  to  the  nation.  Most  states  added jobs at
rates  close  to  the  District  average,  but  a  couple--New Mexico  for
example--were  substantially over  the  average.

Manufacturing continues  to  improve, with most of  the  strength

in the  durable  goods  industries.  Our contacts  in the  District's  key
automobile assembly  plants  tell  us  that  they are  operating at  capacity
levels  following the  changeover  to  new models.  Major expansions  are
under way  in  the  District  for plants producing computer  chips and
other computer  equipment.  Construction activity  remains robust  across
the  District.  Most  of  the  recent  strength has  been  in public projects
with some modest  slowing  in home  building.  The  energy  sector  is  at
least  stable  over  the  past  few  weeks, but  farm  incomes  are  probably  on
the weaker  side  for  us,  especially  in  cattle and hog production.  Bank
credit  continues  to  increase at  most  District banks,  with  strong loan
growth offsetting  some  modest decline  in  securities.

At  the national  level,  we  are  looking  for growth  in  the  last

quarter  to be  as  much as  5 percent.  I  look  for  that momentum  to  carry
forward  into  next  year.  I also  share  the  view that  the  economy  is
currently operating  beyond long-term potential  levels.  Such measures
as  the  unemployment  rate  and capacity utilization certainly  suggest
that  and perhaps  even an  overheating  economy.  At  the  current policy
stage  and  looking  forward  to  next  year,  I  think we do have  continued
inflationary pressures  that  confront  us  as  we  enter  1995.  With that,
to  avoid  going over  the  fence,  I'll  shut up.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW.  Mr.  Chairman,  economic  activity on  balance  in

the  Seventh District  appears  to  be  even stronger  than  at  the  time  of
our  November meeting.  Like  the  Greenbook, we have raised  our estimate
for  real  GDP growth  for  the  fourth quarter,  and  I expect  it  to  be  in
the  5 percent  range.  It  also  seems  likely  that  rapid growth will
persist  into  the  first  quarter  of  1995,  with  some  likelihood  of  growth
in  excess  of  3 percent.  With real  GDP  already slightly  above
potential  output,  this  robust  pace  of  real  activity threatens  to
generate  a noticeable  increase  in  CPI  inflation  later  in  1995,  moving
inflation above  the  Greenbook  forecast.  Indicators  of  consumer
activity  in  the  Seventh District remain quite  robust.  For  most  of  the

12/20/94

-11-

District,  the  holiday sales  season is  running very strong,
particularly  for  such durables  as personal  computers,  electronics,
appliances,  and big  screen televisions.  Only sales  of  soft  goods  such
as  apparel  have  lagged.

The District's  manufacturing  sector continues  strong after
the  summer supply disruptions  in  the  automobile  industry.  Auto and
light  truck sales  are  running at  about  a 15-1/2  million unit  annual
rate  in  the  fourth quarter.  Although availability continues  to
constrain  sales  for some models,  many of  the problems  should be
resolved  over  the  next  six months,  allowing domestic producers  to
continue to  gain market  share.  Over  the next  six months,  the  Big
Three  automakers  plan to  boost  light  truck capacity at  existing plants
by about  800,000  units  through a number of  changes  to production
processes.  Production schedules  for  the  first  half of  1995  are quite
aggressive,  up 4 percent  in  the  first  quarter  from  strong year-ago
levels  and up  5 to  6 percent  in the  second quarter.  While  this  is  a
very upbeat assessment,  some  extremely tentative  signs  of  moderation
in automobile  sales were reported  to  us  just  recently.  Specifically,
reports  yesterday from  two major automobile manufacturers  revealed
some  softness  in demand at  the  dealer level.  Although retail  sales
remain  strong,  some  dealers  have pared back their  orders  from
manufacturers, possibly  as  a result  of declines  in  showroom traffic,
unexpected increases  in  stocks,  or higher interest  rates.  In
response,  one  manufacturer has  taken  the unusual  step of  trimming  its
production plans  and reducing  overtime  levels at  several plants.
Although  it  is  too  early  to  attach much weight  to  these  reports,  they
may represent  early  tangible  effects  of  this  year's  increases  in
short-term rates.

Heavy-duty truck sales  were  strong again  in  October,  and it

now looks  as  if  sales  for  all  of  1994 will  set  a new record high.
Orders also  remain brisk, with the  backlog  extending into next  year's
fourth quarter.  The backlog is  due  at  least  in part  to  producers
allowing customers  to  lock  in  current prices  and avoid expected price
increases  next year  if  they are willing  to  accept  later delivery.
Significant  strength is  also  evident  in  our District's  steel,  machine
tool,  and  office furniture  industries.

In the  agricultural  sector,  the  situation is  more mixed.  It

appears  that  some slowing has  occurred in  sales  of  farm  equipment,
especially for  large  tractors  and combines.  Still,  domestic
manufacturing schedules  are up  strongly  in November and apparently in
December as  well.  Prices  in  livestock markets  have been  depressed by
large meat  supplies,  particularly  for hogs.  On  the  other hand, crop
markets  have been  supported recently by  improving  export prospects  and
by  the  heavy use  of  government price  support  programs,  especially
among farmers  in District  states.  Upward price pressures  are reported
for  food packaging costs,  including very steep  25  to  30  percent
increases  in corrugated cardboard prices, with  another increase
expected in January, as  well  as  increases  in  prices  of  tinplate  and
bottles  used as  beverage  containers.  In addition,  the  explosion  of  a
major fertilizer  plant  in  Iowa has  added  temporary pressures  to  tight
supplies  and sizable  price  increases already evident  for  fertilizer.

On the  employment  front,  labor  markets  continue  to  firm.

Auto-related employment  is  at  its highest  level  since  1979,  and
overall  manufacturing employment  in the  District  is  back to  its  1989

12/20/94

-12-

level.  In  Michigan,  the unemployment  rate  in November  was  the  lowest
since  the  end of  1969,  and  in  Illinois,  the  rate was  the  lowest  since
the  late  1970s.  Moreover,  surveys  of  employer hiring plans  in  the
Midwest are  the  highest  in at  least  18  years.  The  tightening  in
District  labor markets  has  been accompanied by more  frequent reports
of upward pressure  on wages  due  to  labor  shortages.

Overall,  Seventh  District  economic  activity is  consistent

with the  national economy.  It  has  continued to  grow at  a rate  that,
if  maintained, would  lead to  increasing  inflationary pressures.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Parry.

MR.  PARRY.  Mr.  Chairman,  the  Twelfth District's  economy  is

growing  solidly.  Outside  of California,  the pace  of  growth is
moderating  in  some  of  the  intermountain  states,  although Oregon's
economy  seems  to  be  accelerating.  Economic  indicators  for  California
show  continued improvement,  aside  from  the  financial problems  in
Orange County.

The  current  estimate  of  the  Orange  County  investment pool's

losses  is  $2 billion, but  the ultimate  loss  probably is  going  to be
slightly higher.  That  $2 billion  is  equivalent  to  around  2-1/2
percent of  Orange  County's $75  billion personal  income  or  around  .3
percent of  total  state  income.  However,  the  comparison with a  single
year's personal  income  overstates  the  economic  impact  of  the  financial
losses,  since  a large  proportion of  the  funds  was  earmarked for
capital  expenditures  that  are  spread  over several  years.  Since  more
than  97  percent  of  the  funds  in the  pool  were  invested by government
entities  within Orange  County, most  of  the  economic  effect will  be
felt  in Orange  County  itself, which  accounts  for  roughly  10  percent of
California's  economy.  The county and other  participating governments
appear  to have been  largely successful  so  far  in  finding ways  to  meet
immediate  cash needs.  There  is  still  a great  deal  of  uncertainty
about how  the  effects will  be distributed  among  the  affected
jurisdictions.  However,  it  is  clear  that  these  local  government
entities  will  cut  spending substantially.  Orange  County already has
postponed  some  large  capital  projects  and put  a  freeze  on  hiring and
all  nonessential  spending.  A number  of  other jurisdictions  are making
similar moves.

One  of  the  immediate  effects  has been  to  raise  the  cost  of

borrowing  for Orange  County governments  and  for  the  State  of
California.  As  was  discussed  earlier,  credit  spreads  rose  on
municipal  securities  all  over  the  country  after Orange  County filed
for  bankruptcy.  These  spreads  generally have  fallen back to  the
levels  that  prevailed before  the problems  in  Orange  County became
public.  The  exception  seems  to  be  the  State  of California.  Credit
spreads  on  state  issues  rose more  than on most  other  tax-free  bonds.
Subsequently, spreads  have come  down  only a  little  from  their  post-
bankruptcy peaks,  and  they remain higher  than  they were before  the
bankruptcy.  This might  reflect market speculation  that  the  state
government,  which already is  financially weak, eventually will be
asked to  bear  some  of  the  cost.  In this  regard,  I should point out
that  in contrast  to  California  State bonds,  the  credit  spreads  for
actively traded city and  county issues  within California  look about
like  those  for municipals  in  the  rest  of  the  country.

12/20/94

-13-

Exposure  of Twelfth  District banks  to  Orange  County has been

and continues  to  be minimal.  Loans  and direct  holdings of  Orange
County debt by banks  are  small,  and  the  same  goes  for  exposures  under
letters  of  credit.  However,  a few banks  face  some  indirect  exposure
through  sponsorship  of  mutual  funds with Orange  County holdings.
Sponsors  of  some  affected mutual  funds,  notably the money market
funds,  bought  the  funds'  holdings  of  Orange  County debt  to  prevent
their  funds  from  realizing  the  full  losses.  In  other words,  they
wanted to make  sure  they didn't  "break the buck" on  the money  funds.
In general,  the market  seems  to  have differentiated among various
mutual  funds  according  to  the  extent  of  their  Orange  County exposure.
We  also  learned that  one  of  the banks  that  has  a tax-exempt  money
market  fund,  instead of  buying  the Orange  County paper at  par  as  was
done  by a  few other banks,  issued  a letter  of  credit  for the  Orange
County debt,  which of  course  increased  its price  and reduced  the
problem.

I'd like  to  turn to  the  national  economy now and hopefully I

will  remain on  the  right  side of  the  fence  as  well,  but  I certainly
don't want  to be on  top  of  the  fence.  [Laughter]  The national
economy continues  to  exhibit  surprisingly strong growth  in employment,
output,  and  spending.  Indeed, the  evidence  suggests  that  the  current
pace  of  real  economic  activity has  not been diminished very much by
the  tighter stance  of  monetary policy this  year, or  at  least  that  any
policy  effects have  been more than  offset  by other  factors.
Simulations  of  our  own structural  model,  which has  a monetary policy
response  similar  to  models  such as  DRI's  and Ray Fair's,  suggest  that
the  tightening  so  far  this  year has  reduced  the growth  rate of  GDP by
about  1/2  percentage point  in 1994.  The  tightening also  is  projected
to  reduce GDP  growth  by a full  percentage  point  in  1995,  and another
1/2  percentage point  in 1996.  Long bonds  have moved  up more quickly
than  they  often do  in  response  to  a policy tightening;  there were
charts  in  Part  II  of  the  Greenbook that  illustrated  this.  This  early
increase  has probably  accelerated the  effects  of  policy, so  a greater
proportion of  the  effects  of  the monetary restraint  than  suggested
above may  already have been achieved.  I might note parenthetically
that  this  has  a rather  interesting implication  for  the MPS model  where
one-half  of  the  effect  is  in  the  third year.  That  is  very different
from  any other model.  The more conventional  models  are  showing a
faster effect.

Even assuming  that monetary policy tightens  further,  as  in

the Greenbook,  our  structural  model  sees  a  substantial risk  that
inflation in  1995  and  1996  will  be  somewhat  above  its  current  pace.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL.  Thank  you, Mr.  Chairman.  The  economy  in  the

Sixth  District  continues  to  expand, although  the  pace of  the  expansion
has  decelerated  somewhat  from  the  growth  rates we  saw earlier  in  the
year.  Consumer  spending is  holding up quite well.  We had a rebound
in  retail  sales  right after  the  Thanksgiving holiday that  has
continued  this month,  and most  retailers  are  now expecting  that  they
will  exceed  last  year's  strong  levels  by as  much as  6 to  8 percent.
However,  they  are  also  reporting  that  their  sales  are  dependent  to  a
large  extent  on  special  promotions  and  discounts,  and that  obviously
is  cutting  into  their  profit  margins.  Big ticket  items  are  selling
particularly well.  Sales  of  apparel, which  had been weak  for  some

12/20/94

-14-

time,  are also  seeing  strong gains.  We have had reports  starting  in
November  that  automobile sales  were  slowing, and  that has  continued
through  the  first  half  of December.  Tourism remains  a very bright
spot  in  the District  economy.

Manufacturing activity was relatively  flat  in  the  Sixth

District  last month, although most plants  expect to  see  gains  over  the
next six months.  Producers  of  lumber and building materials  are
operating at  or near  capacity, but  several  of  them have noted that
shipments have begun  to decelerate.  The  same pattern  is  showing up  in
home  furnishings and equipment.  In contrast,  activity at  producers of
paper, pulp, and  chemicals  rose  substantially, and demand for auto
parts  is  also  strong.  Again, the  outlook  for  capital  spending was a
little  less  favorable  than  a month ago.

Home  sales  in  the  District  fell below  strong year-ago levels

in most  areas,  although realtors  are  reporting that  they expect a
rebound  in  sales  in  the spring.  Multifamily real  estate markets
continue  to  improve  and rental  rates  are rising.  Commercial real
estate  is  also  doing relatively well  throughout  the  region,  although  I
find it  interesting  that  some architects  report  that  demand for  their
services  is  in  decline;  that  could  imply  some  softening  of
construction next year.  With respect  to  loan demand, bankers  say  that
it's mixed, with  increased commercial real  estate lending and
declining mortgage  lending.  Automobile  lending  also  declined along
with sales.

Labor markets  haven't  changed very much  in  the  District  since

last month.  We continue  to  see  labor shortages  reported  in  certain
areas.  It's  most pronounced in  Tennessee  and in Atlanta.  In Atlanta,
it's  related partly to  the Olympics  and partly to  retailers who are
finding  it  very difficult  to  get people  for  the  holiday  sales period.
Skilled construction workers  are  in  strong demand  everywhere, and
wages  in  that  industry are rising  sharply.

As  for  prices,  about  50  percent  of  manufacturers  indicate

that  they  are still  being pressured by  the  rising  costs  of  raw
materials.  They are noting  difficulty again  in passing  these  costs  on
to  final  goods.

I would just  add with  respect  to  Orange County  that we

haven't seen  any  fallout  in  our District  from that  episode.

Now your  fence  looms  rather  large  in  front  of  me  as  I turn  to
the  national  economy, but  let  me  go  at  it  this way  if  I may.  We,  too,
were surprised  by the  rapid rate  of  growth  in  1994  and by  the
relatively  low inflationary response  to  that growth.  As opposed  to
the  last  couple of  meetings, we did not  run  forecasts  with  an
assumption of  tightening.  We did  it  with constant  federal  funds  this
time.  It's  interesting that  our GDP  forecast  through the  fourth
quarter  of  1996  brings  the rate  of  growth  in  real GDP  down  to  about
the  2.5,  2.6  percent  level  throughout  that  period without  any
tightening at  all.  The  CPI  through that  period is  higher,  as  you
would expect,  than the Board's  forecast,  but  it  remains  at  about  a
3.2,  3.3  percent  level  throughout  1995  and 1996,  with the unemployment
rate  somewhat below the  Greenbook forecast.  That  raises  the  question
in  my mind--and I think  I raised  this  last  time--whether  or not  there
is  something different  going on  in  the economy this  time  around that

12/20/94

-15-

would suggest  that potential  growth  is  higher  and the  NAIRU is  lower.
But  I  think the basic  question  is  whether or  not  there  can be  greater
growth  in  the  economy with  less  inflation,  thereby  implying  somewhat
less  tightening  than  is  forecast  in  the  Greenbook.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS.  Our directors  and other business  contacts

continue  to  report  generally robust  activity in our  region with  just  a
couple  of  exceptions  that  I'll  mention  in  a minute.  I guess  the  most
striking anecdotal  information we  have  gotten  lately has  to  do with
labor market  conditions,  which as  a number of  other people have  noted
for  their  Districts  appear  to  be  tightening  very noticeably  throughout
our  region.  At  our  last  board meeting about  10  days  ago,  we had
several  reports  of  shortages  in  both retail  help  and construction
workers.  The  shortage  of  construction labor  is  said to  be  pushing
construction costs  up  in North Carolina.  Also  in  November, West
Virginia posted  the biggest monthly  increase  in jobs  ever  in  that
state, and  it  was  quite  broadly based across  the West Virginia
economy.

Elsewhere, most  of  the  information we have  on holiday sales

has  been positive.  Also  on  the positive  side  of  the  ledger, we  see
increasingly clear signs  of a  firming  of  conditions  in commercial  real
estate  markets  in  a number  of  local  areas.  Actual  construction has
not  accelerated markedly yet, but  commercial  vacancy rates  are
declining,  rents  are beginning  to  increase  in  at  least  a  few
metropolitan areas,  and  there  is  talk about  increases  in  other  areas
not  too  far down  the  road.  Prime space  has  become  increasingly hard
to  come by, especially  large  blocks  of  it.

Lest  you think  the  only news  we  ever  listen  to  in our  Bank  is

good news,  let me mention a  couple  of  signs  of possible moderation  in
activity  in  some  sectors  in  our  region.  We do  a monthly survey of
manufacturing activity  in  the  Fifth District,  as  a number  of  other
Reserve Banks  do  in  their respective Districts.  Our November  survey
suggested  fairly significant  slowing  in  activity  in  that  sector, which
is  very important  in  our District.  This  slowing  is  in  some  contrast
to  the  published national  data.  Also, we  see  continuing  signs  of  a
flattening  in  residential  real  estate  activity across  the  District.
At  their  meeting a few  days  ago,  our  Charlotte directors  said  that
buyer traffic  for  single-family homes  had hit  a wall  in  the month  of
November.  We never know how much weight  to  give  to  that  kind of
anecdotal  information, but  it  does  seem a  little  at variance with  some
other  things  we  have heard.

Finally,  with respect  to prices  in  the  District,  our  latest

monthly survey  suggests  that  both manufacturers  and  retailers  are  now
expecting  somewhat sharper  price increases  over  the  next  six months
than  they were  just  a  few weeks  ago.

Nationally, of  course,  the broad contour  of  the  Greenbook
forecast hasn't  changed a  great deal.  The  thing  that  struck me  is
that--there  has  been  some  comment about  it  already--in  spite  of  the
strong projected growth near  term, the  bulge  in the  CPI  predicted for
the  first  quarter  of  next year  is  noticeably  less pronounced  than  it
was  in  the November Greenbook.  Inflation  remains  relatively  steady
over  the whole  two-year  forecast  horizon.  I think Mike's  comments

12/20/94

-16-

suggested fairly  that  projections  key  off  of  the  recent  favorable
actual  inflation  data rather  than  the  apparent strength  in  real
economic  activity and  the  strong  job growth and  low unemployment  rate.

Let  me  just  say that  I don't  envy the  staff's  task  in

developing  this  forecast.  I think  developing any  kind of  reasonable
and  credible  forecast  in  this  situation  is  exceedingly difficult  and
the  forecast  we  have  is  certainly plausible.  Still,  I  think we have
to  recognize  that  this  projection can be described  as relatively
optimistic  under the  circumstances.  There are  considerable risks  in
the  forecast  at  this point,  greater perhaps  than  we have  seen earlier.
I think  these risks  are  probably somewhat  more balanced  than  they have
been up  to  now, but  there  still  are substantial  upside  risks.  As we
all  know,  the  economy  is  clearly very strong;  it's  really roaring I
think;  but  there  are  quite a  few signs  of  weakness  here  and there.
There  is  a  lot  of  talk  about passing  intermediate-level price
increases  through  to  final prices  at  the  beginning of  the  year.  So  I
think there  is  certainly a possibility, more  than marginal,  that we
could begin  to  see  the  economy overheat  as  we move  into next  year and
see  an  inflation rate  significantly higher  than  the  rate  the  Greenbook
is  projecting.  At  the  same  time,  I think  the  downside  risk  on  the
real  side  as  we get  out  into  late  1995  and early  1996  is  greater now
than  it  has  been, especially given  the  further  tightening  of policy
that may be needed  to  contain  inflation going  forward.  Because  of
this--and  I'm  going  to  step  on your  fence if  I may here  just  briefly,
Mr.  Chairman--while  I think some  additional  restraint  will  almost
certainly be  required before  this  thing  is  over,  I believe we need  to
be  somewhat  more cautious  in applying  it  than was  necessary earlier
this  year when we were  further  away from a cyclical  peak and when we
had a  serious  credibility problem.

Speaking of  credibility, I  think the  recent  behavior  of  the

bond rate  suggests,  to me at  least,  that  we have  acquired  some of
late.  In my view, that  is  the most  encouraging development we have
seen  in some  time.  The  trick  is  going  to  be  to  maintain  it  going
forward as  we move  into  a situation  where the  risks  are  at  least  a
little more balanced  than  they have been.  I might  just note  once
again  if  I may  that  precisely in this  kind of  situation,  something
like  an  inflation  target might  be  helpful.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Stern.

MR. STERN.  Thank you.  For  the  most part,  the  Ninth  District

economy remains very strong;  much of  it  is  operating  at  full
employment or maybe  even  beyond.  Two  interesting pieces  of
information have become  available  since  the  last  meeting.  On the
anecdotal  side,  I  think there  is  some  accumulating  evidence  that
housing  is  slowing down, both sales  and  construction activity--that
there  has  been some  response to  higher  interest  rates.  I wouldn't  say
that  the  supporting  information  is  overwhelming, but  I  think  there has
been  enough  of  it  to  indicate  some  effect  in  our  area.  Secondly, we
did have  a meeting with a  large number  of Twin City business  leaders
several  weeks  ago,  and  I would  say the  general  tenor of  that meeting
was  that  whatever we have here, we  don't have  equilibrium.  What  I
mean is  that most  of  their talk was  about  labor  shortages  across  the
board,  from  the  skilled  to  the  entry level  jobs.  That market hasn't
cleared.  It  has  not  resulted yet  in  a lot  of wage  pressures, although
people  talk  frequently about raising wages  in one  part of  the  pay

12/20/94

-17-

scale or  another.  But  it  sounded to  me  as  if  there  is more  to  come,
that we clearly  have some disequilibrium.  The  same  thing was  true
when  they discussed what  they were  seeing in  terms of  crude  and
intermediate materials  prices and  availability.  There  obviously are
pressures  there.  It  sounded to  me as  if  there  is more  to  come  and
that  ultimately that will  put pressure  on  final  goods prices.  Now
whether  this  results  in simply a blip  in inflation at  the  consumer
level  or  something more  sustained  remains  to be  seen.  But  clearly
there  is  a lot  of  pressure.  If  these people  are representative,  there
is  a lot  of pressure  coming.

With regard to  the national  outlook,  I guess  what  I found  the

most  surprising part of  the  Greenbook forecast,  something that people
have  already commented on, was  the  inflation  outlook.  If  I used  the
Greenbook  type  of  framework, which as  I understand it  relies  a lot  on
capacity pressures  to  drive  inflation, and  look at  how the  economy has
performed and where  we are  in terms  of  the unemployment  rate  and
capacity utilization and so  forth,  I think  I would come  out with a lot
more  inflation over  the  next  several  quarters than  is  there.  My
concern  is  that we  could get an  acceleration of  inflation--the 1/4
point  or  so  that  the Greenbook  seems  to  envision is  just  noise.  That
could happen or not  happen depending on  a lucky or unlucky break or
two.  My judgment would be  that  if  we get  an acceleration  of
inflation, we will  not need a magnifying glass  to  discern  it.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  That  is  the point  I was  trying to make

before,  Gary.  This  business of  a 1/2  percentage point  increase  in
inflation at  an  annual  rate  as  though that means  anything--

MR. STERN.  You can go  from  0.2  to  0.3  of  a point--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  You can  round  the numbers  to  the nearest

5 percent!

MR.  STERN.  You can go  from  0.2  to  0.3  percent per month and

that gives you  a percentage point  right  there.  On a monthly basis,  it
doesn't  look  like  very much.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  McTeer.

MR. MCTEER.  The economy  in  the  Eleventh District  continues

to  show the  same  healthy rate  of  growth  that  has been  in place
throughout  1994.  We have been  looking intensively  for  signs  of
slowing  activity  in  response to  tighter monetary policy.  So  far  the
only perceptible  slowdown has been  in  single-family  construction,
which peaked  in April,  but  this  decline  has been more than  offset by
strong  activity in  multifamily and nonresidential  construction.  There
has  been no  slowing in  the  rate  of  expansion  of  the most  interest-
rate-sensitive  sectors  of  our manufacturing  industries--rubber,
plastics,  lumber,  nonelectrical and  electrical machinery, primary and
fabricated metals,  furniture, paper,  stone,  clay, glass,  all  of  those.
Defense-related and energy-related manufacturing are  the  only areas
other  than  single-family construction  that  show signs  of weakness.  I
continue  to  hear  scattered  reports  of  price and wage pressures,  but
the  number of  these  reports  seems  to  have  dissipated since  the  last
FOMC  meeting.  Nonetheless, capacity  constraints  are  strong and
possibly intensifying for  electronics, petrochemicals,  and paper
products.  Wage pressures are  reported  in the  electronics,

12/20/94

-18-

telecommunications,  fabricated metals,  and  trucking  industries.  Firms
in the  temporary help  industry expect  even greater difficulty
recruiting  skilled workers  next  year, which could put  even more
pressure  on  wages and prices.  In  spite  of growing pressures on wages
in several  industries  and  rising materials prices  in  a number of
others,  we have  seen little  evidence  of price  rises on  final  goods  and
services,  especially at  the  retail  level.  In  fact,  our  Beigebook
contacts  in the  retailing sector  tell  us  that  intensified competition
in recent  months  has brought  the  average of  their selling prices  below
those  of  a year  ago.

As  the  Greenbook points  out,  we have all  consistently

underestimated  the  strength of  the  economy  throughout  this year.  All
the  risks  seem to  be  on  the  up  side  at  this  stage  with  respect  to  real
growth  as  well  as  inflationary pressures.  The  improvement  of  job
prospects,  consumer  confidence,  and  credit availability are  propelling
strong  growth  in  the  consumer sector.  The need to  add  to  capacity  is
putting upward pressure  on  investment  spending.  Stronger  economies  in
Europe  and Latin America will  be  increasing our  export  demand.  There
is  nothing  in  the new  fiscal  policy proposals  that  would  stifle  these
demand pressures.  Quite  the  contrary, the  anticipation  of  tax  cuts
will  likely  add  to demand pressures,  capacity constraints,  and price
and wage pressures  in  the  coming months.  Mr.  Chairman,  I'll  defer  the
next  sentence!

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  I don't  know how successful  this  is.

[Laughter]  Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.  Thank you, Mr.  Chairman.  The

Second District  continued recent  trends  of  a robust  economy  in New
Jersey and  a slowing expanding  economy  in New York  State.  Data for
the most recently  available month  indicate  that  employment  grew 2.7
percent in New Jersey and stagnated  in New York.  Consumer  sales
throughout  the  District  in November  grew quite moderately, but  the
data and  the  anecdotal  evidence  indicate a  strong  Christmas  season  in
all parts  of  our  District.

On  the  national  level,  I feel  that  there  is  great  uncertainty

about where  the  economy is  going,  or  at  least  I am very uncertain.  I
do  not  believe  that  growth  in  the very  strong fourth  quarter, which
could well  be  4-1/2  to  5 percent or  even more,  is  the  real  world but  a
happenstance of  all  possible positive  elements  coming  together.  If  it
is  not  too  good  to  be  true,  at  least  it  would seem  too  good  to
continue,  and  growth next  year should  slow down  to  a sustainable  pace.
Our  Q4/Q4  GDP  growth  forecast  for  1995  under current policy
assumptions  is  2.4  percent with  the  CPI  at  3.3  percent and going up.
We think that  the  cost pressures  that have been discussed by many
people probably  are  already baked  in  the  cake.

The  greatest uncertainty  is  to  figure  out  where current

monetary policy  is  and its  effect  on  the  economy.  Is  it  tight and,  if
tight,  in  relation  to  what?  We did  some work on  comparing  the present
policy  stance  at  full  employment, and we  tried to  find  some previous
periods when  one  could  say the  economy was more  or  less  in  the  same
macro performance position.  We came  up with April  1972,  May 1978,  and
November  1987  as periods  to  be  compared.  Then we looked  at various
indicators  of  whether monetary policy  is  tight  or  not.  If  you  look at
the  real  fed  funds  rate, which we  compared with the  latest  12-month

12/20/94

-19-

CPI,  it's  now 2.6  percent,  which is  considerably tighter  than  in  the
1970s  and somewhat  tighter  than  in  1987.  The monetary  aggregates, M1
and M2,  are very much  tighter  than in  all  the  previous  comparison
periods.  The  Treasury yield curve is  flatter, which would indicate
that  the market  feels  that  policy is  better  positioned than  it  was  in
those previous periods.  Even the  crude  PPI,  which has  been rather
troublesome  lately,  if  you  look over  the  12-month trend it  too
indicates  that price  performance  is  better,  and  therefore  one  would
think that  monetary policy may well  be  tighter.  I'm not  sure  that
that  tells  us  that  current monetary policy  is  perfect.  It  doesn't
tell  me whether  it's  a  little  too  tight  or  a  little  too  loose  or  very
much, except  that  it  tells me  that  if  I were  to  leap  over what  tiny
bit  of  fence  remains,  that waiting might  have something  going  for  it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Sounds  like  a leap  to  me.  President

Jordan.

MR. JORDAN.  Thank you.  With  regard to  Orange County-type

developments,  before  that  drove  everything else  off  the newspapers,  we
were  getting  a number  of  similar reports  in  our  area.  Cuyahoga County
lost  $150  million, which  they say  is  equivalent  to  a new  football
stadium,  so we have  a  team for  sale.  And  it  appears  now that  the
state held  $900  million  of  stripped bonds  that  are  deeply under  water.
So,  we are  going  to  see  significant  reductions  in waste,  fraud, abuse,
and underemployed people  on  county  and  state payrolls!  These people
will be  going to  work,  fortunately, because  they are  going  to  find a
very good labor market.

I focused  this  time mostly  on manufacturing.  Manufacturing

employment  in our  District  is  almost  50  percent above  the  national
average;  it's  really  the main part  of  the  Fourth District  economy.
With only one  exception, manufacturers  said that  the  NAM president
does  not  speak for  them.  Sometime people volunteered this  to  me;
sometime  I sought out  their views.  If  there  is  a NAIRU in  the  Fourth
Federal  Reserve District,  I would say  it's  a  lot  lower  than  it  is
assumed to  be  for  the  nation because  our  unemployment rates  are  4
percent  or  less  in most  of  our metropolitan areas.  And yet  I still
don't  sense  any change  in people's  attitudes  about what will  happen  to
inflation  in  the  future.  People  talk about  very tight  labor markets.
I continue  to  hear the  same  stories  about  shortages  of  skilled and
unskilled workers,  yet  it  doesn't  seem  to be  getting built  into
people's plans.  They may be  looking  to  that  reservoir  of  previously
discouraged workers  that  was  supposed to  have  existed, or  the
disguised unemployed that  we  are  supposed  to  have  inherited from
earlier periods,  or  the  otherwise underemployed people  out  there.  But
if  they exist,  they  live  in  other Districts  and we  are  having  to
import  them;  we have  reversed  the population  flows  and are  getting
some  in-migration.  Our manufacturers  talk  about paying hiring  bonuses
and performance  bonuses  based on  having  had a very good year, but  they
are  not building pay  increases  into  their wage bases  in order  to
attract  or  to  retain workers.  One  of  the  states,  Kentucky, recently
suspended its  program  to  attract  businesses  to  the  region  because  they
simply view their  labor market  as  so  tight  that  going  out  and  trying
to  steal  companies  from other  regions  of  the  country was not  a very
profitable  thing to  be  engaged  in.  The  person who  told me  this  was
very disappointed because he  heads up  that  program and he  was not  sure
what  he was  going  to  be doing.

12/20/94

-20-

I talked  to  the  CEO of  one  of  the  giant  companies  that mainly

supplies  the motor vehicles  industry, especially heavy  trucks,  and
also produces  other  equipment.  With regard  to  his  capital  expenditure
plans  for  the  longer  run,  whether  for  increasing capacity  or making
productivity-enhancing  investments,  I asked him what  assumptions he
made  about  future price increases.  He  said  zero.  He  was very  adamant
in  saying  that  it  would be  irresponsible  for  any  industrial  leader  in
America  today to  assume  that  they can plan on any price  increases  for
their output.  Instead,  capital  expenditure proposals  are  evaluated on
the basis  of  their ability to  achieve  the productivity  increases  to
match any  cost  increases  in labor  or  other resources.  I thought  this
was  at  least  one  bit  of  evidence  that what we are  trying  to  achieve--
stability in  the purchasing power  of  money--is  beginning to  take  hold
in the  minds  of  our business  people.

Another  industrial  leader  from a very  large company  that

supplies paints  and other  chemical products  approached me  saying  that
we must have  an  immediate  and very substantial  increase  in  the  federal
funds  rate.  And,  of  course,  I was  curious  and  asked him why he  felt
that  way.  Was  he  concerned about  inflation?  He  said absolutely not,
because  he  could not  increase  his  prices.  In  fact,  he  said  that  he
was  trying  to  hold the  line  and resist  pressure  to  reduce his  prices
because of  increased competition.  But his  costs  were  killing him and
the  Fed needed to  raise  the  funds  rate  in  order to  reduce  those  costs.

Small  and  large manufacturers  in  the  District  are doing  very

well  in the  export  markets,  especially  exports  to Mexico  and Canada.
District  exports  have posted  strong increases  in  the  last  two  or  three
years,  and companies  that had never  engaged at all  or  significantly in
these markets  are  now finding  them very attractive  and are doing  quite
well.  I hear  a lot  of  reports  of  plans  to  increase  capacity in  the
next  year or  two  as  well  as  continuing  emphasis  on  labor-saving
investments.

Turning  to the  national  economy,  I can  understand why people
who believe  that  the  growth that  we  have had in  1994  is  the  result  of
prior demand stimulus  would  feel  that  we ought  to  take  that  stimulus
out before  it  spills  over  into  excess  demand and  therefore  rising
prices.  It  is  a  legitimate point  of view.  It  is  not  clear to  me why
we didn't  recognize  that  excess  demand  earlier  and therefore  make  a
better  forecast  for  1994  if  we  knew  that  that  was  what was  going on.
Maybe  hindsight provides  the  answer.  But  I still  think  that we  ought
to  consider an  alternative  interpretation of  what we have been
experiencing  this  year and  that  is  that  it  is  the dividend  for prior
restraint.  We  should have  expected  that policy actions  to reduce
inflation and  to  build our  credibility on  the  inflation  rate would
produce  the  type  of  output  increases  that  we  have  had.  Therefore,
what  has  been  going on  this  year  is  not  the  sort  of  thing  that
necessarily spills  over  into  rising prices  and higher  inflation  in the
future.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President Melzer.

MR. MELZER.  In  the  third quarter,  nominal  GDP was up  6.7

percent  from  a year  earlier,  the  largest  year-over-year  rise  in  five
years.  More  recently, nominal  retail  sales  rose at  a  15.1 percent
annual  rate  from July to  November,  the  fastest  four-month pace  since
the  spring  of  1987.  There  are  few  signs yet  that  our monetary policy

12/20/94

-21-

actions  have  slowed  the pace of  spending.  Since March,  for  example,
business  loan  growth has  accelerated to  an  11.1  percent  rate,  after
falling  in  1993.  Nevertheless,  in  my view monetary policy has  shifted
toward restraint.  All  monetary aggregates have  shown relatively weak
growth  since  spring.  Inventory investment  has  been very strong  this
year.  In my view rapid  inventory accumulation has  been  desired and is
likely  to  continue  for  a time.  Despite rapid inventory  accumulation
so  far  this  year, the  inventory-to-sales ratio has  remained near  the
lowest  level  since  the early  1950s.  According to  a recent  survey by
our  staff,  attempts  in  the Eighth  District  to  build inventory,
especially  of  finished goods,  have  been unsuccessful  simply because  of
continuing  strong  sales  growth.  One  major motor  vehicle manufacturer
in  the  Eighth  District reported  that  it  held larger  stocks  than  its
two  domestic  competitors  simply because,  in contrast  to  its  rivals,  it
had  the  capacity to  keep  production closer  to  the pace  of  sales.  Even
so,  this  firm has had difficulty  in  keeping  its  strongest  selling
models  in  stock.  Such  observations  matched the concern with  respect
to  the nation  as  a whole  expressed  in  the National Association of
Purchasing Managers  surveys  in  October  and November.

In November,  employment gains  exceeded  the robust  average

monthly increases  from January to  October and were more  than  twice  as
large  as  the  average  monthly rise  in  the  civilian  labor  force.  Eighth
District  unemployment  fell  to  4.7  percent  in  October,  its  lowest  level
since August  1974.  That's  a  level  at  which we have  been hovering  for
some  time.  On a comparably measured basis,  the nation's unemployment
rate has  fallen  to  its  March  1989  level,  which  in  turn was  the  lowest
since December  1973.

Notwithstanding  this  evidence  of  strength  on  the  real  side,

the  positive  reaction of  the bond and  other  financial markets  in
recent  weeks  is  heartening.  I hope  this means  that  the markets  now
believe  that  the  long-term  inflation rate  will  not accelerate  from its
current  level.  Whether the  nearly universal  expectation  that
inflation  over  the  near  term, or  the  long  term  for  that  matter, will
be  3 percent  or more  is  acceptable is  another question, as  is  whether
we act  today  in  terms  of  any  short-term actions.  I am not  at  all
averse  to  strong  cyclical  real  growth  if  the  thrust of  our  policy is
consistent with long-run price  stability  and we  have  credibility.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Unfortunately, President Boehne  had  to

leave because  of  an  emergency he  had to  attend  to.  I'd like  to  ask
Rick Lang whether he  could give  us  a brief  survey of  what  is  going  on
in the  Third  District.

MR. LANG.  Thank you, Mr.  Chairman.  The  Third District

economy continues  to  expand but  at  a more moderate  pace than  in the
nation as  a whole.  Employment  levels  in  several  areas  of  the  District
still  have not  reached their pre-recession  levels.  Manufacturing
activity continues  to  be  one  of  the  strong points;  its  levels  continue
to  be  high, although not  as  high  as  in earlier months.  Retailers  are
telling us  that  they are  experiencing good holiday sales,  especially
sales  of  durable goods.

Housing activity  around the  District  remains  mixed, with  only
a  few areas  in  the District  showing  signs  of  strength.  There  are  some
signs  of  increases  in  nonresidential building activity, although  this
is  not  translating  into  substantial  gains  in  construction employment

12/20/94

-22-

at  this  point.  Bank lending  around  the  region is  up but  also not  as
strongly as  in  the nation  as  a whole.  That  is  particularly true  of
business  lending.  Price pressures  continue  to  be  evident  in  the
manufacturing  sector,  but  they do  not  appear  to  be  widespread around
the  region.  Also,  although we  do  not  have evidence  of  strong
pressures  on wages  in  the region,  we do  hear  of  more cases  of  signing
bonuses  being given  to workers  in  some  sectors  of  the  District
economy.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Thanks  very much.  Governor  Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY.  Thank you, Mr.  Chairman.  I'll  try and  stay

entirely on  the  right  side  of  the  fence  by talking  about  fiscal
policy!  [Laughter]  I have  three  observations  to  make:  First,  we are
now  getting the  first  indications  of  the  effects  of  the  1993  tax  law
changes.  I have presented scoring  stories  to  this  group before.  I
want  to  stress  that  what we  have are  very preliminary indications,  but
they are  from both  the macro  aggregate  level  and  from detailed micro
data  that were published  in  Statistics  of  Income.

According  to  our  staff  estimates,  if  you  look at  a liability

model  estimate  of  what  taxpayers owed,  in  1992  it  was  $498  billion  and
in  1993  it  was  $522  billion.  We had a net  gain of  $24  billion  in
liabilities.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  That  is  for  individuals?

MR. LINDSEY.  Yes,  I'm  looking  at  the  individuals'  side  here.

Personal  income rose  4.3  percent between  1992  and  1993.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  What was  it  without  transfer payments?

MR. LINDSEY.  Slightly below  that--4.1  percent.  But  there

are  offsetting  factors.  I could go  on  for  too  long,  but you don't
want  me  to.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  I don't!

MR. LINDSEY.  The  general  approach  to  estimating, given  the
adjustments  the  Chairman  is  talking about,  would be  to  take per-tax-
return personal  income.  The  elasticity  of  receipts  with respect  to
per-return  personal  income based  on  the  index used  for  inflation  is
1.0.  The  elasticity for  real  increases  is  about  1.5.  The  inflation
index  for  1993  was  2.8  percent.  So we would  expect,  if  nothing had
changed  in  the  law, about  a 5 percent  overall  increase  in nominal
receipts  or  $25  billion.  We  got  $24  billion, which doesn't  leave any
room  for  revenue  from  the  tax  increase.  Looked  at  from  an  alternative
point  of  view,  the  estimated  revenue  from  the  tax  rate  increase was
$15  billion.  So,  that  would leave  $9 billion  left  over,  or  an
increase  of about  1.8  percent  attributable  to  economic  growth.  So,  we
would have  to  assume  that  receipts  grew at  only about  40  percent  of
the  rate  of  increase  in nominal  income, which  is  also  implausible.
The micro  data tell  a very similar  story.  These  are  early tax  return
estimates  and every year  the  Statistics  of  Income  publishes an  early
compilation.  I would stress  that  the  data are  early.  What  I want  to
contrast  is,  for  the  same  type  of  sample,  the  top  763,000  taxpayers
which  in  1992  were  those making  over  $200,000.  Overall  AGI  for  those
taxpayers  rose  .4 percent  versus  2-1/2  percent  for  other  taxpayers.

12/20/94

-23-

But when you break down the  composition  of  income you  get a pattern
that  I think strikingly suggests  an enormous  behavioral response.  For
example, looking at  Schedule C income,  which is  notoriously
susceptible to  changes  in  tax rates,  people making under  $200,000  did
not have  a bad year;  they gained about  3 percent, but  the  rich people
did  terribly.  They had a decline of  43  percent  in  their reported
business  income.  And while corporate profits  for C Corporations  did
great  in  1993,  and partnership and S Corp profits  for people making
under  $200,000  rose  28  percent,  those  sorts  of  profits  fell  25  percent
for people who were  affected by the  tax rate  increase.  The  third
parameter  that  is  probably most  susceptible  to  tax rate behavioral
responses  is  charitable giving.  Where  overall  charitable  giving rose
about 3 percent,  charitable giving by those making  over  $200,000  rose
41  percent.  If  we add up  the  dollar changes  here,  a $5.5  billion
decline  in  business  income,  a $14  billion decline  in partnership
income,  and  $2.9 billion  in  extra charitable deductions,  just  looking
at  those  three  factors  we get  a shortfall  from  1992  levels  of  $22.3
billion that  would have been taxed at  an average  rate of  38  percent.
That  would give  us  a shortfall  of  $8.5  billion.  In other words, more
than half  of  the  tax  increase was  offset by behavioral  responses.  I
found it  striking because both  the micro  and macro data point  in  the
same direction.

I think that  that  type  of  evidence plus  evidence  that has
accumulated over  the  last  15  years  is  going to  lead  to  some modest
changes,  and  I want  to  emphasize  the  word  "modest,"  in the  scoring
process  that  Congress  will  use.  But  I do  want  to  disagree--and  I
rarely do--with Bob McTeer's  observation.  I think  that  we should keep
in mind a number  of  effects  with regard  to  what  is  going to  happen  to
fiscal policy.  In my mind the  short-term effects  of  fiscal policy
will  probably be contractionary.  To  explain why,  first,  I think the
dynamic will  be  to produce  a near-term balanced change  in  the  overall
scoring.  There are  two  philosophical  reasons why  the new  leadership
in  the  House  should do  that.  First, Newt  is  a political  philosopher,
and his basic  strategy  is  to  reverse  the  observation  that all  politics
is  local,  which  is  Tip  O'Neill's  approach, where you buy off  the
taxpayers in  your District by putting up a project and  they don't  care
about the  national effect, meaning  the  tax implications.  The  election
was  run on a reversal of  that  strategy.  And so  I think if  you're
placing yourself  in Newt's  shoes  as  a political  strategist, you want
both  to pay off  your  constituents and punish the  opposition.  That
requires both tax  cuts  and  spending  increases.

In addition,  I think  the  lesson of  the  iron triangle  is not

lost,  and there will  be intentional  efforts  to  try and weaken  the
long-term  effects  of  the  relationship between  the  bureaucracy, Hill
staff,  and the press  by defunding  it.  So  I think we will  see  that  the
timing of  spending reductions will  be much quicker  than anyone
anticipates.  And  they will  be heavily oriented  toward what  in
Washington we  call  "reductions in  force"  and the  rest  of  the  country
calls  "firings."  They actually are  not  firings;  they are buyouts.
So,  here  is why I'd  like  to  elaborate on  why we  should keep  in mind
that probably the  net effect  of  what we  are going  to  see  is  a fiscal
contraction.  With a buyout you give  the  departing  employee  a lump  sum
payment.  That  expands  the  government deficit.  But  the  newly laid  off
employee does  not  run out  and spend his  buyout  immediately;  in  fact,
he's a little traumatized  and will  actually  cut  back on  spending.  So

12/20/94

-24-

there would be one  example  of where you'd get  an  increase  in  the
budget  deficit which would not  feed back  into  higher aggregate  demand.

Second, of  those prospective tax  increases,  I think two  in

particular will  happen.  One  is  a child credit which actually will be
dribbled out  over  the  course of  the  entire fiscal  year and may not
even  start until midyear.  So you get  $10  a week in  your paycheck.
The  timing of  the median-dollar  fiscal  impetus  will be much later than
the  timing of  the  offsetting dollar  of spending  cuts.  The  other  tax
cut,  which  is  capital  gains,  I think has clear  timing  issues.  More
important,  I think there  are issues  for  the  effect  on  the marginal
propensity to consume  that  dollar, which  I think  is  probably quite
low.  So,  I believe  the  net  fiscal  impetus  that  is  going  to come  from
the  budget changes  on  a timing basis  is  going  to  be quite  negative  for
1995  and 1996.  Second,  I think if  we  look  at  the marginal  propensity
to  consume  issues again,  the  effect on  demand  of  any fiscal  change  is
going  to be  rather small.  We always  taught  that  the balanced budget
multiplier was  around 1 in  a very simplified model  or more precisely
that  the  effect  of  a spending  cut  is more  dramatic  than  the  effect  of
a tax change.

There  is  a third reason why that's  going  to  affect  the

economy  in  a negative way, and that  is  that  we are going  to  see  I
think an intensely  regional  distribution of  the  spending changes,
mainly focused  in  the northern  portions  of  the  Fifth  District!  If you
want  any indication  of  that,  go  for  a tour  of  some  of  the  nicer
sections  of Upper  Northwest  section of Washington, and you will  see
"For Sale"  signs  just  about  everywhere,  although  I think  there were
local  elections which may have affected  that  outcome  as well  as  the
national  elections.  As  in  the  case  of  defense  spending  cutbacks,  I
think we are going  to  see  a highly regionalized effect.

The  third observation  I'd have on  the  net  impact  is  on  the

regulatory side.  I think  that  compared to  the  fiscal  actions  the
regulatory actions  of  the new Congress will  be extremely  dramatic.
Here  I think  the  right model  to  think about  is  what happens  to  GDP
when you stop  building  a pyramid.  I don't mean  to  imply  that  all  of
our regulations  are pyramids, but  some have  cost-benefit relations
which  are  not much better.  When you stop  building  a pyramid, you  lay
off  workers and you have  a negative  effect  on  GDP.  Those  workers will
eventually find  employment.  Their  real  output  will be higher, but
those  real  output  gains will not be  seen  for  two  or  three years.  I
think we  are going  to  see  a major  change in  the  regulatory apparatus,
and particularly  in  the  mandating of  the private  sector and state  and
local  governments  to  spend money  for  federal  regulatory purposes.  The
net  result,  I think, will  also  be  contractionary on  the  economy, at
least over  the  forecast horizon.  Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Sounds like  a 30-year bond rate  of  5

percent!  Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY.  Mr.  Chairman,  in the  spirit  of  "contain yourself

to  what you see,"  what  I see  is  what  I've heard all  morning--a very
strong economy where  the  risks are  rather heavily skewed  to  the  up
side.  Let me  take  just  a minute  to  mention  two other  matters.  The
first,  which has been  alluded to  a couple of  times  this morning, is
that  there  may be more  substance  than many of  us  think  to  this  whole
notion  that we  have  some  kind of  a new economy with a lower propensity

12/20/94

-25-

toward  inflation.  I am referring  to  this  whole mix of  arguments  that
we may have  a  lower NAIRU, a new level  of  competition, world markets
with  lots  of  capacity, much higher productivity, and probably  less
significant wage pressures  than  one might  expect with this  level  of
employment.  I have  had a  lot  of  sympathy with that  argument  for  a
long time  and spoke  to  it  several  times  at  our meetings  during  the
spring.  I don't much  doubt  that  that  has  been present  and  is  present
in the  mix of  the  economy right  now.  I  think it  probably  is  a
significant  reason why we have  done as  well as  we  have  so  far  relative
to  the  amount  of  growth  and the  amount  of  inflation that we have
experienced.  But  I rather  doubt  that  we  can depend  on  that mix of
considerations  to  carry us  very much higher in  the  level  of  capacity
utilization  than we  already  are  experiencing without  having  that  mix
of considerations  exhaust  themselves  with higher  inflationary
pressures  showing up.

The other  thing  I'd  like  to  mention  is  that  I am worried

about  and puzzled by  the  formation of  consumer debt.  I think  there
has  to  be  a  serious  downside risk there,  either  short  term or  long
term.  Consumer  debt  is  off  the  charts  on  the up  side  in relation  to
consumer  income  or net  worth, and its  growth should  slow.  There  are
precious  few signs  that  it  is  slowing so  far, but  there  is  a  short-
term possibility  that what we  are  seeing  now is  that  the  consumer  is
indeed  shopping until  he or  she  drops and  that maybe  the wallet  will
close  after Christmas.  Inventories  could  start  to  build up quickly.
That  is  something  to  watch immediately  after Christmas.  If  we don't
get  some  slowing  in  the  near future,  then  I would worry  that  that  is
going to  imply some  other  types  of  problems  further  on  down the  line
that  could perhaps  be  even more  serious.  Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor  Phillips.

MS.  PHILLIPS.  Thank you.  Our  discussion has  demonstrated
the depth and  the breadth and  the  resilience of  the  economy.  These
are  terms  that we usually use  for  market conditions,  but we could
certainly apply  them  to  this  expansion period.  We  are  closing  in now
on  four years  of  economic  expansion.  Growth  in  three  of  those  years
is  now indicated  to  have been  above potential  in most  parts  of  the
country.  It  almost  seems  that  Orange  County  is  the  only place  that
does  not  appear  to  be  participating.  A  key question  is  similar  to  the
one  that  Governor Kelley  just  posed;  that  is,  when are  we  going  to  see
stronger signs  of  a slowdown?  So  far we  are  hearing and seeing
significant  signs  of  momentum going  into  1995.  I do  think that  the
monetary stimulus  that  extended  from  1989  through  the  first part  of
1994  is  causing  a good deal  of  the momentum, and  I don't  think we need
to put  too  fine  a point  on  it.  Within that  period we  had  15  months  of
a  3 percent  federal  funds  rate  that  certainly has  had an  influence.  I
do  think that  the  so-called head winds  died down  sometime  in  1993.
People became more  comfortable with  their balance sheets,  and  the
monetary policy  ease  started  to  show through  significantly into  the
economic  system.  As  other people  have  said,  these  restructuring head
winds are  now becoming  tail  winds.  We  are  now reaping  the benefits  of
the  earlier balance sheet  restructuring which  is  providing a lot  of
cash for  both businesses  and households  to  spend.  Whereas we  did have
a credit  crunch  in  the  banking sector,  now we are  seeing  significant
willingness by banks  to  lend  to both households  and businesses.  Both
business  investment and  construction spending, which had been  a drag

12/20/94

-26-

on  the  economy, are now starting  to  contribute  significantly  to  the
expansion.

Well,  at  some point  it  must  stop.  I think that  forecasters

have plenty of  room to be humble  as  we end  1994.  It  is  at  least
feasible  that  consumers  could  slam on  the  brakes  early next year--when
they balance  their  checkbooks when  they  really start  to  assess  how
much debt  they have taken  on.  Maybe  it  will  happen when they get  the
latest repricing  of  their  ARMs  or when the  wealth effects  start  to hit
as  they  get  their year-end mutual  fund statements.  I think people  are
beginning to  realize  that  the paycheck  increases  are  not  as  great  as
they have  seen  in  the past.  We may not  have  the  strong  year-end
bonuses  in  some areas  that  we have  seen  in past  years.  In  short,  I
think that  the party  for  consumers  is  going to  be  over, but  it  is  not
clear how far  the current  momentum  is  going to  carry us  forward from
here.

On the  business  side,  I think  that  the  tail  winds actually

may be  a bit  stronger because  of  the  productivity kick  that we  are
getting  from re-engineering and  technology investment.  Eventually,
monetary policy will  start  to  bite  harder  as  this  pipeline  effect
works  its  way through  the  economy.  We have been  given breathing  space
with  respect  to  final  consumer price  increases.  We may have been
saved by the  bumper grain  crop  that we have  seen  this  year.  Energy
prices  backed off.  We have had  a mild autumn.  Ironically, the  labor
market  is  giving  us  some mixed  signals.  There has  been a  lot  of
discussion around  the  table  today about  labor shortages,  but  also
discussion of  the  fact  that  we are  not  seeing big pressures  in wage
markets.  Jerry Jordan  talked  about  some  of  the  temporary measures
that  are being  taken  to  try  to  deal  with these  labor  shortages  that  do
not  affect  the  permanent wage  structure.  I think  that  despite  the
fact  that  we  have  a  5.6  percent  unemployment  rate,  there is  still  some
considerable unrest  in  the  labor  markets.  People  have  jobs,  but  they
don't necessarily have  the  jobs  that  they want or  that  they like.
Except  in  some  skilled areas  there  may be more  flexibility  in the
labor market  than we had  thought.  I believe  there  is  a willingness
now  to move  and change  careers,  and  this  willingness will  be helpful
in containing wage pressures  as  we move  forward.  And certainly on  the
benefits  side,  the  health  cost  containment efforts  have  been helpful.

In sum,  as  we move  into  1995  I,  too,  think we  are  going  to

get  a slowdown, but  the  question  is  when and how much.  On the  fiscal
side,  I'm  not  as  confident  as  Larry Lindsey  in making predictions.  It
seems  to  me  that  everything  is  on  the  table  in  the  Congress.  In  this
contest  of  wills  that  we  are  about  to  see,  I hope  that  the  loser  is
not  deficit reduction.

On  the market  side,  the  financial markets  really have

performed quite well  given all  of  the  shocks  that  we have  experienced
in  1994,  but  I think there  is more  yet  to  come.  We  have seen quite  an
orderly correction  this  year,  but  there may yet be  some  fallout.  Joan
Lovett and,  of  course,  Bob Parry  talked at  length  about Orange  County.
I don't  think we have  seen  all  of  that play out.  I don't  think we
have yet  seen  all  of  the  implications  of  the  Bankers  Trust  situation
play  out.  When people  get  their year-end mark-to-market  statements  on
their mutual  funds,  there may well be  some  surprises.  I think many of
the  counties  may still  be  trying  to  figure  out  exactly where  they
stand.  So  there may well  be some  shocks  coming in  1995.  The point  of

12/20/94

-27-

that,  of course,  is  that  there  is  considerable uncertainty as  we go
into  1995.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE.  Mr.  Chairman,  if  the  staff projection  for  the

fourth quarter  is  correct, we clearly have a more vibrant  economy than
most of us  had expected and the  surprise  is  the  lack  of  inflation
flares  in  the  current  figures.  I am  somewhat puzzled by the  Greenbook
projection  for  the  first quarter  of  1995.  The abrupt  GDP  slowdown
seems  to me  to be  counterintuitive.  With  the very high  level  of
capacity utilization and reduced  slack in  the  labor markets, pressures
are  building  for price  increases  and higher wage  demands  when contract
negotiations begin next  year.  What  I  find puzzling  is  the widespread
existence of  sales  at  significant discounts  on  every kind of
merchandise.  Brooks  Brothers has  recently offered  40  percent  off  on
top-of-the-line  goods,  and the  newspapers and catalogs  are  bursting
with ads  for  sales.  Coming during  the  top  selling  season of  the  year,
these  sales  would seem  to  support  the  idea  that  price increases  are
very difficult  to  make  stick.  To be  sure,  steel--operating at  or
about 95  percent of  capacity--has  negotiated contracts  for  1995
deliveries  at  higher prices.  And that  pattern will  probably spread  in
the near  future  to  other  industries  that  also are  operating at  high
levels of  capacity.  The  momentum certainly  seems  to  be  there  for
accelerating growth  in  the  economy even  though  it  is  already burning
along at a rate  well  above potential.  And as  the night  follows  the
day, inflation  is  certain  to  be  lurking.  The height  of  the  Greenspan
Wall prevents me  from completing my prepared remarks  at  this  time.  I
will wait  for  the  gate  to  open.  [Laughter]

SPEAKER(?).  The  flood gate was  it?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  I've learned my lesson!

SPEAKER(?).  A  less-than-successful building project.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Yes,  that  is  right!

MS.  MINEHAN.  That  is  really true.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor Blinder.

MR. BLINDER.  I think the wall  was  extremely successful.  I'm
not  going to  breach it.  I'm  also going  to  be very brief  since,  coming
almost  at  the  end, almost  everything  that  I might  have said--and  its
opposite--has  already been said!  [Laughter]

Let  me  take  a few minutes  to  defend  the  conventionality of

the  Greenbook  forecast  against  some  of  the  objections  that  were
raised.  Although, as  a small  footnote,  in thinking  ahead about my
Humphrey-Hawkins  forecast  in  February, my inclination would have  been
to  be  a  little higher on near-term growth--1995  growth--and maybe  a
little higher on  inflation.  But  these  are  small  differences.  I want
to defend  the Greenbook both  in the  particulars,  the  kind  of  outlook
that  it  is  pushing--a rapid  deceleration of growth  and a small
increase  in  inflation--and also  on  the  basic methodology of  being
conventional.  I think there  is  a  lot  to  be  said  for,  and very  little
on  the  other side,  the  staff  of  the  central bank  to  be extremely

12/20/94

-28-

conventional  in  its  methodology and not buy on  to hypotheses  that  have
very little  empirical  support,  although  10  years  later  that might  look
like  a good idea.  Usually it  doesn't,  but  it  might.  Speaking as  a
citizen and as  a central banker,  I'm glad to  see the  staff  sticking  to
the tried  and at  least  not  falsified methods!  [Laughter]

I agree with  the  Greenbook outlook  that we  probably have
pushed a bit past  the  NAIRU.  There  is  a probability distribution
around  this,  of  course, but  the best  guess  is  that  the  economy
probably has pushed a little past  the  NAIRU, or noninflationary
capacity.  I also  agree  that  it  is  quite  reasonable  to  expect  a very
considerable deceleration of  growth  in 1995  under current policy and
then  a tiny bit more  in  1996  if  there  is  no  further  tightening.  One
of  the  reasons--Susan Phillips  and  several people have mentioned  it--
is  something  that  is  too  easy to  forget:  the  lagged effects  of  the
stimulative  monetary policy  that only ended  in  February  1994,  and only
very slightly at  that.  It  is  even  easier to  forget  the  stimulative
effect  of  the bond market  rally that peaked in price,  troughed  in
yield, only in October 1993.  Everything we  know about  lags  in
interest  rates  says  that  those  two  things--the previous  Fed stance and
the bond market  rally attributable  to whatever you want  to  attribute
it  to--should be powering the  economy  in 1994.  I think  the main
reason behind  the  standard  forecasts'  underestimates  of  1994 was  an
unwillingness  to  believe  in interest  rate  effects.  It  is  the  same
kind  of  thing that  is  happening now;  everyone  is  looking  around  and
asking where  it  is,  not believing, and  then  all of  a sudden it  is
there.  This  has happened many, many times  in the  past, and I have no
doubt  that  it  will  happen  in the  future.  And  it probably is  happening
right  now.  This  is  a second reason to  expect a considerable
deceleration.  We first  of  all  have  the petering out  of  the previous
expansionary effects  of  interest  rates  and,  second, just  the beginning
of  the  early stages  of  the  kicking  in  of  the  contractionary phase  of
monetary policy.  As  I think Mike  indicated  in  answer  to some
question, you  should just  now be  beginning  to  see  the  effects  of  the
Fed's  tightening in 1994.  It  is  very hard at  this point  to  see  it  in
the  tea  leaves, but  history suggests  that  it  is  right  around  the
corner.  So  those  are  two  fundamentals  leading me  to  think we  should
have  a sharp  deceleration  in  1995--the wearing  off of  the previous
expansion and  the  kicking  in  of  the  tightening.

Finally, there  is  the  inventory swing.  I think  the  staff

outlook--I was  about  to  say  it  is  exactly right,  but nobody can  get  it
exactly right.  Nobody knows  the  timing of  this, but  it  is  an awfully
good bet  that between  the  fourth quarter  of  1994  and  the  fourth
quarter  of  1995,  the  inventory  swing  alone will  take  something between
1/2  and a full  percentage point  off  the growth  rate.  It  would be
quite  surprising if  that didn't happen.  So  all  that points  to  a
considerable  slowdown in  the  economy  even  if  there  is  no more
tightening of monetary policy, and  somewhat more  if  there  is.  That  is
as  close to  the  fence  as  I'm going  to  come  right  now.

Let  me  just  take  two minutes  on  inflation.  Many people  are
surprised,  and several  people have  remarked around  this  table,  about
the  modest  rate  of  inflation given  the  rapid  economic  growth.  I want
to  say  two  things about  that.  First,  this  is  not  quite  as  surprising
as  people  seem to  think.  If  we have overshot  capacity, as  Mike said,
we have overshot  very, very recently and by very, very modest  amounts.
And there  are  long  lags.  It  would be  surprising  indeed  if  we already

12/20/94

-29-

saw a  sharp  increase  in  inflation  from  that.  Simple  evidence, which
says  the  same thing  in  a different  way,  is  that  the  conventional
Phillips  curves  are  fitting  this  episode extraordinarily well.  They
have very small  residuals.  So,  if  there  is  a new economy due  to
greater  openness,  a  traumatized  labor  force, or  whatever--all  these
things  are possible--the evidence  for  that  is  really not  in  the data.
And so  I think  the  staff  is  wise  to  stay clear  of  it.  That  is,  it
would be  imprudent  for us  as  central  bankers  to  presume we are  in  a
new,  substantially less  inflationary world.  On  the  other hand,  the
recent  news  is  good:  To  the  extent  that  the errors  are  coming  in not
quite  zero,  they are  coming  in  favorably.  And while we would be
imprudent  to  jump hastily  to  a conclusion  that  we are  in a new world,
we would be  foolish  to  ignore  the  evidence as  it  comes  in.  And the
Greenbook doesn't  ignore  it.  They have written  down the  inflation
forecast a bit  in  reaction  to  the  recent  data.  I  think that  is  about
the  right way  to  deal  with  it.

Finally, a  last  remark  about  inflation and  in  defense  of  the

staff:  Standard econometric  estimates would  say  that  a  1 percent
overshoot--1  percent  as  measured by the  unemployment  rate  for  an
entire  year--would add about  1/2  percent  to  the  inflation  rate.  Now,
it  is  correct  that  nobody  should take  these numbers  as  equivalent  to
the  gravitational  constant  in physics--never mind Einsteinian
amendments  to  that.  We  don't  know these numbers  nearly  that  well.  On
the  other hand, there  is  no particular  reason  to  think that  it  is  too
low rather  than too  high.  It  is  the  best  guess,  and  even  if  you want
to view that  0.5  percent  effect  as  saying  0.5  plus  or minus  2
percentage  points, which  I  think would be  very much an  exaggeration of
the  errors,  0.5  is  still  as  good a guess  as  you can make--except that,
if  anything,  the  incoming  evidence seems  to be  pointing  to  a  little
less  of  an  inflationary impact,  not  a little more,  as  I said  a minute
ago.  So,  the  evidence  is  not  overwhelming.  But,  if  anything,  it
would shade you  toward  less  of  an  inflationary acceleration, not  more.
So,  there,  I have  defended you!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor Yellen.

MS.  YELLEN.  My opinion concerning  the  strength and  likely

future direction  of  the  economy has  changed just  marginally  since our
last  meeting.  Certainly,  the  evidence has  continued to  accumulate
that  we have  an  economy with a very  good head of  steam.  We  see  that
in  the  employment report,  a significant  rise  in  the help wanted  index,
growing order backlogs,  and  frankly  to  my surprise  in the  Michigan
indexes  of  car,  appliance, and house  buying  intentions  which all
turned up  after having  fallen,  in  some  cases  substantially, in
November.  So  I must  admit I'm  surprised to  see  so  little  evidence  of
a  slowdown,  although I continue  to  feel--as  I  stated last  time--that
we are  seeing  in part  the  lagged effects  of  a prolonged period of  low
interest  rates,  as  Governor  Blinder also  noted.

There  is  certainly some  risk  that real  growth will  slow  less

in  1995  than  the Greenbook  forecast  now assumes  and that we  could
overshoot potential  output  in  1995  by more.  Nevertheless,  I'll  just
continue  to  emphasize,  as  others  and  I have  in  the past,  that  our
previous  actions  have  added a great  deal  of restraint  to  the pipeline.
Since our  last  meeting real  interest  rates have  risen  considerably,
and as  Bill McDonough  emphasized, real  interest  rates by various
measures  are  not  low by historical  standards.  We have  seen,  finally,

12/20/94

-30-

a decline  in  the  stock market, which will  bring wealth effects  on
consumer spending  into play, and  for  once  the  dollar has been
appreciating--which  re-enforces  direct  interest  rate  effects  and plays
some moderating  influence on  the  inflation  forecast.  In addition,  of
course, as  Mike has  emphasized,  inventory accumulation is  bound  to
slow and  it  seems  possible  to  me  that  accelerator mechanisms  can  then
kick  in  to  slow the  economy significantly.

So,  I see  a number of  changes  in  the pipeline  that  I expect

to work  to  cool  off  demand but with a very substantial  lag.  And
frankly at  this  stage  I remain  uncertain as  to  just  where the  economy
would be  in  1996  with  the  100  to  150  basis points  increase that  is
assumed  in the  Greenbook.  I share  the  concern  of  a number of private
forecasters  and of  some  of  you that  this  degree  of  tightening  in  the
near  term could slow demand growth  and  that we  could  end up producing
a boom/bust  scenario.  To  avoid  such an  outcome,  it  seems  to me  that
the  funds  rate  would have to  fall  rather quickly,  by more  than  the
Greenbook assumes,  once  growth slows  to  trend, even  with the  economy
below the NAIRU.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Thank you.  Is  coffee  available?

MR. BERNARD.  Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Let's  take  our usual break.

[Coffee  break]

MR. KOHN.  [Statement--See  Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Questions  for  Don?  If  not, why don't  I

start  as  usual?  I'm  impressed with the  extent  to which  it  is  very
difficult  to  find  any negative  factors  in  the  current  outlook.  You
can not  find  it  in  the  order patterns, which  are  strong  across  the
board.  There  are  very few  firms  outside  the  defense-related area or
long-term turkeys  that  are  not  doing exceptionally well.  [Laughter]
The  Christmas  selling  season  is,  as  always,  difficult  to  read.  The
trouble with  the Christmas  selling  season  is  that  the  constant  dollar
volume  is  really predetermined because  retailers  will  sell what  they
have  and  the  only thing  that  is  indeterminate  is  the price.  But  that
is  quite  relevant to  how  the  system works when you  get  into  the  first
quarter.  Looking strictly at  the  data as  they stand  at  this  stage,  it
is  very difficult  to  tell  whether  in  this  quarter  the  GDP  growth rate
is  3 percent  or  7 percent.  We  are  making  forecasts  about  how the
system  is  going  to  evolve.  My  own  impression  is  that  since  it  is
extraordinarily unlikely that  all  of  these positive  events  will
continue  without  change  for terribly  long,  one  has  to  assume  that  this
expansion will  start  to  ease  off  at  some point.  The  only thing  that  I
think we have  to  be  careful  about  is  that  the  easing may be more
delayed  than  we suspect.  And until  we begin to  see  the process  of
erosion  in  its  early  stages, we  really have no  basis  for  saying  that
the  expansion  is  slowing  down.  We  are  looking at  history;  we are
looking at  relationships;  but  there are  no  significant demonstrable
imbalances  in the  system that  basically  say things have  to  change.  We
are  projecting that  there  will  be  a  change,  but  that again  is  a
projection.  As  of  the moment  in  the  labor markets,  initial  claims
continue  at  quite  low  levels.  The  fairly strong pattern  of  C&I  loans
suggests  that  inventory accumulation is  still  moving  at a  reasonably

12/20/94

-31-

strong pace  and that  is  bolstered by  the  orders pattern, which
suggests  that producers' durable goods  are  doing well.  Remember, a
goodly part of  inventories  is  supported by the  capital  goods  and
construction markets  even though we don't  keep  the  data  that way.

As  best  I can judge, profit margins  are still  on  the  firm

side and even  though profit  forecasts  are beginning to  look more
symmetrical  rather  than just  continuously underestimated,  the  evidence
on  the profits  side  is  still  quite positive.  Prices,  as a lot  of you
have noted, are  firming in  the  commercial  real  estate markets,
although my suspicion  is  that  the nationwide  figures may still  be
eroding albeit at  a much  slower pace.  I won't  add much  on
homebuilding;  it  is  a puzzle but  I think that  if  it  doesn't  start  to
move down,  then  all  of  our historical  relationships,  all  of  our basic
data, are  lacking  in predictive  value.  I don't believe  what  is  going
on  in homebuilding, but we  will  find out  eventually.

I think  the  interesting question  is  why wages  are not

responding  to what  is  a very rapidly  tightening labor market.  After
speaking to  some  labor  leaders  and others who  talk  to  their members
and have  a sense of  this,  I get  the  impression that  long-term job
insecurities  are quite pervasive  especially with respect  to  the
portability of health  insurance and pensions  that make workers  more
cautious  about  changing jobs.  The layoff  rates  are very low;  the
turnover  rates  are  really quite  low by American  standards;  and there
is  a tendency among workers  just  to  stick with what  they have.  The
effect  of  this,  I suspect,  is  a major  factor  in holding wage  increases
to  a very sluggish pace  considering all  the  evidence we have been
getting  in recent months  of  labor market  tightness.  This  is  crucial
because  so  long as  that  is  the  case and productivity  is  positive, unit
costs  are very well  contained.  Any endeavor  to  move  final  prices  up
in  that environment  induces  competitors  to  come  in and  try to  steal  a
firm's  market  share,  which erodes  the  firm's pricing  capability.  So
long as  we have some  evident  flexibility  in  the  system, then prices
can not readily move.  This  doesn't  necessarily mean  that  business
firms  have  to  run out  of  capacity;  obviously, it  just  starts  to  get a
little more  costly or  a little  tight  and we begin to get pressures.
But  it  is  not  clear  from  the  anecdotal data  and  the macro  data  that we
have  that  these pressures  are  severe.  I thought  that  the  exercise
that was  done for  the  Greenbook Part  II,  which separated where  the
growth rates  have been  in manufacturing depending on which  industries
were  at  high operating  rates,  is  tending  to  suggest  that there  is  more
flexibility  in  this  system than our  old conventional wisdom of
capacity use  would indicate.  There  obviously has  to  be a limit
somewhere,  and when we  look back on  this we may well  find that we have
a system that  is  a lot  more  flexible  than we presupposed.

This  is  also  true,  I think, with respect  to  monetary policy.

While  it  is  certainly  the  case  that we  have what  historically would
have been  a not  insubstantial  amount  of  a policy impact by  this  time,
the  simulations  that  the  staff  has done,  including  the  fact  that  long-
term interest  rates moved up  faster than  the normal process  would
imply, suggest  that  we  are probably some  25  percent  into  the
cumulative effects  of  our policy  tightening at  this  stage.  That  is
not  a small  number, and we  are now seeing very little effect  as  a
consequence.  On  the  contrary, what  we are  seeing  is  an easing  of
credit  terms  in  the  banking sector  and the  old notion that we  used to
have  30-40  years  ago--that  the  central  bank would  tighten, short-term

12/20/94

-32-

interest  rates  would rise, bank  credit would  suddenly be crunched by
Regulation  Q or  some  other  factor,  financing would be  undercut, and
the  economy would swoon--clearly is  an historic  relic  and  the
disintermediation  that we used  to  see  is  just  not  there.  On  the
contrary, we  are  having difficulty getting banks  to  notice  that
interest rates  are up.  The interest  rates  on  automobile  installment
paper  are  really lagging.  Everybody  is  trying  to  protect market
share, and  this  whole  thing just  doesn't  seem to  be  coming together.
But  it  will.  It  always  does.  And the  question  is  essentially pretty
much when.

I think it  is  really worth recognizing  that  there  is

something  quite different  about  the  timing  of  this  recovery.
Ordinarily, a recovery has  a much  higher rate  of  growth  in  the  early
stages  and  slows  in  the  later  stages.  Probably what  is  happening here
is  that  we  really didn't  have  the  classic  movement  to  a cyclical
recovery until well  into  the  cycle,  and we  are probably now  at
effectively the  earlier  stages  in a geriatric  sense as  distinct  from
the  calendar.  What  this  suggests  is  that  we probably  still have quite
significant momentum  in  the  system, and  it  is  not  clear  just when  it
will  ease  off.  I wonder to  what  extent we  can attribute  all  of  this
to  monetary policy and monetary policy lags.  Surely, we can  attribute
some  of  it;  there  is  no  question  that  that  is  the  case.  But  there  is
an  internal  dynamic  in  the  economy  that  is  wholly independent  of  the
business  cycle.  I do  think  the  issue  that Jerry Jordan  raised  is  an
interesting  one,  and even  though  it  is  very difficult  to  prove
statistically,  it may well be  that  the  fact  that  inflation  is
relatively low may--despite all  the  discussions we have  had about  the
inadequacy of  the  evidence--be contributing  to  improved productivity.
If  that  is  the  case, we will  get  some greater growth  in potential.  I
hope  that  one  of  these days  I will  be  able  to  use  one  of  these
statistics  after  the  fact,  and  finally say  I told you  so  [Laughter])
without  struggling.  I must  say I'm  a  little  concerned about  the
continued ease  in bank lending terms  which  I suspect  is  greater  than
the  numbers  show.

I seriously wonder  what our  monetary actions  from here  on

will  do  to  1995  as  well  as  to  1996.  I think  it  is  true,  as  a number
of  you have  pointed out,  that  if  we  really look  at  the  distributed
lags--the  average performance historically  of monetary policy--it  is
very difficult  to  make  the  case  that  what we may do  in the  early
months  of  1995  will have  significant  effects  in  calendar  1995  in  real
terms.  I would only caution  that  if  we  get  an  unexpected breakout  on
the  up  side  in  inflationary expectations,  the  distributed  lag  of
monetary policy will bunch up  very quickly.  We have  to  be  careful
about  that.  I do  think  the argument  that most  of  the  impact  is
delayed is  clearly a correct view, but  I  think we  have to  be careful
about  the probability--even  though  it  is  low--of  significant
aberrations  that  could have  important  negative  effects.

All  in all,  if  we decided that  we needed  to  move  the  funds

rate  up  at  this  meeting, which  I don't  support  I must  say, I doubt
very much that  that would have  a negative  effect  on  economic activity.
I think the  economy's  momentum is  still  quite  strong.  I do worry,
however, with  or without the  Orange  County turmoil  and  the  usual  end-
of-year problems,  whether we  would be  taking undue  risks  in
endeavoring  to tighten  in this  environment.  I think  that  the  odds
that  we  are  going  to  have to  move  shortly after  the  first  of  the  year,

12/20/94

-33-

no  later  than  our next  meeting, are  quite high.  However, it  is
conceivable  that  this  expansion could  fizzle  out  fairly  quickly.  I
frankly don't  expect  that,  but  I think we  can't disregard  that
possibility.  Where  I would  come  out  at  this  stage is  that  I hope  we
will be  comfortable  staying where we are  for a while.  I believe,  as
Don  Kohn pointed out,  that we have  time  to  make  further  adjustments  if
need be, but  because of  the possibility that  we might  find  it
necessary  to  move after  the  first  of  the  year but  before  January 31,  I
think  it  would be preferable to  have  an asymmetric  directive.  Vice
Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.  Mr. Chairman,  I support  your

conclusion  that  alternative  B with an  asymmetric directive  is
appropriate.  As  I remarked earlier,  the degree  of  uncertainty about
the  effect of  existing monetary policy suggests waiting.  Also,  the
markets  are very  thin as  Joan described  earlier,  and  as  Susan Phillips
suggested we  could have  some  remaining  effect  of  governmental  actions
on Bankers  Trust, which would create  some  uncertainty in markets.
Therefore,  I think that  to  make a move  that  is  not absolutely
necessary right at  this  time  involves  some degree  of  risk.  It  is
difficult  to  quantify and would be  better  if  we avoided  it.  Why
asymmetric?  We  get  enough  data  in the  first half  of  the month--
nonfarm payroll  employment  on the  6th of  January, retail  sales  on  the
13th,  and  industrial  production on  the  17th--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Industrial  production we  get much

earlier.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.  We do?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Yes,  it  is  a Federal  Reserve number!

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.  The world  gets  it  later.  In any

case,  I think what  is  important  is  not  so much what we  know but what
is  known  outside.  It  might  very well  be  the  case  that  by the middle
of  the  month, roughly, our  strong views  on price stability  could be
questioned.  And, therefore, we  should have the  capability of  moving.
We  can move  in  fact without  an  asymmetric  directive, but  I think  that
we  are  better  off with  the  asymmetric  directive  toward tightening.
Therefore,  I believe  that  the  combination  of  doing nothing  today with
an  asymmetric directive  toward tightening  is  the  appropriate  mix.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE.  Mr.  Chairman, one  argument  against  policy moves

at  this  time  is  this  skittishness  of  the markets  on  the heels  of  the
Orange County mess.  On  the  contrary, I  think the  markets  have  reacted
to  the  "Lemon" County and  the  Bankers  Trust  situations  with great
poise  and restraint.  In my opinion,  the markets  may be  more dismayed
by a  lack  of  further  tightening now, particularly as  they sense  the
increased  level  of  economic  activity,  the  shrinking  labor  market
slack, high  levels of  capacity  utilization, and consumer  attitudes
that don't  foretell much  slowing of  consumption.  In  the past,  there
has  been market  speculation  that we  were behind the  curve.  The
November  action  countered that  impression, and  I worry that  ignoring
the  continued strength of  economic  activity even  temporarily may
reignite  concerns  about  our determination.  At the  risk of  dubbing  the
Fed  as  the  Grinch who  stole Christmas,  it  seems  to  me we  need  to  snub

12/20/94

-34-

the  brakes  again without  delay,  and  therefore  I would prefer
alternative C  symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President Melzer.

MR. MELZER.  Thanks,  Alan.  I  favor  "B" asymmetric  toward

tightening.  As  I mentioned before,  the  response of  the  financial
markets  to  our  last  move  together with  the  slow growth  of  the
aggregates  convinces me  that  we can  afford  to  do  nothing now and
observe  the  effects  of  our  prior actions  for  a time.  I must  say,
though,  that  I'm not  at  all  convinced  that  we  have  fully met  the
current challenge  especially  if  our  goal,  as  I think  it  should be,  is
price stability.  Therefore,  I think  it  is  important  that we give
serious  consideration  at  the  February meeting as  to  how we might
convey our  long-term  intentions  in  this  regard.  The question  that we
had  from  Senator Riegle  last  July was  indicative,  I think, of  the  fact
that perhaps  on  the  outside  there was  some  confusion as  to exactly
what we  intended.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  There  has been  some discussion  that  the

new Congress  would  establish  such  a  legislative goal.

MR. MELZER.  Yes.  With  regard  to  that  issue, perhaps  one

thing we  ought to  think about  would be  to  provide  some  longer-run
inflation  forecasts,  say beyond  1995  or  1996,  because,  as  an  initial
step  in  considering  legislation, I  think one  could  say  that  monetary
policy  is  going  to  have  its principal  long-term  impact  on  inflation.
Eventually, I would be  inclined  to  establish  long-run inflation  or
price  level  objectives  as  some  other  central banks  have done.  Now
clearly this  is  going  to  require  a  lot  of  further  work, and  I'm
encouraged by  the  fact  that  the  staff  is  looking  into  that  issue.  I
would hope  that  we might  have something,  at  least  to  start  on,  that  we
could  talk  about at  the  February meeting.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor  Blinder.

MR. BLINDER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I agree  that  this  is

a good time  for waiting.  It  was  only 35  days  ago  that we  raised  the
fed  funds  rate by what was  essentially  a record amount.  The August
interest  rate  increase was  only three  months before  that,  and by all
historical  standards  ought  not  to  be  showing  in  the  data  as  yet.  That
is  to  say,  125  of  the  250  basis  points  of  tightening  that we have  done
up  to  now  could not possibly be  in  the  data at  this  point.  I think  if
we  were  to  move now  it  would  imply  some  sense  of  alarm on  our part,
some  sense  of  urgency  that  things were  going badly wrong.  And  like
you,  I don't  think  things  are  going badly wrong.  Things  are  looking
pretty good.  Even the next  FOMC meeting comes  just  11  weeks  after  the
November  15  action,  that  is,  less  than a quarter.  What  is  magic  about
a quarter?  It  is,  of  course,  the magic number  for  a macro  economist
who  tends  to  look at  the  economy every quarter.  It  is  a  shame  there
wasn't more  spacing  in  there, but  that  is  the  way the  FOMC  calendar
falls.  So,  I think you are  almost  surely right  that  it  is  wise to
wait until  the  next  FOMC meeting unless  something  fairly  startling
happens.  In  that  regard,  I would prefer  a symmetric  directive.  I
don't  feel  strongly  enough about  this  to  make  a big  deal  of  it,  but  I
have  a predisposition  to  wait  until  the  next  FOMC meeting  for  a number
of  reasons.  I wasn't persuaded by  Bill's  argument  that  if  these  data
that  he  mentioned come  in  strongly that  we might  not wish  to wait what

12/20/94

-35-

basically amounts  to  only two more weeks.  If  the Greenbook  forecast
without  the  additional  tightening is,  say,  2.1 percent  real  growth  in
1995,  which we were discussing before,  it  is  not  so  obvious  that  we
ought  to  take action  to push  it  down  lower  than that.  As  I said
before,  I suspect  that  the projection  might be  a  little on  the  low
side;  that  without more  tightening growth  in  1995 might  be  higher than
that;  and indeed  that  more  tightening might be  necessary.  I for  one
have  an  open mind about  future increases  in  short  rates.

Finally,  I won't  repeat my  thermostat speech  of  the  last

time, but  I always  keep  in  mind that  the  classic  mistake  of  central
banks  in  almost  all  times  and almost  all  countries  is  to  overstay
either  their  tightening or  their easing.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS.  As  we all  know, the  Greenbook  is  assuming  that
the  funds  rate  has  to  be pushed up  another percentage point  or perhaps
even more  to  keep  inflation  from breaking  out.  Obviously, we can't
know for  sure  at  this  stage whether  that much  tightening  is  going to
be  needed, and  indeed as  you suggested, Mr.  Chairman,  things may work
out  so  that  nothing more  is  needed.  Still--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  That  is  a very  low probability.

MR. BROADDUS.  I would  think so,  and  I think  it  is  certainly

a very high probability that  we are  going to  have  to  do  something
more.  The  question before  us  this  morning  is  whether or not we need
to do  some  of  that  tightening today  or whether we  can put  it  off  a
little  longer.  I think  it  is  a very close  call.  My own  preference  at
this  meeting would be  to  move  the  funds  rate  up  1/4  percentage point
to  5-3/4  percent.  I realize  the  1/4  point  funds rate moves  earlier  in
the  year had adverse  reactions,  and  at  that  time  some  argued that
those moves  were made under  sensitive  circumstances.  However,  the
situation  is  very different  now.  We  only recently made  a very strong
move,  so  I don't  think  that  kind of  reaction would be  a problem at
this  stage  of  the  game.  I think  the main argument  for  a relatively
modest  further  move  today  is  that  it  would reinforce  and lock  in  the
quite  considerable credibility gains  that  the  November tightening
appears  to  have produced, as  I believe John LaWare  suggested.  I think
some  reinforcement  at  this  stage would be  desirable given  the  very
strong recent  data on both  employment and  spending.  At  the  same  time,
a  1/4  point move would be  significantly more  restrained than  any of
our  last  three moves,  and  it  would indicate  that  we  recognize  the  need
for  caution  as  we move  closer  to  the  cyclical  peak.  So,  my preference
would be  for  a 1/4  percent  increase.  I also would  like  to  second Tom
Melzer's comments  about  the need  to  consider some  sort  of  inflation
target,  something  to  nail  down our  longer-term goals  and objectives  at
the  February meeting.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG.  Mr.  Chairman, I would agree with those  who  say

that  we need to  take  some  action at  some  point.  I  think that  that
should be  now, not  later.  The  best  environment  is  to  do  it  now while
sensitive  to  market  concerns.  I happen  to  think Governor LaWare  is
correct.  By delaying we would risk having  to  do more  later  and  having
more  adverse effects,  so  I would prefer  doing  something now.

12/20/94

-36-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN.  I think  the main part  of  our problem right  now

is  inflation  psychology.  It  certainly reflects  the  lack  of  a nominal
anchor.  It  suggests that  it would be  helpful  to  have a politically
supported mandate  to  attain and maintain a stable value of  the  dollar.
If  somehow we could achieve  the  conditions of  a true gold  standard--
without gold but  the  steady purchasing power  of  money in the  minds  of
people--over  time  it  would make  some of  these  short-term things  that
we  go  through a lot  easier  to  deal  with.  I also  support  Tom Melzer's
suggestion about  having  a discussion but  also  having a long-term
focus.  That  may  sound like  a minor  change but  one  that may be
important  in  a communications  sense because  our  long-term forecasts
are often  taken  as  long-term  inflation  objectives.  I still  feel  that
the  numbers we put  together for  the Humphrey-Hawkins  process  should
not be people's predictions  of  what  is  going  to  happen with regard to
inflation, but  rather  a reflection of  what  we  intend to  try and
achieve by  our monetary policy  actions.

There  is  some  good news  about what  seems  to be a consensus

around the  table that  the  rates of  change  of  output  and employment
this year  are  unsustainable.  And as  somebody said, unsustainable
things  have  a habit  of  ending.  The question  is  whether  it  will  end as
a result of  a natural process  in  which whatever  dynamics  produced it
in  the  first place  start  to  diminish  so we  get  a deceleration  in  the
rate  of  change  toward  something  that's more  consistent with  trend.  Or
is  it  something  that we have  to  take conscious  policy actions  to  force
if  it  is  not  occurring naturally?  I would resist  the  latter.  To  the
extent  that  the  anticipated slowing  in  the  growth  of activity  is
supposed  to  occur because  of  reductions  in  capital  expenditures  for
productivity-enhancing or  capacity-increasing purposes,  it  is  not  to
be welcomed.  It  is  implausible  to  me  that  investing  less  in  capacity
and productivity  lessens  the  chance of  inflation.  In  fact,  quite  the
contrary;  we  should welcome having more people  invest  in capital
expenditure programs  for capacity  or productivity.  So  if  you're  going
to  contemplate  an  action before  the next  meeting, with or without  an
asymmetric  directive, with  or without a telephone  call,  I hope that
the numbers  will be  reviewed very  carefully to  determine whether what
we are  seeing is  a result of  still  diminished head winds  and the
economy has a ways  to  go  in a natural  spontaneous process  versus
something that  is  read  in  the marketplace  as  a spillover  of  excess
demand.  And that  is  going  to  happen  if  it  isn't  carefully done.  I
wouldn't  dissent  against  an asymmetric  directive, but  I would be very
concerned  if  any action taken was  interpreted  in  the marketplace  as
anti-growth  for  the  sake  of  it.

MR. MELZER.  Jerry,  just to  clarify, I favor your  objective
as  well, but  recognizing  the  practicalities of  getting  from where we
are  to  that  in a relatively short period  of  time and the possibility
of  a legislative mandate,  I was  suggesting  that  a long-term forecast
may be  an  intermediate  step we  could take  on  our  own right  away.  But
I agree with you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  We inevitably are going to  have  to  be

discussing that because we are  required  to  do projections  of  the
monetary aggregates.

MR. KOHN.  Just  for  1996.

12/20/94

-37-

MR. MELZER.  Yes,  I'm  looking  even  further out  as  a

possibility.

MR.  KOHN.  1995,  excuse me.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY.  I want  to  associate myself  fully with Governor

Blinder's  views.  My reasoning  is  similar.  The  first  observation  is
that  I think the November move was  extremely  successful.  Our  decision
to  go  75  basis points  took off  the market pressure  in both  the  foreign
exchange market  and the  bond market.  I think had we moved  50  basis
points, we  would be moving  another  50  basis points  today.  So  in that
sense we  should be  patting ourselves  on  the back  for our  last  move.
And as  a result  I don't  think we should  move right  now.

I have  four  reasons  for not  preferring an  asymmetric

directive.  The  first has  to  do with data.  Reporters  often ask
whether we  are waiting  for  information  from  the  Christmas  season  to
decide what  we  are  going  to  do.  The  right  answer  is  that  there  is
absolutely nothing  that  we  are  going  to  do  at  this  meeting  that  could
conceivably affect  the  Christmas  season  or vice  versa.  In  fact,  as
our  discussion about  lags  has  indicated, what we are  talking  about  is
not  even  the  first  quarter;  what we  are  talking  about  is  late  1995  and
early 1996  with regard to  the  effect of  our  actions.  So,  rather  than
looking at current  activity we have  to  use  our  crystal  balls,  which
admittedly are  cloudy, and  stare down the  road.  So,  I'm not  sure what
information  is  going  to  come  out  in January  to  cause us  to  change  our
minds.

On  the  other hand,  I do  think  that  over  the  longer period we
are  going  to  have  information  that  will  be  useful.  We will  have more
information  on where  fiscal policy  is  headed and  sooner  than we
usually do.  In  addition,  we are  going  to  have  information  on  the
consumer.  I think the  anecdotal  evidence on  the  consumer  situation,
as  Governor  Kelley suggested,  is  that  they appear  to  be  tapped  out.
In  fact,  when you  talk  to bankers,  they  are now  issuing credit  cards
to  C and  D class  credits,  and  they are  doing so profitably.  I'm
saving  this  for  the next meeting,'but when I look  at  the  cash  flow
situation  of  households,  the  only private  sector  support  for this
spending  in my mind is  a buildup  of  consumer  credit.  I think the
credit  data  bear that  out.  So,  I would  rather delay for  information
reasons--certainly not move  in January,  and  I may even want  to  delay
at  our  next  meeting  on January  31-February  1.

The  other  issues have  to  do with our  tactics  in  the market.

We have  learned  this  year that moving  at meetings  gives us  a much more
efficient  tradeoff measured by the  short-term move  compared to  the
long-term move.  Generally, we have had  flat  or  rallying markets  on
moves at  meetings.  We have  been unsuccessful when we moved
intermeeting, and  I think  that  is  another reason  not  to  go  asymmetric
and  not  to move  intermeeting.

Finally, and  I think  this  reinforces  President  Melzer's

point, we will  have  to  consider  our  long-term  intentions  at  our  next
meeting and we  will  be making not  only a tactical  move  but a  strategic
move.  And I think we  should at  the  very least  want  to  hold whatever
tactical moves  we have  until we  know where  we  are  going  to  go

12/20/94

-38-

strategically.  So  for  those reasons  I concur  with Mr.  Blinder and
urge  symmetric  "B."

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Parry.

MR. PARRY.  Mr.  Chairman,  in my view the  economy  has  picked
up more momentum since  our last  meeting, and  the  degree of  tightness
in  labor and product  markets  has  risen  even  further.  Our analysis
agrees  with the Greenbook  that  further  tightening  is  needed in  order
to  prevent an  increase  in  the  inflation  trend.  Therefore,  I would
prefer  a  50  basis point  increase in  the  funds  rate.  Frankly,  I don't
see  the problems  of  Orange  County as  a  reason to  hesitate  in doing
what  is  best  at  this  point  for  the  national  economy.  Financial
futures  markets  expect a  50  basis  point  increase  in  the  funds  rate  by
early January.  Thus,  I doubt  that  a policy move at  this  time  would
cause much disruption.  However,  I can  support  your recommendation
since  I interpret your comments  as  indicating that  a change  in  policy
is  quite  likely by roughly the  middle  of January.  If  the  tone  of  the
economic  data does not  change,  I am concerned that  further  delay
beyond that point  would lead  to  a deterioration of  inflationary
expectations.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW.  Mr.  Chairman, we believe that  further tightening

is  almost  inevitable  because  of  the  unexpectedly rapid pace of  the
expansion and  the  prospect  of unsustainably robust growth  continuing
in  the  future.  However,  in light  of  the  unusually  large  action at  the
November meeting, we recommend  leaving  the  rate unchanged  for  the  time
being, with  the  expectation  that  economic developments  in  the  coming
weeks  will  confirm the  need for  an  increase  in  the  funds  rate  at  the
January meeting,  if  not before.  So,  I would agree with you on  the
asymmetric directive.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Forrestal.

MR.  FORRESTAL.  Mr.  Chairman,  I think that  the  case  for not

moving  today  is  quite persuasive.  We  did move aggressively  just  a few
weeks  ago  and  I think we  have moved  aggressively throughout  the year.
The  cumulative moves  are  really quite  significant.  We need to
remember the  lags  in  monetary policy and  give  some  time  for  that  to
work  through  the  pipeline.  In  fact,  I am not  convinced  that  any great
further  degree  of  tightening  is  necessary, but  I have  an open mind on
that  score.  Also,  as  I tried  to  indicate before,  I think  there  is  now
greater  flexibility  in  the  economy.  At  the  risk  of  belaboring that
point,  I think  there  is  a plausible argument  that would  suggest  that
the  economy can  support  a greater degree  of  growth  at  the  present  time
without  incurring  inflationary pressures.  Obviously,  this  is  more
theory and  argument  than anything  else,  and as  has  been pointed out
this  morning  there  is  really  not very much empirical  evidence.  Some
of  the  things  that  you  cited with respect to  the  labor market  I think
are  appropriate  and relevant  here,  so  the burden  of  proof  obviously  is
on  those  who  would suggest  that  this  is  a plausible  theory, and  I
think there  is  a risk  in  using it  in  terms  of  policy deliberation.
However,  I do  think  it  is  important  to  keep  this  in mind as  we go
forward because  if  this  is  in  fact  the  case  we run a  risk on  the  other
side  of  seriously overdoing monetary policy actions.  For  the  moment,

12/20/94

-39-

I would support  your recommendation.  I would prefer a  symmetric
directive, but  I could  support  the  asymmetric  option as  well.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY.  Mr.  Chairman, in appreciation  for  Governor

Blinder not  giving his  thermostat  speech  I'll  forego  giving my
inflationary teakettle  speech!  [Laughter]  But  I do  think that  given
the momentum  that  we observe  that  it  is  overwhelmingly likely that  we
are  going  to  need to go  up  at  least  some more;  and  it  does  seem to  me
that  once  one  becomes  convinced of  that,  then  it  is  desirable  to  do  it
quite  soon in  the  expectation  that  that  is  the best  way to head off
having to  do  too much.  That  said, I think  it  certainly would be  a
good idea  to  hold off  until  after  the year-end pressures.  At  that
point,  we ought  to  take  another very hard look  at  it.  For  today, I
certainly  support  your  "B" asymmetric  approach.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor Phillips.

MS.  PHILLIPS.  I also would support  "B" asymmetric.  I think

that we have  more tightening to  go,  but  I'm willing to wait  until
early next year.  As  a general  matter, I agree with Governor Kelley--
if  you  are  going  to  do  it,  earlier  is  better.  But  I think we have
been given  some breathing  room with the  favorable  CPI  numbers.  It
would be useful  to  let  us  get past  the  end of  the year and  the  year-
end marking-to-market.  That  allows  the markets  a chance  to  settle
out.  Ultimately, I think  that  more  tightening is  going  to be
necessary.  With all  of  the market  and monetary restructuring  that  has
taken place,  it  is  probably  going  to  take  larger  swings  in  interest
rates  to  achieve monetary goals.  It  is  very difficult  to  generalize
from past experience when  the pipeline  is  going  to  kick in  fully.  I
would  like  to  see  us  give  serious  consideration  to  the  longer-term
inflation  targeting approach  that  a number  of  people have  spoken
about;  Tom Melzer  started  off  the discussion  of  it  today.  But  for
today,  I think  "B" asymmetric will  serve  us  well.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor Yellen.

MS.  YELLEN.  Mr.  Chairman,  I favor  alternative B  to  hold the

funds  rate  at  5-1/2  percent  at  this  meeting, and  I favor  it  for  the
reasons  suggested in  the  Bluebook.  I also  concur with the  sentiments
expressed by Governors  Blinder  and Lindsey and  President Forrestal.  I
think a wait-and-see  strategy is  reasonable,  given  the magnitude of
previous  tightening  and particularly given our  uncertainty  about
whether  and how much the  economy  is  likely  to  slow on  its  own  and my
own uncertainty about  how much additional  tightening  is  going to  be
needed.  I would prefer a  symmetric  directive  with a strong
presumption that  we would wait  until  the  next  meeting in  order  to  act.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER.  I agree with your proposal.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Stern.

MR. STERN.  I'd favor  "B" with a  symmetric  directive.  I
favor  "B"  because  I do  think we  have  applied some  restraint  and,
given  the  lags,  I think we  ought  to  be patient and  take  some  time  to

12/20/94

-40-

see  what  effects,  if  any, they  have.  I favor a symmetric  directive
for  several  reasons.  Part of  it  is  my normal antipathy  to,  or
discomfort with,  asymmetric directives.  But more  fundamentally on
this  occasion,  I have  trouble  imagining what  evidence we will get  in
the  next  several weeks  that  is  really going  to  help us  address  what  I
consider  to be one  of  the  key questions:  What  is  the  economy going  to
be  like  and what  is  the  appropriate  stance or  policy actions  that  will
influence  things  later in  1995  and into  1996?  It  just  doesn't  seem
likely to me  that we  are going  to  learn  anything  in the next  several
weeks  that  is  going to  help us  very much  in addressing those
questions.  I may be wrong, but we  can have  a conference call  if
significant new information  does materialize.  Beyond  that,  the
suggestion has  been made,  and I certainly agree with it,  that  there
are  a number  of  fundamental  longer-run policy  issues  that  the
Committee  should discuss  and perhaps  try to  reach  consensus on.  I
noted a number  of  them  in my recent  communication.  [Secretary's  note:
A copy of  Mr. Stern's  letter  to  Chairman  Greenspan, dated November 29,
1994,  is  appended.]  And I think the  one  that  is  on  the  table  already
about  longer-run  inflation objectives  is  a good place  to  start.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Just  to  clarify:  One  of  the  events  that

is  not  irrelevant is  how the  markets respond  to  what's  happening.

MR. STERN.  Yes.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  And  I think  that  that  is  probably the

most crucial  "statistic"  in a sense  and really the  only one  that  could
make a material  difference  in  this period.  I agree  it  is  very hard  to
find data with anything  crucial.  But  I think  that  there  is  a very
important  issue  here, namely  that we not  allow our  an  erosion in  our
credibility that we have built  up and which has  kept  the  cap on  long-
term  interest  rates.  I must  tell you,  it  is  too  subtle an issue  for
any of  us  to  predict.  Let's  get  to  President  Minehan  and then  I have
a few  things  I'd like  to  say about  this  issue.

MS.  MINEHAN.  I have  been  concerned for  some  time  about  the

thermostat  issue  that  Governor Blinder raised.  We did quite  a little
work prior  to  this  meeting to  assure ourselves  that at  least as  far  as
we  could project, however  deficient  that projection might be,  that  the
amount of  tightening  that  is  already in  the pipeline  is  not
sufficient.  We  came  out pretty strongly, all  of  us  in Boston, with
the  conclusion that  it  is  not  sufficient.  So  for us,  it  is  not  a
question of  "whether;" it  is  a question  of  "when."  I would align
myself with the  people who think  that  if  it  is  not  a question of
whether but a question  of  when, that  sooner  is better  than  later.  In
that  area  I would align myself with Governor  LaWare's remarks.  Don
Kohn  talked about  the markets  being fairly confident,  but  I think  it
is  important  to  remember  that what  the market  giveth  the  market  can
take away,  too.  And along  the  lines  of what you said, Mr.  Chairman,  I
too would be  concerned  that we might  lose  the  credibility that has
been hard won.  I view the  75  basis points  we did at  the  last meeting
in  two ways:  as  a 50 basis  point make-up  for  actions  that  I think we
should have  taken  earlier,  and as  25  basis  points  into  what we needed
to  do  at  that meeting.  So,  I don't really regard that  move as being
as  strong as  some  other people do.  All  of  that  said,  I'm very
cognizant  of  the probability that people  who are  closer to  the  markets
than we  are in  Boston have  a view of  the  thin  trading  and whatever
that  is perhaps better  taken  than ours.  So  I'd be willing  to go  "B,"

12/20/94

-41-

but  I'd  feel  fairly  strongly that  asymmetric  should be  the  tone
because I am  concerned that we might  see  market movements, given  the
strength of  the  underlying economic  data.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  This  is  an  interesting result  we  are

getting.  It  is very clear  that  there  is  a heavy consensus  for  "B."
However,  there  is  a very sharp  split  on  symmetric versus  asymmetric
unless  we  take  the  two members  who have argued  for  an  increase as
being  on the  asymmetric  side--but we  don't usually do  it  that way.
What  I would  like  to do,  though,  is  more pro  forma and that  is  to
suggest  the  following as  probably an appropriate  way to  come  at  this.
We  are,  as  I think a number of  us have discussed,  in a crucial  area  as
to how we  should behave.  Given  the discussion  that  we have had  around
this  table,  I don't  think  it  would be wise  to move before  the next
meeting without a  conference call  to  be  certain that  everyone  has  a
say with respect  to  how they view what we are dealing with.  I  frankly
don't  know whether or not  such  a call  will be  appropriate;  it  may well
be very clear  during the  period  that  it  is  not.  But  I don't  think we
ought  to  move  in  the  intermeeting period without having had a
Committee  discussion.  I would like  to  stay with the  asymmetric
directive with  "B" because  it  captures,  marginally  as I read it,  the
view of  the Committee.  But  it  is  pro  forma and  I would suggest  that
the  difference  frankly between  symmetric and  asymmetric,  as  far  as
action  is  concerned, probably  is  minuscule.  So,  I would like  to  put
"B"  asymmetric  on  the  table  for  a vote.

MR. BERNARD.  I am reading  from page  14  of  the  Bluebook:  "In

the  implementation  of  policy  for  the  immediate  future,  the  Committee
seeks  to maintain  the  existing  degree  of pressure  on  reserve
positions.  In  the  context of  the Committee's  long-run  objectives  for
price stability and  sustainable economic  growth, and giving  careful
consideration  to  economic,  financial,  and monetary developments,
somewhat  greater reserve  restraint would  or  slightly lesser  reserve
restraint might be  acceptable  in the  intermeeting period.  The
contemplated reserve  conditions are  expected  to  be consistent with
modest  growth  in M2  and M3  over  coming months."

MR.  LINDSEY.  Somewhat  and  slightly?  You  said  somewhat more

and  slightly  less?

MR. BERNARD.  I used somewhat with the  "greater" restraint

and  slightly with  the  "lesser."

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Call  the  roll.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan 
Vice Chairman McDonough 
Governor Blinder 
President Broaddus 
President  Forrestal 
President Jordan 
Governor Kelley 
Governor LaWare 
Governor Lindsey 
President  Parry 
Governor Phillips 
Governor Yellen 

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

12/20/94

-42-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  The  next meeting is  January 31st  and

February 1st,  and  luncheon is  served.

END OF MEETING




==== GREENBOOK | 1994-12-20_fomc19941220gbpt119941214.txt ====

Prefatory Note 

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 

available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain. 

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 

gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.    

1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Strictly Confidential  (FR)  Class  II FOMC

December  14,  1994

SUMMARY  AND  OUTLOOK

_ 

II 

I

Prepared  for the  Federal Open  Market  Committee
by the staff  of the  Board  of Governors  of the Federal  Reserve System

DOMESTIC  NONFINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS

Overview

Echoing  1992  and  1993,  the  U.S.  economy  is  apparently  ending

the  year  with  a bang.  From the  information available  now, we

estimate  that  real  GDP  is  increasing  somewhere  around  5 percent  at

an  annual  rate  in  the  current  quarter,  with  an  even  sharper  gain  in

the  manufacturing sector.  Business  fixed  investment  and  exports

appear  to  be  pacing  the expansion,  but  consumer  demand  is  also

increasing  briskly  as  households  seem  to  be  more  confident  and  quite

willing to  spend  the  income  generated by  the  rapid  growth  in  jobs.

Inventories,  though  growing  at  a fast  clip  through  the  early  fall,

evidently  remain  comfortable,  if  not  lean,  in most  sectors.

These  developments  would  appear  to  call  into  question  our

previous  judgments  about  the  underlying  strength  of  expansionary

forces  in  the  economy  and  the  restraining effects  of  the  changes  in

the  financial  environment  that  have  occurred  over  the  past  year.

Indeed,  the  upside  risks  noted  in the  last  Greenbook seem to  be

materializing.  Nevertheless,  even though we  have  revised  up  our

forecast  of  growth  over the  next  couple  of  quarters,  we  still

anticipate  that  a substantial  deceleration will  occur  in  1995.  This

forecast  reflects  in  part  the  inevitable moderation of  inventory

investment--though the timing  of  that  swing  obviously  is  uncertain.

In  addition,  we  have  raised  the  assumed  path  for  the  federal  funds

rate  so  as  to  impose  the  further  restraint that  will  probably be

needed  to  reverse  the  recent  overshooting  of  non-inflationary  levels

of  resource  utilization.  The  pace  of  output  growth  is  projected  to

slow well  below potential  by the  middle  of  next  year  and  to  remain

there  for  several  quarters.

Obviously,  our  assessment  of the  inflationary  risks  in the

outlook  remains  something  of  a conjecture  at  this  point.  On

I-1

I-2

balance,  incoming  price  data  have  been more  favorable  than  we  had

expected,  and  we  have  marked  down  our  CPI  projection  for  1995.

Nonetheless,  the  recent  surge  in  resource  utilization  is  still

expected  to  lead  to  some  deterioration  in price  performance in  the

near term.  After mid-1995,  though,  with  an  easing of  pressures  on

resources  and  with the  bulge  in  materials  costs  having been  largely

passed  through  to  prices  of  final  goods,  core  inflation should  drop

back to  a rate  just  a little  above the  recent  trend.

Key Assumptions

Short-term interest  rates  are  assumed  to  rise  appreciably  over

the  next  several months  and  to  ease  only  a little  from those  higher

levels  over  the  remainder  of  the  projection period.  Thus,  as

indicated  above,  short  rates  are  somewhat  higher  in  1995  and  1996

than  was  assumed  in  the  last  Greenbook.  Nonetheless,  we  have

lowered  the  near-term  path  for  long  rates  a  little;  the  recent

behavior  of  the  bond  market  seems  to  support  our  previous  view about

the  likelihood  of  a significant  flattening  of the  yield curve.  Bond

and mortgage  rates  are  projected to  fluctuate  near  recent  levels

through  early  1995  and  then  to  move  lower as  economic  activity

moderates  and  fears  about  inflation  subside.

Members  of  the  Congress  are  talking about  a variety of  changes

in  the  federal  budget,  and  the  prospect  of tax  and  spending  cuts  may

already  be  affecting expectations  throughout  the  economy  and  the

financial markets.  President  Clinton  is  slated  to  reveal  some  of

his  plans  on  December  15.  The  fiscal  outlook  is  thus  in  flux.  Any

changes  that  occur,  however,  are  likely  to  be  spread over  several

years,  and  given  the  constraints  within  which the  Congress  and  the

Administration will  be working, we  have  assumed  that  the  budget

deficit  will  not  be  affected  greatly  at  the  aggregate  level  within

the  next  two  years.  Under  our present  assumptions,  the  unified

I-3

deficit  is  projected  to  total  $186  billion  in  FY1995  and

$204  billion  in FY1996.  These  estimates  are  essentially the  same  as

those  in  the  November  Greenbook.

With  respect  to  the  external  sector,  recovery  has  continued

apace  in  key  industrial  economies,  and  we  have  raised  our  projection

for  the  increase  in  total  foreign  real  GDP  (on  an  export-weighted

basis)  in  1994  from  4 percent to  4-1/4  percent.  We  expect  healthy

growth  to  continue  in  1995  and  1996.  Meanwhile,  the  trade-weighted

value  of the  dollar  in  terms  of  other  G-10  currencies  has  risen

since  the  last  FOMC meeting,  and  it  is  projected  to  remain  around

current  levels  over  the  forecast  period.  The  spot  price for  WTI

crude  oil  has  dropped  to  around  $17  per  barrel,  partly because  of

unseasonably warm  weather.  Nonetheless,  we  still  expect  it  to  move

up  to  about  $18.50  per  barrel  by  late  next  spring--the  same  level  as

in  last  month's  Greenbook--and to  remain  in  that  area  through  1996.

Current-quarter  Economic  Activity

The  data  set  for the  current  quarter  still  contains  gaping

holes,  but  the  available  information suggests  that  real  GDP will

probably  register  a gain  somewhere  around  5 percent  at  an  annual

rate--roughly  a percentage  point  above  the  point-estimate  in the

November  Greenbook.  The  predicted  pace  is  broadly  consistent  with

the  strong  indicators  for  the  labor market  in  October  and  November

and the  still  low  level  of initial  claims  for  unemployment  insurance

into  early  December.  Industrial  production  is  also  rising  briskly

this  quarter,  especially  in  the  manufacturing  sector,  where  output

appears to  be  increasing  at  an annual  rate  of  almost  7 percent.

I-4

SUMMARY  OF  THE  NEAR-TERM  OUTLOOK
(Percent change,  at  annual  rates,  unless  otherwise  noted)

Real  GDP 

Previous 

Final  sales 
Previous 

Unemployment  rate  (level,  percent) 

Previous 

1994

Q3 

Q4

3.9 
3.4 

4.2 
3.1 

6.0 
6.0 

5.0
4.1

6.0
4.8

5.6
5.7

The  incoming  data  on  spending  and  inventories  are  also

consistent with  a big  gain  in  real  GDP  this  quarter.  The  spending

figures  in  hand  appear  to  be  consistent  with  final  sales  growth at

an  annual  rate  of  around  6 percent.  As  for  inventories,  we  think

our  forecast  of a moderate  falloff  in  the  pace  of  stockbuilding

represents  a sensible  balancing  of  the  impetus  to  accumulation  from

firms'  desire  to  maintain adequate  buffer stocks  against  the  run-

offs  associated with  stronger-than-expected  growth  in  final  sales.

The  surge  in  final  sales  this  quarter  is  being  paced  by

continued  rapid  growth  in  business  fixed  investment.  At  this  stage,

we  estimate that  real  BFI  will  grow at  an annual  rate  of  close  to

20  percent,  with  broad-based  advances  likely  for both  producers'

durable  equipment  and  nonresidential  construction.  Orders  and

shipments  of  computing equipment  posted  large  gains  through  early

autumn,  and  reports  in  the  trade  press  suggest  that demand  for  these

items  continues  to  surge. 1  Bookings  for  other  types  of  equipment

(excluding aircraft)  have  also  remained  robust,  the  October  level

1.  We  do  not  expect  the  difficulties  with  the  Pentium  chip  to
have much  effect  on  outlays  in  the  current  quarter.  The  problem was
not  made  public  until  late  November,  and  Pentium-based  machines
account  for  only  a small  share of  business  computer purchases.
Moreover,  any  drop  in  sales  is  likely  to  be  largely  offset  in  GDP  by
movements  in inventories.  Looking  ahead, we  have  trimmed  $2 billion
(annual rate)  from real  computer  outlays  in  the  first  quarter  of
1995.

being  nearly  2  percent  (not  at  an  annual  rate)  above  the  average  for

the  third  quarter.  In  addition,  the  gains  in  construction-put-in-

place  in  September  and  October  set  the  stage  for  a  sizable  increase

in  real  outlays  for  nonresidential  construction  this  quarter.

Strong  growth  in  real  disposable  income,  combined  with a  marked

upturn  in  sentiment,  appears  to  be  providing  considerable  impetus  to

consumer  spending  this  quarter.  We  look  for  an  increase  in

consumption  of  5-1/2  percent  at  an  annual  rate,  compared  with  growth

averaging  about  3  percent  at  an  annual  rate  over  the  first  three

quarters  of  the  year.  A  jump  in  sales  of  autos  and  light  trucks,

when measured  using  BEA  seasonal  factors,  accounts  for  roughly  a

percentage  point  of  the  increase  in  consumption.2  But  the

incoming data  for  retail  sales  imply that  outlays  for  goods  other

than motor vehicles  are  posting  hefty  gains  as  well;  we  estimate

that,  in  real  terms,  they  rose  1/2  percent  in  November  to  a  level

nearly  2  percent  (not  at  an  annual  rate)  above  the  third-quarter

average.

By  contrast,  real  outlays  for  residential  construction are

expected  to  decline  moderately this  quarter,  mainly because  of  the

drop  in  single-family  starts.  The  evidence--statistical  and

anecdotal--on  this  sector  continues  to  be  ambiguous  and,  frankly,

somewhat  puzzling.  However,  perhaps  because  of  our  priors  about  how

activity  "should"  respond  to  the  rise  in  mortgage  rates  this  year,

we  expect  single-family  starts  in  November  and  December  to  match,  on

average,  the  October  pace  of  1.14 million  units  (annual  rate)--down

materially  from the  1.21  million  rate  of the  third  quarter.

In  the  government  sector,  federal  purchases  should drop

markedly  in  the  fourth quarter,  after  having  been  boosted  by  a  fluky

2.  Using BEA  seasonals,  sales  increased  from  14.6  million  units

(annual  rate)  in  the  third  quarter  to  15.4  million units,  on
average,  in  October  and  November.  On  FRB  seasonals.  the  increase
was  only from  15.1  million  units  to  15.3  million  units.

I-6

jump  in  defense  spending  in  the  third  quarter.  The  Monthly Treasury

Statement  for  October  suggests  that  defense  spending  is  moving back

toward  the  path  implied  by  the  underlying trends  in  appropriations.

Meanwhile,  real  purchases  by  state  and  local  governments  are  likely

to  post  another  sizable  rise  this  quarter,  in  part  because  of a jump

in  construction  outlays  in  October.  In  addition,  even  allowing  for

the  hiring  of poll workers,  payrolls  in  November  stood moderately

above the  third-quarter  average.

Although we  have  no  hard  data,  we  expect  real  net  exports  to

flatten  out,  after  having  subtracted  nearly  a percentage  point,  on

average,  from  real  GDP  growth  over  the  first  three  quarters  of  the

year.  All  reports  point  to  brisk  growth  of exports, but  the

vigorous  expansion of  domestic  demand  suggests  that  imports will  be

up  strongly  as  well.

Although the  rapid  growth of manufacturing here  and  abroad has

been  pushing up  the  prices  of  industrial materials  and  components,

inflation  at  the  consumer  level  has  remained  subdued.  The  CPI

increased  0.3  percent  in  November,  in  part  because  of  a spurt  in

energy  prices.3  The  core  component  rose  just  0.2  percent  for  a

third month,  and  the  twelve-month change  slipped  back  to

2.8  percent.  Average  hourly  earnings  fell  0.2  percent  last  month

after  leaping  0.6  percent  in  October;  over  the  past  twelve months,

hourly  earnings  rose  only  2.6  percent,  helping to  hold  increases  in

unit  labor  costs  to moderate  proportions as  productivity  growth

slowed.

The  Outlook  for the  Economy  in  1995  and  1996

We  expect  the  current  surge  in  activity  to  provide  some

momentum  for  growth  in  early  1995.  In  particular, the  continuing

3. As  discussed  in  Greenbook  Part  2, the  mandated  reformulation

of  gasoline will  add  to  pump  prices  over  the  near  term.  However,
the  BLS  intends  to treat  this mandate  as  a  "quality improvement,"
thus  eliminating any  direct  effect  on  the  CPI.

strength  of  sales  appears  to  be  motivating many  firms  to  seek

additional  workers  and  to  expand  their  facilities,  and  firms  in  some

industries  may  need  to  rebuild  inventories.  Real  short-term  credit

costs  are  not  prohibitive at  this  point,  and  credit  availability

does  not  appear to  be  an  issue  for  either  consumers  or  businesses:

Banks  have  yet  to  curb  the trend  toward  easier  nonprice  lending

terms  and  standards  that  has  been  in  place  for  a couple  of  years

now.  Under  the  circumstances,  we  have  added  1/2  percentage  point  to

the  real  GDP  growth  rate  we  had  previously  projected  for  the  first

half of  next  year.

Nonetheless,  the  pace  of  activity  expected  for  the  first  half

of next  year--2-1/2  percent  (annual  rate)--marks  a noticeable

deceleration from 1994,  and  we  anticipate  growth to  slow  further,  to

a  1-1/4  percent  rate  in  the  second  half.  To  a substantial  degree,

this  pattern simply  reflects  the  lagged  effects  of  the  earlier

increases  in  interest  rates  on  private  domestic  final  purchases,

which  are  magnified  by  the  dynamics  of  inventory  adjustments  and  by

multiplier  effects  on  income  and  spending.  The  further  tightening

of  money market  conditions  will  impose  additional  restraint  by

making  new short-term loans  more  expensive  and  by  increasing  the

burden  of  servicing  existing  floating-rate  debt.  Moreover,  higher

real  short  rates,  and  the  greater  concerns  that  are  likely  to  arise

about  the  sustainability  of  economic expansion,  should  put  some

downward  pressure  on  the  values  of  shares  and  other  assets.

Finally, we  doubt  that bank  lending  practices  will  continue  to  ease

in  an  environment  of  slower  economic  growth  and  less  certainty about

the  prospect  of  repayment.  All  told,  we  now project  that  growth  in

real  GDP  will  remain well  below  potential  into  1996,  with  only  a

slight  firming  in  the  latter  part  of  that  year  as  the  easing  in

nominal  interest  rates  stimulates  a mild  pickup  in  homebuilding and

other  final  demand.

I-8

SUMMARY  OF  STAFF  PROJECTIONS 1
(Percent  change  at  annual  rates,  except  as  noted)

Real  GDP 

Previous 

Private  domestic  final  purchases 2  

Previous 

Civilian unemployment  rate  (percent) 3  

Previous 

1994 

1995 

HI 

H2

1996

4.1 
3.8 

4.9 
4.2 

5.6 
5.7 

2.5 
1.9 

3.9 
2.9 

5.5 
5.8 

1.3 
1.2 

2.1 
1.8 

5.7 
6.1 

1.8
2.2

2.1
2.4

6.1
6.3

1. Percent  change  from  final  quarter  of previous  period  to  final

quarter  of  period  indicated,  unless  otherwise  indicated.

2. Personal  consumption expenditures  plus  business  fixed

investment  plus  residential  investment.

3. Average  level  for the  final  quarter  of period  indicated.

Consumer  spending.  Our  forecast  now has  real  consumer  spending

growing  at  an  annual  rate  of  nearly  3-1/2  percent  in  the  first

quarter  of  1995,  a percentage  point more  than in the  November

Greenbook.  The  fourth-quarter  surge  in  wages  and  salaries  is  likely

to  produce  a whopping  6-1/2  percent  (annual rate)  gain  in  real

disposable  personal  income in  the  fourth quarter.  And,  indications

of  hiring plans  (for  example,  from Manpower  Inc.)  suggest  that  job

growth  will  remain  brisk in  the  first  quarter,  increasing  income  and

buoying  sentiment  in  the  face  of  what  we  anticipate will  be  less

favorable  financial  market  conditions.

As  we move through  1995,  however,  the  underlying pace  of  income

growth  slows,  and  we  expect  to  see  increases  in  consumption drop

into  the  area  of  1-1/2  percent  at  an  annual  rate  in the  second half

of the  year.  Finance  charges  on  auto  and  other  consumer  loans will

rise  appreciably  over  the  coming year.  in lagged  adjustment to  the

increases  in market  rates  that  have  already  occurred  and to  the

assumed  further  rise  in  short  rates;  this  increase  will  affect  many

I-9

existing  floating-rate  loans  as  well  as  new  borrowings.  We  also

anticipate  that  weak  asset  prices  will  contribute  to  a negative

wealth  effect  on  consumer  demand,  offsetting  any  stimulus  to

spending that  might  be  associated  with  the higher  interest  earnings

many households  are  enjoying.  These  influences  are  expected  to  push

up  the  saving  rate  over  the  next  two  years--to  a level  of  about

4-1/2  percent  in  1996,  1/2  percentage  point  above  that  in  1993-94.

Outlays  for  durables  tend  to  be  more  discretionary  or

deferrable  than  some  other  types  of  consumption  and,  thus,  are

likely  to  be  especially  sensitive  to  the  slowing  of  income  growth.

In  particular,  sales  of  light  vehicles  are  projected  to  drop  from

well  above  15  million  units  at  an  annual  rate  in  the  past  few months

to  14-1/2  million  units  in  late  1995  and  1996,  a pace  below  longer-

term trends  and well  below  current  industry hopes.

Business  fixed  investment.  We  think that  1995  will  see

substantial  further  growth  in  spending  on business  equipment,  but,

as  the  year  progresses,  outlays  should  decelerate  considerably.

Overall,  real  purchases  of  producers'  durable  equipment  are  expected

to  rise  9-1/2  percent  over  the  four  quarters  of  the  year,  down  from

16  percent  over  1994.  Spending  on  office  and  computing machines

will  continue  to  be  spurred  by  technological  innovations  that  expand

computing capabilities  and  push  down  prices;  we  look  for  an  increase

in  real  outlays  in  1995  close  to  the  19  percent  gain we  are

projecting  for  this  year.  The  recent  trends  in  orders  also  point  to

continued  sizable  gains  in  spending  for  other types  of  equipment  in

the  near  term.

After  the  next  few  quarters,  however,  the  deceleration  in

business  output  should  restrain  capital  expenditures  across  the

board;  in  addition, with  profits  squeezed  and  little  further  growth

in  cash  flow,  firms  will  have to  rely increasingly  on  external

I-10

sources  to  finance  their  expenditures.  In  particular,  we  foresee

spending  on  equipment  other  than  computers  (and motor  vehicles)

falling  in  the  first  half  of  1996  and  then  flattening  out  later  in

that year.

With  construction permits  for most  major  building

categories  on  decided  uptrends,  we  project  that  real  investment  in

nonresidential  structures will  rise more than  7-1/2  percent  in  1995

and  about  6-1/2  percent  in  1996.  both  figures  being  somewhat  higher

than we  expect  for  1994.  The  strong  growth  we  are  projecting might

look  anomalous  in  the  context  of  a weakening  economic  environment,

but  the  climb  is  occurring  from  a deeply depressed  level,  and  lags

in  adjustment  in  this  sector  traditionally  have  been  long.  Among

the  key  sectors,  the  sharp  rise  in  factory  operating  rates  this  year

is  currently providing  considerable  impetus  to  industrial

construction;  and  firms  producing  computer  chips,  as  well  as  other

manufacturers,  are  reportedly planning  substantial  expansions  of

plant  capacity  over  the next  couple  of  years.  In  addition,  outlays

for  office  and  other  commercial  construction  should  continue  to  be

bolstered  by the  greater  availability of  financing  for  such

projects.  The  rise  in  interest  rates  this  year has,  at  the  margin,

had  a negative  effect  on  the  valuation  of  properties;  however,

anecdotal  evidence  suggests  that--despite  a fall-off in  REIT

activity  from  the  pace  earlier  this  year--prices  are  quite  firm in

many markets  and  interest  in  real  estate  deals  remains  high.  Thus,

despite  the  assumed  further  tightening in the money market,  our

construction  forecast may  well  have  an  upside  risk.

Residential  investment.  We  continue  to  project  a softening  in

single-family  housing  activity  in  1995,  but  the  decline  is  now

expected  to  be  smaller  than  projected  in the  November  Greenbook.  To

some  extent,  we  attribute  the surprising  resiliency  of  housing

I-11

activity to  date  to  the  strong  income  gains  in  recent  quarters,  and

we  have  allowed  the  higher  projected  level  of  income  in  the  current

forecast  to buoy housing  demand  in  the  period  ahead.  In  addition,

even  at  current  levels  of mortgage  rates,  houses  remain highly

affordable  by  historical  standards  (gauged  on  a  cash-flow basis),  a

factor  that  may  be  providing a  greater  offset  to the  influence  of

rising  rates  than  we  anticipated.  All  told,  we  expect  single-family

starts  to  drop  from  1.18  million  units  in  1994  to  1.10  million  units

in  1995  and  to  increase  only  slightly  in  1996  in  response  to  a

moderate  easing of  nominal  mortgage  rates.

Multifamily  starts  are  projected  to  remain  on  the  gradual

uptrend  that  has  been  evident  over  the  past  couple  of  years.

Activity  in this  sector  should  continue  to  be  bolstered  by  emerging

demand  pressures  in  some  markets  as  well  as  by  the  improved

availability  of  financing  for these  projects.

Business  inventories.  We  expect  inventory  investment  to  remain

elevated a while  longer,  as  firms  remain  concerned  about  the

availability  of  supplies  and  as  sales  expectations  remain high.

Over  the  longer  run,  however,  current  rates  of  accumulation  are

clearly  unsustainable.  The  experience  of the  past  several  years

suggests  that  firms  will  be  aggressive  in trimming  orders  and

production  when confronted  with  flagging  sales,  and  any  overhangs

that  develop  are  likely to  be  short-lived.  Inventory  investment

thus  is  expected  to  slow  in  the  second  quarter  of  1995  and  to  fall

considerably  further  over  the  second  half  of  the  year,  shaving more

than  1/2  percentage  point  off  the  real  GDP  growth  rate,  on  average.

during  that  latter period.  Inventories  are  not  expected to  have

much effect  on  real  GDP  growth in  1996.

Government  purchases.  As  noted  above, the  unwinding  of the

third-quarter  bulge  in  defense  spending  is  producing a  steep  drop

I-12

in  real  federal  purchases  in  the  current  quarter;  we  expect  this

process  to  extend  into  the  first  half of  1995.  Consistent  with  the

requirements  of  OBRA-1993,  we  have built  in  moderate further

decreases  in  federal  purchases  after mid-1995:  Real  defense

spending  is  expected  to  decline  at  an  annual  rate  of  about  6 percent

in  the  second half  of  1995  and  4-1/2  percent  over  the  four  quarters

of  1996,  while  real  nondefense  purchases  are  expected  to  edge  down

over  the  period  as  a whole.

Real  state  and  local  purchases  of  goods  and  services  are

projected to  remain  on  the moderate  uptrend  that  has  been evident

over  the  past  two  years:  The  projected  growth  rates  for  1995  and

1996--close  to  2-1/2  percent  per  year,  on  average--are  a little

below the  average  for  1993  and  1994.  Even  though  the  general  funds

budgets  of  many  states  now  seem to  be  in  better  shape,  significantly

higher  outlays  for  public  services  and  infrastructure  improvements

do  not  seem  likely,  given  the  political  pressures  to  hold  the  line

on--or  to  cut--taxes.

Net  exports.  After having  increased  substantially  in  1993  and

1994,  the  deficit  in  real  net  exports  is  projected to  change  little.

on  balance,  over  the  next  two  years.  The  anticipated leveling  out

is  partly  attributable  to  the  lagged  effects  of  the  weak dollar  in

1994;  but  more  important,  the  robust  pace  of economic  activity

abroad  should  bolster  exports  while  the  moderation  in  the  growth of

U.S.  GDP  should help  to  restrain  imports.  (A complete  discussion  of

these  developments  is  contained in  the  International  Developments

section.)

Labor  markets.  Businesses  will  no  doubt  continue  to  look  for

ways  to  economize  on  labor  expenses.  However,  the  easiest

organizational  and  technological  improvements have  already been

adopted,  and  further  outsized  gains  in  labor  productivity do  not

I-13

appear  likely.  Thus,  to meet  the  growth  in  sales  and  production

that  we  are  forecasting  into  early  1995,  businesses  will  need  to

maintain  a brisk pace  of hiring.

The  rapid  pace  of job  creation  of  late  appears to  be  spurring

an  uptick  in the  participation  rate,  and  further  improvements  in  job

prospects  should stimulate  somewhat  faster  growth  of  the  labor  force

in  the  first  part  of next  year.  On balance,  the  unemployment  rate

is  projected  to  remain  at  around  5-1/2  percent  through  mid-1995.

With  output  growth  dropping  to  an  annual  rate  of  only  about

1-1/4  percent  in  the  second  half  of  1995  and  remaining  below

potential  in  1996,  employment  gains  taper  off  and  the  unemployment

rate backs  up  noticeably.  Nonetheless,  the  projected  unemployment

rate  at  the  end  of  199 6 --at  6.1  percent--is  a shade  below that  in

the  November  Greenbook.  As  for  productivity, we  now expect  to  see

an  increase  of  only  about  3/4 percent  over  1995  as  whole.

Productivity  growth  is  expected  to  improve  a little  in  1996--but

still  to  fall  a bit  short  of  its  long-run trend  of  close  to

1-1/2  percent.

SUMMARY OF  STAFF  INFLATION PROJECTIONS
(Percent change at  annual  rates)

ECI  for  compensation  of

private  industry workers 

Previous 

Consumer  price  index 2  

Previous 

Excluding food  and  energy 

Previous 

1994 

H1 

H2 

1996

1995

3.3 
3.3 

2.7 
2.9 

2.9 
3.1 

3.7 
3.8 

3.1 
3.5 

3.4 
3.7 

3.7 
3.7 

2.9 
3.0 

3.0 
3.1 

3.7
3.6

2.9
2.9

3.1
3.1

1. Percent  change  from  final month  of  previous  period  to  final

month  of period  indicated.

2. Percent  change from  final  quarter  of  previous  period  to  final

quarter  of period  indicated.

I-14

Wages  and  prices.  The  incoming data  still  provide no

indication  that  a broad  acceleration of  wages  and  prices  is  under

way.  Nonetheless,  with  the  economy  growing  rapidly  and  resource

utilization  now exceeding  levels  that  we  believe  are  consistent  with

stable  inflation, we  continue to  forecast  an upturn  in  wage  and

price  inflation  in early  1995.

Reports  of  labor  "shortages"  and wage  pressures  seem to  be

multiplying  of  late--a  pattern  consistent  with  our  notion  that  the

unemployment  rate  has  dropped  below the  "NAIRU."  Although  cost-of-

living  trends  have  been  stable  recently,  we  expect  that  tighter

labor markets  are  leading  to  a pickup  in  wages.  The  ECI  for  private

industry  workers  is  expected  to  increase  3.7  percent  in  each  of  the

next  two  years,  compared  with an  estimated  increase of  3.3  percent

in  1994.  The  acceleration  in  1995  is  likely to  be  concentrated  in

wages,  which  are  forecast  to  rise  3-1/2  percent  over  the  year,  while

increases  in  benefits  are  expected  to  continue  to  run  at  about  the

4 percent  pace  now  estimated  for  1994.  Judging  from  survey

information  and  press  reports,  the  fierce competition  in  the medical

marketplace  seems  to  be  exerting  a powerful  restraint  on  health

insurance  premiums  for  1995.  At  the  same  time,  we  expect  firms  with

underfunded  pension plans  to  continue to  step  up  the  pace  of

contributions.

The price  information  received  since  the  last  FOMC  meeting has

contained  some  pleasant  surprises,  and  we  have  lowered  our  CPI

forecast  for  both the  current  quarter  and  1995.  Nonetheless,  we

continue  to  expect  an  uptick  in  inflation  in  early  1995,  with the

core  CPI  rising  at  a 3-1/2  percent  annual  rate.  This  pickup

reflects  our  expectation  that  past  and  prospective  large  increases

in  the  prices  of  materials  and  components  will  be  passed  through

more  fully  into  finished  goods  prices  in the  near  term.  The  upward

I-15

pressures  on materials  prices  reflect  both  the  so-called  "speed

effect"  associated  with  rising  rates  of  resource utilization  and  the

acceleration  of  non-oil  import  prices  that  has  followed  the  drop  in

the  exchange  rate  earlier  this  year.  We  are  allowing  for  a

concentrated  bulge  in  the  inflation  rate  because  anecdotal  reports

point  to  the  possibility  of  a bunching  of price  hikes  just  after  the

turn  of the  year.

With  economic  growth  slowing  and  pressures  on  resource

utilization  easing  in  the  latter  part  of next  year,  we  should  see

some  reversal  of  the  speed  effects.  And,  the  projected  stability  in

the  exchange  rate  should  lead  to  a moderation  in the  increases  in

non-oil  import  prices  over  the  course  of  1995.  In  1996,  the  core

CPI  is  expected to  rise  just  over  3 percent,  about  a quarter

percentage  point  more  than projected  for  this year.  With  increases

in  food  and  energy  prices  expected  to  remain on  the moderate  side  in

1995  and  1996,  the  total  CPI  is  expected  rise  a bit  less  than  the

core  measure.

Strictly Confidential  (FR)
Class  II  FOMC

STAFF  PROJECTIONS  OF CHANGES  IN GDP,  PRICES, AND UNEMPLOYMENT

(Percent,  annual  rate)

December  14,  1994

Nominal GDP 

Real  GDP 

GDP  fixed-weight 
price  index 

Consumer 
price  index1 

Unemployment
rate

(level except
as  noted)

Interval 
_ 
__  _ 

_I_ 

ANNUAL

19922
19932
1994
1995
1996

QUARTERLY

1993  012
Q22
032
Q42

1994  Q12
Q22
2
Q3
Q4

1995  Q1
02
Q3
Q4

1996  Q1
Q2
Q3
04

TWO-QUARTER

3

1993  Q22
Q4 2

1994

1995  Q2
04

1996  Q2
Q4

FOUR-QUARTER 4

2  

2  

1992  Q4
1993  Q4
04 
1994 
1995  Q4 
1996  Q4 

11/09/94  12/14/94 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_J  _ 

11/09/94  12/14/94 

_ 

_ 

_I_ 

_ 

_ 

11/09/94  12/14/94 
_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

I 

11/09/94  12/14/94 
_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

I  _ 

11/09/94  12/14/94
_

_ 

_ 

_ 

5.2
5.4
6.1
5.1
4.3

4.4
4.2
3.8
7.7

6.1
7.2
5.2
6.1

5.7
4.2
3.6
3.8

4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8

4.3 
5.7 

6.6 
5.7 

4.9 
3.7 

4.6 
4.8 

6.4 
5.0 
6.2 
4.3 
4.7 

4.3 
5.7 

6.6 
6.4 

5.5 
3.7 

4.2 
4.6 

6.4 
5.0 
6.5 
4.6 
4.4 

1.8 
4.5 

3.7 
3.8 

1.9 
1.2 

2.0 
2.4 

3.7 
3.1 
3.8 
1.5 
2.2 

1.8
4.5

3.7 
4.5 

2.5
1.3

1.6
2.1

3.7 
3.1 
4.1 
1.9 
1.8 

3.3 
2.2 

3.0 
2.8 

3.4 
2.9 

3.0 
2.9 

3.2 
2.8 
2.9 
3.1 
2.9 

3.3 
2.2 

3.0 
2.8 

3.3 
2.8 

3.0
2.9

3.2 
2.8 
2.9 
3.1 
3.0 

3.1
2.4

2.4 
3.3 

3.5 
3.0 

2.9 
2.9 

3.1 
2.7 
2.9 
3.3 
2.9 

3.1 
2.4 

2.4 
2.9 

3.2 
2.9 

2.9 
2.9 

3.1 
2.7 
2.7 
3.0 
2.9 

-. 3 
-.5 

-.3
-.5

.1
.3

.1
.1

.3 
-. 8 
-. 8 
.4 
.2 

-. 3
-.5

.3
-. 8
-. 9
.1
.4

1. For  all  urban consumers.
2.  Actual.
3. Percent  change  from two  quarters  earlier;  for unemployment rate,  change  in  percentage  points.
4. Percent change  from  four  quarters earlier;  for  unemployment rate,  change  in  percentage points.

Strictly  Confidential  (FR)
Class  II 

FOMC

REAL  GROSS  DOMESTIC PRODUCT  AND RELATED  ITEMS,

ANNUAL VALUES

(Seasonally adjusted annual  rate)

December  14,  1994

Item 

Unit1 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996

Projected

4900.4 
4718.6 

5250.8 
4838.0 

5546.1 
4897.3 

5724.8 
4867.6 

6020.2 
4979.3 

6343.3 
5134.5 

6737.8 
5342.9 

7116.2 
5506.3 

7412.6
5594.3

Bill.  $
Bill.  87$

% change

EXPENDITURES

Nominal  GDP
Real  GDP

Real  GDP
Gross  domestic purchases
Final  sales
Private  dom.  final  purch.

Personal  cons.  expend.

Durables
Nondurables
Services

Business  fixed  invest.

Producers'  dur. equip.
Nonres.  structures

Res.  structures

Exports
Imports

Government purchases

Federal

Defense

State and  local

Change  in bus.  invent.

Bill.  87$

Nonfarm
Net exports

Nominal  GDP

3.3 
2.5 
4.2 
4.2 

4.2 
8.5 
3.2 
3.7 

5.5 
9.1 
-1.2 
9 

13.5

3.6

.2

-3.4
-3.2
2.9

19.9
26.9
-104.0

1.6 
.9 
1.5 
.5 

1.2 
-.5 
1.2 
1.7 

.2 
-.4 
1.2 
-.1 

.7 
-.8 
-.1 
1.7 

-.4 
-1.7 
2.3 
-7.7 

.7 
2.9 
-3.9 
-15.2 

11.3
2.6

2.0
-. 6

-1.5
4.0

29.8
29.9
-73.7

6.7
.4

3.3
2.8
1.5
3.6

5.7
3.2

-54.7

3.1 
3.9 
3.0 
5.0 

3.0 
9.0 
1.3 
2.5 

16.0 
21.3 
1.6 
8.1 

5.8

12.4

-1.0
-6.9
-9.0
3.0

4.1 
4.7 
3.4 
4.9 

3.7 
8.4 
3.3 
2.6 

13.2 
15.8 
4.8 
1.6 

9.5

13.5

.0

-3.9
-5.1
2.4

1.9 
1.9 
2.4 
3.0 

2.2 
.1 
2.2 
2.7 

9.1 
9.5 
7.7 
-2.9 

8.3
7.3

-. 5
-5.9
-8.2

2.5

1.8
1.8
1.9
2.1

1.8
.4
1.8
2.2

3.6
2.7
6.6
1.4

8.7
7.2

.3
-3.2
-4.5

2.2

15.3
18.5
-73.9

46.5
38.9
-113.9

30.7
27.1
-122.3

15.9
13.6
-117.3

5.0

6.5

4.6 

4.4

.3 
-.1 
-.4 
-.8 

.0 
-1.3 
-1.6 
1.2 

-6.2 
-3.2 
-12.4 
.7 

8.1
4.0

-.8
-3.2
-7.0

.8

-1.1
-1.3
-19.5

3.5

108.3
6.7

.2
78.0

1.01
12.31
8.39
6.14
2.25

3.7 
4.1 
3.8 
5.1 

4.2 
9.6 
3.2 
3.5 

6.7 
11.0 
-3.4 
17.0 

5.0
8.6

.7
.8
-1.3

.6

2.5
-2.0
-32.3

6.4

108.6
7.4

4.0
79.2

1.20
12.80
8.35
6.26
2.10

% change

7.7

6.0

4.7

EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION

Nonfarm  payroll  employ.
Unemployment  rate

Millions
%

Industrial  prod.  index
Capacity util.  rate-mfg.

% change
8

Millions

Housing  starts
Light Motor  Vehicle  Sales

Auto sales  in  U.S.

North American prod.
Other

INCOME AND SAVING

Nominal  GNP
Nominal  GNP
Nominal  personal  income
Real  disposable  income
Personal  saving  rate

Bill.  $
% change

%8

Corp. profits,  IVA&CCAdj
Profit  share  of  GNP

% change
%

Federal  surpl./def.
State/local  surpl./def.
Ex.  social  ins.  funds

Bill.  $

% change

PRICES  AND COSTS

GDP  implicit deflator
GDP  fixed-wt. price  index
Gross domestic  purchases
fixed-wt. price  index

CPI

Ex.  food and  energy

ECI,  hourly  compensation

2

Nonfarm business  sector

Output  per hour
Compensation  per hour
Unit labor cost

105.2
5.5

3.2
83.6

1.49
15.43
10.63
7.54
3.10

4908.2
7.8
7.1
3.2
4.4

10.2
7.4

-136.6
38.4
-18.4

4.2
4.2

4.1
4.3
4.5

4.8

107.9
5.3

-. 1
83.2

1.38
14.53
9.91
7.08
2.83

5266.8
6.1
6.5
1.1
4.0

-6.3
6.9

-122.3
44.8
-17.5

4.4
4.4

4.4
4.6
4.4

4.8

.5

3.8
3.3

-1.4 
3.1 
4.6 

109.4
5.5

-. 2
81.3

1.19
13.85
9.50
6.90
2.60

110.5
6.8

3.6
80.9

1.29
13.89
8.72
6.75
1.97

113.4
6.1

5.8
83.3

1.42
15.09
9.20
7.23
1.97

5567.8

4.9
6.5
1.1
4.2

2.3
6.8

5740.8
3.2
3.7
.9
5.0

8.8
6.8

-163.5
25.1
-35.6

-202.9
17.0
-46.5

6025.8
6.1
8.1
5.0
5.5

9.6
6.7

-282.7
24.8
-41.6

6347.8
5.0
2.8

.5

4.1

23.4
7.7

6729.5
6.3
6.7
4.1
4.0

4.6
8.1

-241.4

26.3

-40.0

-162.3
25.8
-39.8

4.5
4.6

5.2
6.3
5.3

4.6

.4
6.2
5.7

3.3
3.6

2.9
3.0
4.4

4.4

2.3 
4.7 
2.3 

2.6
3.2

3.2
3.1
3.5

3.5

3.2
5.1
1.9

1.8
2.8

2.5
2.7
3.1

3.6

1.8 
2.4 
.6 

2.4
2.9

3.0
2.7
2.9

3.3

1.2
3.4
2.1

116.1
5.6

2.5
84.2

1.39
15.23
9.26
7.43
1.83

7089.7
4.3
5.7
2.4
4.2

-3.5
7.8

-158.3
27.5
-37.0

2.6
3.1

3.0
3.0
3.2

3.7

.8
4.0
3.1

117.2
6.0

1.8
82.4

1.41
14.51
8.68
6.93
1.75

7375.8
4.4
5.1
2.2
4.6

4.4
7.5

-189.5
27.8

-36.2

2.5
3.0

2.9
2.9
3.1

3.7

1.2
4.0
2.8

1. Percent  changes  are  from  fourth quarter  to  fourth quarter.

2. Private-industry workers.

Strictly  Confidential  (FR)
Class  II 

FOMC

REAL  GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT
(Seasonally adjusted,

AND  RELATED  ITEMS,  QUARTERLY  VALUES
annual  rate  except  as  noted)

December  14,  1994

Item 

Unit 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2

1992 

1993 

1994

EXPENDITURES

Nominal GDP
Real  GDP

Real GDP
Gross  domestic purchases
Final  sales
Private  dom.  final purch.

Personal  cons.  expend.

Durables
Nondurables
Services

Business  fixed  invest.

Producers'  dur. equip.
Nonres.  structures

Res. structures

Exports
Imports

Government purchases

Federal

Defense

State  and  local

Nonfarm
Net  exports

Nominal GDP

EMPLOYMENT AND  PRODUCTION

Bill.  $
Bill.  87$

5896.8
4918.5

5971.3
4947.5

6043.6
4990.5

6169.3
5060.7

6235.9
5075.3

6299.9
5105.4

6359.2  6478.1
5139.4  5218.0

6574.7
5261.1

6689.9
5314.1

% change

3.1
3.2
4.8
5.7

5.8

15.5
4.2
4.5

-. 1
-1.3
2.9
22.4

6.1
6.6

1.5
-1.3
-7.2

3.3

2.4
3.7
1.5
4.2

1.7
.4
-. 7
3.4

15.0
22.7
-1.6
22.7

1.5
13.0

-3.0
-4.8
-5.1
-1.8

-14.3
-17.9

-1.9
-34.1

3.5
3.9
3.5
3.9

3.9
10.0
2.7
3.2

5.0
11.0
-8.9

.8

5.3
8.4

3.4
8.6
11.5
.1

5.7
5.7
5.6
6.7

5.6

13.2
6.9
3.0

7.5
12.9
-5.5
23.8

7.2
6.5

.9
1.1

-3.3

.8

5.2
1.8
-38.9

6.6
6.3

-38.5

1.2
2.7

.2
3.5

1.6
3.2
-1.6
3.1

15.1
20.0
2.5
5.3

-1.0
11.6

-5.9

-15.4
-20.0

.9

18.5
19.7
-57.6

2.4
3.3
2.4
3.7

2.6
9.8
1.6
1.4

15.6
21.6

.3

-7.6

7.7
14.9

1.2

-3.6
-2.2
4.4

2.7 
4.0 
3.2 
5.3 

3.9 
7.7 
2.8 
3.6 

12.2 
16.2 
.5 

9.4 

-3.2 
7.4 

1.1

-3.0
-9.2
3.7

6.3
5.8
6.4
7.4

4.0

15.5
2.4
2.0

21.1
27.5
3.3

28.2

21.7
16,0

-.1

-5.0
-3.6
2.9

3.3
5.0
2.2
5.8

4.7
8.8
3.8
4.0

10.9
18.6
-11.8
10.0

-3.5
9.5

-4.9

-10.3
-16.0
-1.4

4.1
4.6
1.5
2.7

1.3
.4
2.2
1.1

9.2
6.1
20.6
7.0

16.6
18.9

-1.2
-7.9
-4.1

2.9

18.9
22.8
-69.3

13.0
20.9
-86.3

10.8
10.7
-82.2

25.4
22.1
-104.0

59.2
51.7
-111.8

% change

7.1

5.2

4.9

8.6

4.4

4.2

3.8

7.7

6.1

7.2

Change in  bus.  invent.

Bill.  87$

-6.3

4.2

Nonfarm payroll  employ.
Unemployment  rate 1

Millions
%

108.1 
7.3 

108.4 
7.5 

108.7 
7.5 

109.1 
7.3 

109.7
7.0

110.3
7.0

110.8 
6.7 

111.4 
6.5 

112.0
6.6

113.0

6.2

Industrial prod.  index
Capacity util.  rate-mfg.

1

% change

.9 
78.4 

5.8 
79.1 

3.4 
79.4 

6.2 
80.1 

5.1
80.8

Housing starts
Light Motor  Vehicle  Sales

Auto sales  in U.S.

North American  prod.
Other

INCOME AND  SAVING

Millions

1.24 
12.46 
8.33 
6.12 
2.21 

1.15 
12.81 
8.41 
6.25 
2.16 

1.19 
12.71 
8.24 
6.25 
1.99 

1.24 
13.22 
8.43 
6.40 
2.03 

1.15
13.23
8.32
6.36
1.96

.7
80.6

1.24
14.11
8.93
6.87
2.07

3.3 
80.7 

5.3 
81.4 

7.1
82.3

1.31 
13.69 
8.65 
6.68 
1.97 

1.48 
14.53 
8.97 
7.08 
1.89 

1.37
15.45
9.45
7.44
2.00

6.0
83.1

1.44
14.76
9.15
7.16
1.99

5907.7

5979.1

6049.4

Nominal  GNP
Nominal  GNP
Nominal  personal  income
Real  disposable  income
Personal  saving rate 1

Bill.  $
% change

%

Corp.  profits,  IVA&CCAdj
Profit  share  of  GNP 1

% change

6.8
8.2
5.9
5.3

18.8
7.0

4.9
5.6
2.1
5.5

.5
6.9

6167.0
8.0
15.3
10.6

6.2

6243.9
5.1
-5.8
-7.4
4.0

6303.3
3.9
8.6
4.7
4.6

6367.8

4.2
2.4

.8

3.9

6476.2
7.0
6.7
4.3
4.0

6574.0
6.2
5.3
3.4
3.6

6682.5
6.8
7.7
3.5
4.1

4.8
3.7
1.7
5.0

-40.0

6.0

101.1
7.0

9.6
7.1

30.7
7.5

18.4
7.7

37.0

8.2

-17.9
7.7

33.6
8.2

Federal  govt. surpl./def.
State/local  surpl./def.
Ex.  social  ins.  funds

Bill.  $

-279.9
19.9
-45.7

-284.8
25.9
-40.5

-293.9
20.4
-46.3

-272.1
33.1
-33.8

-283.5
21.6
-44.7

-237.0
25.3
-41.1

-224.9
23.9
-42.4

-220.1
34.5
-31.7

-176.2
25.2
-40.7

-145.1
27.0
-38.9

% change

PRICES AND COSTS

GDP  implicit deflator
GDP  fixed-wt. price  index
Gross  domestic purchases
fixed-wt. price  index

CPI

Ex.  food  and  energy

ECI,  hourly  compensation

2

Nonfarm business sector

Output per  hour
Compensation per  hour
Unit  labor  cost

3.8
3.9

3.6
2.6
3.7

3.6

4.2
5.7
1.4

2.7
3.3

3.4
3.5
3.6

3.2

1.9
4.6
2.6

1.3
2.7

3.2
2.9
3.0

3.2

2.8
5.8
2.9

2.7
2.8

2.5
3.5
3.6

3.5

3.8
4.5

.6

3.3
4.2

3.3
2.8
3.5

3.9

-2.0 
2.1 
4.1 

1.6
2.4

2.6
3.1
3.5

3.8

.4
2.4
2.0

1.0 
2.0 

1.6 
2.0 
2.4 

3.4 

1.3 
2.4 

2.4 
3.1 
2.9 

2.9 
3.1 

2.5 
1.9 
2.6 

2.9
2.9

3.2
2.8
3.4

3.4 

2.7 

3.7

4.0 
2.8 
-1.2 

4.9 
2.4 
-2.4 

2.9
6.1
3.1

-2.1

.7
2.9

1. Not at an  annual  rate.

2.  Private-industry workers.

Strictly Confidential  (FR) 

REAL GROSS  DOMESTIC PRODUCT  AND RELATED ITEMS,  QUARTERLY VALUES

Class  II  FOMC 

(Seasonally adjusted,  annual  rate except  as noted) 

December  14,  1994

1994 

1995 

1996

Projected

Item 

Units 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4

EXPENDITURES

Nominal  GDP 
Real GDP 

6786.5  6900.2  7006.1  7086.6  7154.4  7217.5  7291.0  7368.9  7452.4  7538.1
Bill.  $ 
Bill.  87$  5365.0  5431.5  5472.3  5500.0  5518.3  5534.8  5553.8  5579.0  5607.3  5637.0

Real GDP 
Gross  domestic purchases 
Final  sales 
Private dom.  final  purch. 

% change 

Personal cons.  expend. 

Durables 
Nondurables 
Services 

Business  fixed  invest. 

Producers'  dur.  equip. 
Nonres.  structures 

Res.  structures 

Exports 
Imports 

Government purchases 

Federal 

Defense 

State  and  local 

Change  in  bus.  invent. 

Bill.  87$ 

Nonfarm 
Net  exports 

3.9 
4.5 
4.2 
4.3 

3.3 
6.3 
3.3 
2.4 

14.4 
18.0 
2.9 
-6.5 

12.2 
15.6 

7.1 
12.5 
13.6 
4.2 

5.0 
4.8 
6.0 
7.0 

5.5 
18.9 
4.0 
3.0 

18.6 
21.2 
10.0 
-3.1 

13.7 
10.4 

3.0 
3.2 
3.2 
4.3 

3.4 
6.7 
2.6 
2.9 

12.4 
13.5 
8.5 
-5.7 

9.0 
9.0 

2.0 
2.2 
2.6 
3.5 

2.4 
.8 
2.2 
2.9 

11.6 
12.7 
7.6 
-3.3 

8.5 
8.4 

-.5 

-8.1 
-11.3 
4.1 

-1.2 
-7.4 
-10.2 
2.5 

-1.0 
-7.1 
-10.1 
2.5 

1.3 
1.3 
2.1 
2.5 

1.6 
-3.6 
2.1 
2.8 

7.9 
8.0 
7.6 
-1.5 

7.8 
6.3 

-.1 

-4.8 
-6.7 
2.5 

1.2 
1.0 
1.7 
1.7 

1.3 
-3.4 
1.8 
2.2 

4.6 
4.0 
7.0 
-.9 

7.9 
5.5 

1.4 
1.2 
1.7 
1.7 

1.5 
-1.2 
1.8 
2.2 

3.0 
2.0 
6.8 
.6 

8.4 
6.3 

1.8 
1.6 
1.8 
2.0 

1.8 
.2 
1.8 
2.2 

3.0 
2.0 
6.7 
1.4 

8.8 
6.5 

2.0 
2.0 
1.9 
2.2 

1.9 
1.2 
1.8 
2.2 

3.7 
3.0 
6.5 
1.4 

8.8 
7.6 

2.1
2.2
2.1
2.4

2.0
1.5
1.8
2.2

4.5
4.0
6.3
2.0

9.0
8.2

.2 

.2 

.1 

.3 

.7

-4.2 
-5.7 
2.5 

-3.6 
-4.7 
2.2 

-3.9 
-5.3 
2.2 

-3.2 
-4.3 
2.2 

-2.3
-3.7
2.2

56.1 
46.3 

17.0
14.6
-120.8  -118.8  -121.6  -123.9  -123.1  -120.6  -118.7  -116.5  -116.6  -117.5

16.5 
14.1 

43.2 
36.7 

25.1 
23.1 

15.2 
12.9 

35.5 
32.0 

18.8 
16.5 

45.1 
35.6 

15.1 
12.8 

Nominal  GDP 

% change 

5.9 

6.9 

6.3 

4.7 

3.9 

3.6 

4.1 

4.3 

4.6 

4.7

EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION

Nonfarm  payroll  employ. 
Unemployment  rate1 

Millions 
% 

113.9 
6.0 

114.7 
5.6 

115.4 
5.5 

116.0 
5.5 

116.4 
5.6 

116.7 
5.7 

116.8 
5.9 

117.0 
6.0 

117.3 
6.1 

117.7
6.1

Industrial  prod.  index 
Capacity util.  rate-mfg1 

% change 
% 

5.0 
83.6 

5.1 
84.3 

5.4 
84.7 

2.8 
84.6 

1.1 
84.0 

.8 
83.4 

1.1 
82.9 

1.8 
82.5 

2.1 
82.3 

2.3
82.1

Housing  starts 
Light Motor  Vehicle Sales 

Auto sales  in  U.S. 

North American prod. 
Other 

INCOME AND  SAVING

Millions 

1.47 
14.65 
9.09 
7.09 
2.01 

1.42 
15.49 
9.12 
7.23 
1.89 

1.40 
15.74 
9.62 
7.62 
2.00 

1.39 
15.58 
9.55 
7.65 
1.90 

1.38 
15.00 
9.06 
7.36 
1.70 

1.38 
14.60 
8.80 
7.07 
1.73 

1.39 
14.50 
8.70 
6.95 
1.75 

1.41 
14.50 
8.63 
6.88 
1.75 

1.42 
14.50 
8.66 
6.91 
1.75 

1.43
14.55
8.71
6.96
1.75

Nominal  GNP 
Nominal  GNP 
Nominal  personal  income 
Real  disposable  income 
Personal saving  ratel 

Bill.  $ 
% change 

% 

6775.9  6885.8  6988.5  7059.5  7127.6  7183.3  7256.9  7330.9  7417.9  7497.3
4.4
5.7
2.7
4.7

4.1 
4.5 
.7 
4.5 

3.9 
4.0 
1.6 
4.0 

4.8 
4.3 
1.9 
4.5 

4.2 
6.0 
3.3 
4.8 

3.2 
5.7 
2.9 
4.4 

4.1 
5.3 
1.3 
4.0 

6.1 
7.9 
3.7 
4.3 

6.6 
8.8 
6.5 
4.2 

5.7 
5.1 
2.9 
4.0 

Corp.  profits, IVA&CCAdj 
Profit share  of  GNP1 

% change 
% 

8.1 
8.2 

1.0 
8.1 

1.2 
8.0 

-5.2 
7.8 

.5 
7.8 

-10.0 
7.5 

-.8 
7.4 

5.1 
7.4 

10.4 
7.5 

3.2
7.5

Federal  govt.  surpl./def.  Bill.  $ 
State/local  surpl./def. 
Ex. social  ins.  funds 

-155.1  -172.6  -158.5  -147.2  -149.0  -178.4  -192.9  -181.8  -181.0  -202.3
30.9
-33.1

24.8 
-39.3 

29.7 
-34.3 

25.9 
-38.1 

29.0 
-35.6 

29.1 
-35.8 

27.3 
-37.0 

24.1 
-41.2 

24.6 
-39.6 

26.7 
-38.5 

PRICES AND  COSTS

GDP  implicit deflator 
GDP  fixed-wt. price  index 
Gross  domestic purchases

fixed-wt.  price  index 

CPI 

Ex.  food and  energy 

ECI,  hourly compensation 2  

Nonfarm business  sector

Output  per hour 
Compensation  per hour 
Unit  labor  cost 

% change 

1.9 
2.8 

3.4 
3.6 
2.8 

1.7 
2.7 

2.7 
2.3 
2.6 

3.1 
3.6 

3.5 
3.1 
3.5 

2.6 
3.0 

3.0 
3.2 
3.3 

2.5 
2.9 

2.9 
3.0 
3.0 

2.4 
2.7 

2.7 
2.8 
2.9 

2.7 
3.2 

3.1 
2.9 
3.0 

2.5 
2.9 

2.8 
2.9 
3.1 

2.5 
2.9 

2.8 
2.9 
3.1 

3.3 

3.6 

3.7 

3.7 

3.7 

3.7 

3.7 

3.7 

3.7 

2.9 
3.0 
.0 

1.3 
3.8 
2.5 

1.0 
4.1 
3.0 

.8 
3.8 
3.0 

.7 
3.9 
3.2 

.7 
4.0 
3.3 

1.1 
4.3 
3.1 

1.4 
3.9 
2.5 

1.2 
3.9 
2.7 

2.5
2.9

2.8
2.9
3.1

3.7

1.1
3.9
2.7

1.  Not at  an  annual  rate.

2. Private-industry workers.

Strictly Confidential  (FR)
Class  II  FOMC

NET  CHANGES IN  REAL GROSS DOMESTIC  PRODUCT AND RELATED  ITEMS
(Billions of  1987 dollars)

1

December  14,  1994

Item 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

1992 

1993

Projected

Real GDP
Gross  domestic purchases

Final sales
Private  dom.  final  purch.

Personal  cons.  expend.

Durables
Nondurables
Services

Business  fixed  invest.

Producers'  dur. equip.
Nonres.  structures

Res.  structures

Change  in  bus.  invent.

Nonfarm
Farm

Net exports
Exports
Imports

Government  purchases

Federal

Defense
Nondefense
State  and  local

37.7 
38.8 

57.5 
55.1 

46.1 
15.7 
10.7 
19.7 

-. 1 
-1.2 
1.1 
9.2 

-19.8 
-28.9 
9.1 

29.0 
45.1 

18.4 
41.7 

14.0 

.4 
-1.8 
15.3 

18.0 
18.6 
-.6 
9.8 

10.5 
12.4 
-1.8 

-1.0 
8.4 
9.4 

-16.2
2.1
18.3

-7.1
-4.6
-3.4
-1.2
-2.5

1. Annual  changes are  from  Q4  to Q4.

43.0 
47.9 

42.1 
39.1 

32.2 
10.7 
7.1 
14.4 

6.4 
9.9 
-3.5 
.4 

1.0 
3.7 
-2.8 

-4.8 
7.4 
12.3 

70.2 
69.8 

68.8 
66.3 

45.8 
14.3 
17.8 
13.7 

9.7 
11.8 
-2.1 
10.8 

1.4 
4.5 
-3.1 

.4 
10.2 
9.9 

14.6 
33.7 

2.7 
35.9 

13.8 
3.7 
-4.2 
14.4 

19.4 
18.4 

.9 
2.7 

11.9 
13.4 
-1.5 

30.1 
41.8 

29.7 
38.6 

22.0 
11.2 
4.3 
6.4 

20.7 
20.7 

.1 
-4.1 

.4 
3.1 
-2.7 

34.0 
51.1 

40.0 
54.5 

33.0 
9.0 
7.4 
16.6 

16.9 
16.6 

.2 
4.7 

78.6
74.4

80.7 
76.9 

34.0 
18.1 
6.3 
9.6 

29.3 
28.2 
1.2 
13.5 

-5.9 
-1.9 
-4.0 

-2.2
-10.2
8.0

43.1 
64.9 

28.5 
61.9 

40.1 
10.9 
10.3 
18.9 

16.4 
20.9 
-4.6 
5.4 

14.6 
11.4 
3.2 

-19.1 

-11.7

-1.5 
17.5 

11.0
22.8

-17.0
-4.9
12.0

-14.1
-15.4
-14.2
-1.3
1.3

2.5
-2.7
-5.9
3.2
5.2

4.1 
29.9 
25.8 

-. 3

-4.5
-2.2
-2.3

4.2

-21.8
-5.6
16.2

-11.6
-9.4
-10.2

.8

-2.1

53.0
60.7

19.2
29.8

11.5

.5
6.0
5.1

14.3
7.5
6.9
3.9

33.8
29.6
4.2

-7.8
24.3
32.0

-2.8
-7.0
-2.4
-4.5

4.1

13.6
-6.4

-20.7
-32.6

-. 6

-5.5
-17.1
22.1

-33.3
-11.9
-21.4
1.2

34.4
33.3
1.0

19.9
42.2
22.2

-8.0
-12.4
-19.9
7.4
4.6

179.9 
201.6 

186.8 
202.2 

138.1
41.1
33.8
63.1

34.0
39.1
-5.1
30.2

-6.9
-8.3
1.4

-21.6
28.1
49.9

6.2
2.9

-3.4
6.4
3.2

157.3
201.0

153.1
205.9

102.8
42.0
13.8
47.0

86.3
83.9
2.4
16.8

4.2 
4.4 
-. 2 

-43.7
34.5
78.1

-9.1
-25.9
-23.7
-2.2
16.8

213.5
250.1

179.1
215.4

128.9
42.9
36.2
49.9

82.9
75.8
7.1
3.6

34.3
24.9
9.4

-36.6
59.1
95.7

.3

-13.6
-12.2
-1.4
13.9

Strictly Confidential  (FR)
Class  II  FOMC

NET  CHANGES  IN  REAL  GROSS  DOMESTIC  PRODUCT  AND  RELATED  ITEMS1

(Billions of  1987  dollars)

December  14,  1994

Item 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996

1994 

1995 

1996 

Projected

Projected

Real GDP
Gross  domestic purchases

Final sales
Private  dom. final  purch.

Personal  cons.  expend.

Durables
Nondurables
Services

Business  fixed  invest.

Producers'  dur.  equip.
Nonres.  structures

Res.  structures

Change  in  bus. invent.

Nonfarm
Farm

Net  exports
Exports
Imports

Government  purchases

Federal

Defense
Nondefense
State  and  local

50.9 
60.1 

54.1 
47.2 

28.6 
8.0 
8.9 
11.6 

22.5 
21.4 
1.1 
-3.9 

-3.1 
-5.4 
2.3 

-9.0 
18.8 
27.9 

66.5 
64.4 

77.3 
76.5 

48.7 
23.5 
11.0 
14.3 

29.7 
26.0 
3.7 
-1.8 

-11.0
-10.7

-. 3

2.0 
21.6 
19.6 

-1.2
-7.2
-6.9
-. 2
5.9

1. Annual changes  are  from Q4  to Q4.

40.9 
43.6 

42.8 
48.3 

30.5 
9.1 
7.2 
14.2 

21.0 
17.8 
3.2 
-3.3 

-1.9 
1.1 
-3.0 

-2.7 
14.8 
17.6 

27.6 
29.9 

35.3 
39.9 

21.5 
1.1 
6.3 
14.1 

20.3 
17.4 
2.9 
-1.9 

-7.7 
-4.7 
-3.0 

-2.3 
14.5 
16.7 

18.4 
17.6 

28.7 
28.3 

14.7 
-5.1 
6.1 
13.8 

14.4 
11.5 
3.0 
-.8 

-10.4
-8.9
-1.5

.7 
13.5 
12.8 

16.4 
13.9 

22.8 
19.8 

11.5 
-4.8 
5.2 
11.1 

8.7
5.9
2.8
-.5

-6.3 
-6.6 
.3 

2.6 
14.0 
11.4 

19.1 
17.2 

22.6 
20.4 

14.3 
-1.6 
5.1 
10.7 

-3.6
-3.6

.0

25.2 
23.0 

25.4 
23.0 

16.4 

.2 
5.2 
11.0 

5.8 
3.0 
2.8 
.8 

-. 2 
-. 2 
.0 

28.3 
28.3 

26.9 
26.2 

18.1 
1.7 
5.1 
11.3 

7.3 
4.5 
2.8 
.8 

1.4 
1.3 
.1 

1.8 
15.1 
13.2 

2.2 
16.1 
13.9 

.0 
16.4 
16.5 

.4
-2.9
-2.5
-. 4
3.3

.2
-3.1
-2.8
-. 3
3.3

.8
-2.5
-2.2
-.3
3.3

29.7
30.6

29.1
28.4

18.5

2.1
5.1
11.4

8.7
6.0
2.7
1.1

.6
.6
.0

-.9
17.1
18.0

1.6
-1.8
-1.9
.1
3.4

157.3 
201.0 

213.5 
250.1 

153.1 
205.9 

179.1 
215.4 

102.8
42.0
13.8
47.0

86.3
83.9
2.4
16.8

4.2
4.4
-. 2

-43.7
34.5
78.1

-9.1
-25.9
-23.7
-2.2
16.8

128.9
42.9
36.2
49.9

82.9
75.8

7.1
3.6

34.3
24.9

9.4

-36.6 
59.1 
95.7 

.3

-13.6
-12.2

-1.4
13.9

103.3 
105.0 

129.6 
136.3 

78.3

.3

24.8
53.2

64.5
52.6
11.9
-6.5

-26.3
-19.1

-7.2

-1.7 
56.9 
58.6 

-4.9
-19.8
-18.6

-1.2
14.9

102.3
99.2

104.0
98.0

67.3
2.4
20.5
44.5

27.6
16.5
11.1
3.0

-1.8
-1.9

.1

3.1
64.7
61.7

3.0
-10.3
-9.4
-. 9

13.3

Strictly Confidential  (FR)
Class  II  FOMC

STAFF PROJECTIONS  OF  FEDERAL SECTOR  ACCOUNTS  AND RELATED  ITEMS
(Billions of  dollars  except  as  noted)

December 14,  1994

Item 

1993a 

1994 a  

1995 

1996 

Ql a  

Q2 a  

Q3b 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4

Fiscal  year 

1994 

1995 

1996

UNIFIED BUDGET 

Receipts1 
Outlays1 
Surplus/deficit1 

On-budget 
Off-budget 

Surplus  excluding

deposit insurance 2  

Means of  financing
Borrowing 
Cash decrease 
Other 3  

Cash operating  balance,

end  of  period 

NIPA  FEDERAL  SECTOR 

Receipts 
Expenditures 
Purchases 
Defense 
Nondefense 

Other  expenditures 

Surplus/deficit 

FISCAL  INDICATORS

4

High-employment  (HEB)
surplus/deficit 
Change  in  HEB, percent
of  potential  GDP 
Fiscal  impetus  (FI),

1153 
1409 
-255 
-301 
46 

1257 
1461 
-203 
-259 
56 

1349 
1535 
-186 
-250 
64 

1414 
1618 
-204 
-269 
65 

-283 

-210 

-203 

-216 

249 
6 
0 

185 
17 
1 

184 
-24 
26 

208 
0 
-5 

289 
348 
-59 
-66 
8 

-65 

51 
5 
2 

Not  seasonally adjusted

363 
363 
0 
-33 
33 

318 
372 
-53 
-55 
2 

302 
381 
-79 
-86 
6 

295 
393 
-98 
-107 
9 

415 
376 
39 
-1 
40 

337 
385 
-48 
-56 
7 

320 
402 
-82 
-88 
6 

304 
409 
-105 
-114 
9 

437 
403 
34 
-6 
40 

354 
404 
-50 
-60 
10 

327
423
-97
-102
5

3 

-57 

-82 

-104 

37 

-54 

-83 

-110 

32 

-55 

-96

8 
-6 
-2 

37 
15 
1 

55 
9 
15 

80 
16 
3 

11 
-49 
-2 

39 
0 
10 

61 
25 
-4 

88 
20 
-3 

14 
-45 
-3 

45 
0 
5 

67
25
5

53 

36 

60 

60 

45 

51 

36 

27 

11 

60 

60 

35 

15 

60 

60 

35

1242 
1497 
447 
307 
140 
1049 
-254 

1355 
1529 
439 
296 
144 
1090 
-174 

1461 
1618 
437 
290 
147 
1181 
-157 

1523 
1707 
430 
280 
150 
1277 
-183 

1338 
1514 
438 
292 
146 
1076 
-176 

1381 
1526 
435 
292 
144 
1091 
-145 

1388 
1544 
444 
301 
144 
1099 
-155 

1416 
1589 
441 
295 
146 
1148 
-172 

1458 
1617 
441 
293 
148 
1176 
-158 

1482 
1630 
435 
287 
148 
1195 
-147 

1488 
1637 
432 
284 
148 
1205 
-149 

1496 
1674 
429 
281 
148 
1245 
-178 

1511 
1703 
432 
282 
150 
1272 
-193 

1538 
1720 
430 
280 
150 
1290 
-182 

1549 
1730 
429 
278 
150 
1302 
-181 

1568
1770
428
277
151
1342
-202

Seasonally adjusted,  annual  rate

-210 

-164 

-185 

-196 

-158 

-141 

-161 

-196 

-189 

-179 

-177 

-201 

-206 

-190 

-186 

-206

-.1 

-.7 

.3 

.1 

-.6 

-.3 

.3 

.5 

-.1 

-. 1 

0 

.3 

.1 

-.2 

-.1 

.3

percent, cal.  year 

-4.1 

-6.8 

-6.2 

-5.1 

-4.2 

-4.3 

3.8 

-2.6 

-2.8 

-2.5 

-.5 

-.8 

-2.3 

-1.7 

.1 

-.4

1.  Excluding health  reform, OMB's  July 1994  deficit estimates  are $220  billion  in  FY94,  $167  billion  in  FY95,  and  $179  billion in  FY96.  CBO's

August  1994  deficit estimates  of  the budget are  $202  billion  in  FY94,  $162  billion  in  FY95,  and  $176  billion  in  FY96.  Budget  receipts,  outlays,  and
surplus/deficit include  corresponding  social  security  (OASDI) categories.  The OASDI  surplus  is  excluded  from the on-budget deficit  and  shown
separately as  off-budget, as  classified  under  current law.  The  Postal Service  deficit is  included  in off-budget  outlays  beginning  in  FY90.

2.  OMB's  July  1994  deficit  estimates,  excluding deposit  insurance spending, are  $224  billion in  FY94,  $185  billion  in  FY95,  and  $187  billion  in  FY96.

CBO's August  1994  deficit estimates,  excluding  deposit  insurance  spending, are  $207  billion  in  FY94,  $180  billion  in  FY95,  and  $188  billion  in  FY96.

3.  Other  means  of  financing  are  checks issued  less  checks paid,  accrued  items,  and changes  in  other  financial  assets  and  liabilities.

4.  HEB  is  the  NIPA measure  in  current dollars,  with  cyclically sensitive receipts  and  outlays  adjusted to  the  level of  potential  output generated

by  2.3  percent real  growth and  an  associated unemployment  rate  of  6 percent.  Quarterly  figures  for  change  in  HEB and FI  are  not at  annual  rates.
Change  in  HEB,  as  a  percent of  nominal  potential  GDP,  is  reversed  in  sign.  FI  is  the weighted  difference of  discretionary  changes  in  federal
spending  and  taxes  (in  1987  dollars),  scaled by  real  federal  purchases.  For  change  in  HEB and  FI,  negative  values  indicate  restraint.

a--Actual.
b--Preliminary.

DOMESTIC  FINANCIAL  DEVELOPMENTS

Recent  Developments

Short-term interest  rates  rose  over  much  of the  intermeeting

period,  initially  in  response  to  the  3/4  percentage  point  increase

in  the  discount  and  federal  funds  rates  at  the  time  of  the  last  FOMC

meeting,  and  subsequently  in  reaction  to  the  surprising  strength  of

incoming  economic  data.  The  full  amount  of  the  tightening  was

reflected  in  a hike  in the prime  rate  to  8-1/2  percent  from  7-3/4

percent.  In  early  December.  Orange County's  announcement  that  its

investment  fund had  suffered  a large  loss  prompted  some  flight  to

quality  and  a reassessment  of the  likelihood  of  a further  monetary

tightening at  the  December FOMC  meeting,  causing  short-term Treasury

rates  to  give  back some  of  their  increases.  On  net,  short-term

rates  have  risen  between  1/2  and  3/4  percentage point  since  the

November  meeting.  In  contrast,  long  term  rates  have moved  down  a

bit  since  the  last  meeting;  the  System's  action  evidently  inspired

some  increased  confidence  that  it  would  act  aggressively to  contain

inflation.

Ramifications  of  the  Orange  County  situation have  disturbed

financial markets  on  a broad  front.  The  county fund,  which had  made

a highly  leveraged bet  that  interest  rates  would hold  steady  or

fall,  came  a cropper  as  rising  interest  rates  severely eroded  its

value.  The  county  filed  for  bankruptcy  when dealers balked  at

rolling over maturing  RPs,  and  it  subsequently defaulted  on  a $110

million taxable  pension  bond  issue.  Prices  of  tax-exempt  issues

generally  came  under  some  downward  pressure  on  the  news,  but

declines  were  particularly deep  on  debt  issued  by  the  units  directly

involved.  Although tax-exempt mutual  fund  managers  were braced  for

a  sharp  investor  reaction,  to  date  unusual  liquidation  activity

reportedly has  been  confined  to  money  funds  specializing  in

1-23

I-24

California  paper;  some  investment  advisers  to  money  funds  purchased

or  enhanced  the  value  of  their  funds'  affected  paper  in  order  to

prevent  share  values  from falling  below a dollar.

Despite  strong  and  generally better  than-expected  corporate

earnings  reports,  stock markets  were  down  appreciably  over  the

intermeeting period.  Shares  of  FNMA  and  FHLMC and  of  the  investment

banks  closest  to  the  Orange  County  situation were  hit  hard,  but

stock  price  declines  were  widespread  and mostly  preceded the  Orange

County developments,  perhaps  further  evidence that  markets  now

anticipate  monetary tightenings  to  bite.

M2  posted  a  slight  expansion  in  November,  the  first  since  July,

bringing  its  growth  since  the  fourth  quarter  of  last  year  to  a  1

percent  rate,  the  lower  bound  of  its  annual  growth  range.  Higher

short-term  rates  further  increased  the  already  elevated opportunity

costs  of holding the  liquid  deposit  components  in  M2,  which

continued  to  run  off  in  November.  Small  time  deposits  and  MMMFs,  by

contrast,  accelerated.  M2  may  also  have  been boosted  in  November  by

a  redeployment  of  funds  from bond  and,  to  a lesser  extent,  stock

mutual  funds,  although the  strength  of  noncompetitive  tenders

suggests  some  shift  toward  direct  holding  of  securities,

M3  growth  slipped  a bit  last  month,  to  a  2 percent  rate,  mainly

because  of  a sharp  deceleration  of  institution-only money market

mutual  funds.  The  growth  of  large  time  deposits  also  slowed,  albeit

to  a still  rapid  pace.  Nevertheless,  banks  reduced  their  managed

liabilities  overall  last month,  as  they  had  in  October, mostly  by

reversing  some  of  the  large  borrowings  from  foreign  offices  made

earlier  this  year.  On  the  year,  M3  has  expanded  at  a 1-1/4  percent

rate,  well  within  its  0-to-4  percent  target  growth  range.

Bank lending  grew at  a brisk pace  in  November,  extending the

broad-based  advance  of business,  real  estate,  and  consumer  loans

I-25

that  began  in  the  spring.  This  strength  appears  to  owe,  in  part,  to

a continued  easing  of  standards  and  terms  on  many  loans.  In

November,  as  in  October,  banks  funded  credit  extensions,  in  part.  by

liquidating  holdings  of  securities,  although  some  of  the  reported

drop  in  these  assets  resulted  from marking  a portion  of  them to

market.

Public  bond  issuance  of  nonfinancial  firms  increased  somewhat

in  November but  remained  well  below  the  pace  of  1993.  Higher  long-

term rates  have  not  only depressed  issuance  in  favor  of  borrowing  at

commercial  banks  and  finance  companies  but  also have  reduced

somewhat  the  average  maturity  of  bonds  issued.  Quality  spreads

generally  remain  narrow  but  have  widened  on  lower-rated bonds,  and

several  planned  junk bond  issues  have been  withdrawn  in  recent

weeks.

Equity  issuance  by nonfinancial  firms  picked  up  in  November,

despite  the market  downturn.  The  outstanding volume  of  equity is

expected  to  contract  in  the  fourth  quarter,  however,  owing  to

merger-related  share  retirements.  So  far  this  year,  the  value  of

large  nonfinancial  mergers  has  cumulated  to  $70  billion, more  than

three  times the  total  for  all  of  last  year.  Much  of the  rapid

expansion of  commercial  paper  in  recent  months  has  supported merger

activity.

Acting to  boost  business  borrowing  recently has  been the

strength  of  commercial  real  estate  loans,  which  edged up  again  in

the  third  quarter  after  three years  of  declines.  At  domestic

commercial  banks,  such  loans  expanded  for  the  fifth  consecutive

quarter,  jumping  to  an  annual  rate  of  6 percent.  The  rapid  runoffs

of  commercial  real  estate  loans  at  foreign banks,  however,  have

shown  little  sign  of  abating.

I-26

Household  credit  demands  continue  to  be  strong  overall.

Residential  mortgage  growth  picked  up  in  the  third  quarter,

particularly at  domestic  commercial  banks,  where  growth  spurted  to

nearly  a  15  percent  annual  rate,  a pace  that  is  unlikely to  be

sustained  in  the  current  quarter.  Growth  of  consumer  installment

debt  has  picked  up  a bit  from the  third-quarter  pace,  advancing  at  a

16  percent  rate  in  October.  Strength  apparently continues  to  owe,

in  part,  to  incentives  tied  to  the  volume  of  credit  generated  on

"premium" credit  cards  but  also  reflects  aggressive  lending  by

banks,  as  evidenced  by the  unusually  sluggish  response  of  auto  loan

rates  to  the  upward movement  in  market  rates  this  year.

With  no  long-term bond  issuance  this  quarter,  the  Treasury will

raise  $31  billion  of  its  total  marketable  borrowing  of  $55  billion

through  bill  issuance;  to  achieve  this,  the  weekly bill  auction has

been  raised  $4 billion  since  September,  to  $27  billion.  Another  $9

billion  of  the  quarter's  projected  $79  billion  deficit  will  be

financed  by a decrease  in  the  Treasury's  cash balance.

Gross  issuance  of tax-exempt  debt  continued  to  be  weak  in

November,  held  down by  anemic  refunding  activity.  The  outstanding

stock  of  long-term tax-exempt  debt  likely was  little  changed  last

month,  after having  declined  an  estimated  $5 billion  this  year  as

pre-refunded  issues  were  retired.

Outlook

The  increase  in  short-term interest  rates  assumed  necessary  in

the  near  term to  check  inflationary  pressures has  been  raised  in

light  of the  recent  evidence  of  surprising  economic  strength  and

resource utilization.  The further  tightening  is  projected  to  push

bond  yields  up  a bit.  But  as  economic  activity  slows  over  the  next

year  and  inflation moderates  after  a brief  spurt,  the  bond market

rally  is  expected  to  resume,  carrying  yields  below  current  levels.

I-27

Monetary  policy  is  assumed  to  move  slightly  in  the  direction  of  ease

in  late  1995  or  early  1996,  but  real  short  rates  are  expected  to

remain  above  their  levels  today.

Both  M2  and M3  are expected  to  accelerate  somewhat  next  year.

The  outlook  is  unchanged  from that  of November,  as  the  impact  of

additional  economic  growth  is  offset  by  restraint  from  the  higher

opportunity  costs  implicit  in  the more  aggressive  policy  restraint.

In  1996,  M2  accelerates  a bit  further  as  opportunity  costs  decline.

M3  growth  stays  unchanged,  however,  as  bank  credit  growth  remains

subdued.

Overall  debt  growth  is  projected to  be  virtually unchanged  in

the  next  two  years  from the  1994  pace  of  5 percent.  The  expansion

of  federal  government  debt.  which  is  expected to  be  4-1/2  percent

this  year,  likely  will  rise  by  a percentage  point  in  1995,  largely

owing  to  technical  factors  relating to  the  timing  of  expenditures

and  receipts.  This  acceleration  moves  the  growth  of  federal  debt

back above  that  of  nonfederal  debt  and  nominal  GDP  in  1995.  This

faster  pace  is  maintained  in  1996  as  well.  Growth  of  nonfederal

debt  is  projected to  slow  gradually  from the  current  quarter's

5-1/4  percent  rate  to  4-3/4  percent  in  1996,  broadly in  line  with

the  slowing  in  nominal  GDP.

Consumer  credit  expansion  should  ease  somewhat  from  its  current

elevated pace  as  consumer  durable  expenditures  are  damped  by  slower

income  growth  and  the  impact  of the  recent  and  projected  firming  of

interest  rates  on  consumer loan  rates.  Home mortgage  growth  slows

only  a bit,  with  the  higher  short-term  rates  expected to  reduce  the

share  accounted  for  by ARMs.  The  recent  trend  toward  greater

accommodation  in bank  lending  is  likely  to  begin to  reverse  over  the

projection  period  as  a slower  economy  and  rising interest  rate

I-28

burdens  cause  household  delinquency  rates  to  edge  up  from their

current  low  levels.

Despite  a projected  reduction  in  inventory  accumulation,  a

widening  of the  corporate  financing  gap  next  year,  attributable  in

part  to  sluggish  profits,  helps  to  sustain  borrowing by  nonfinancial

businesses.  Nonetheless,  the  pace  of business  borrowing  is  expected

to  slow after  the  current  quarter  as  the  hectic  pace  of merger

activity  abates.  With bond  yields  dropping  and  the  yield  curve

flattening,  an  increasing  share  of  business  credit  needs  over  the

next  two  years  will  be met  in  longer-term markets.  This  shift  is

likely  to  be  further  encouraged  by  a halt--if  not  some  reversal--of

the  current  swing  toward  easier  nonprice  terms  and  standards  in bank

business  lending  as  the  slowing  of  the  marked  economic  expansion  and

higher  interest expenses  heighten perceived  credit  risks.

We  are  assuming  that  concerns  raised  by Orange  County will

subside  soon  and  that  there will  be  no  ongoing  disruption  of

municipal  markets.  Gross  debt  issuance  of the  state and  local

sector  is  expected to  remain  unchanged  next  year  and to  pick  up  only

slightly  in  1996.  Owing to  a slowing  pace  of  retirements,  however,

the  stock of this  debt  outstanding, which  is  expected to  contract  2-

1/2  percent this  year,  expands  slightly  next  year  and  posts  moderate

growth  in  1996.

Confidential FR  Class  II
December  14,  1994

CHANGE IN DEBT  OF  THE  DOMESTIC  NONFINANCIAL SECTORS 1
(Percent)

-------------------- Nonfederal---------------------

Total 2   govt. 

Federal 

Total 

Total 

Home 
mtg. 

Cons. 
credit 

Business 

----- Households------ 

State  and 
local 
govt. 

------- MEMO--------
Private
financial 
assets 

Nominal
GDP

Year

1982 
1983 
1984 
1985 
1986 

1987 
1988 
1989 
1990 
1991 

1992 
1993 
1994 
1995 
1996 

9.8 
11.9 
14.6 
15.5 
12.3 

9.4 
8.9 
7.8 
6.3 
4.4 

4.8 
5.4 
5.0 
5.0 
5.0 

19.7 
18.9 
16.9 
16.5 
13.6 

8.0 
8.0 
7.0 
11.0 
11.1 

10.9 
8.3 
4.5 
5.5 
5.8 

7.4 
10.1 
13.9 
15.2 
11.9 

9.8 
9.2 
8.1 
5.0 
2.4 

2.8 
4.3 
5.1 
4.9 
4.7 

5.5 
11.8 
13.0 
15.3 
12.0 

11.4 
10.5 
9.2 
6.5 
4.7 

5.8 
7.1 
7.7 
6.4 
5.8 

Quarter  (seasonally adjusted  annual  rates)

1993:1 
2 
3 
4 

1994:1 
2 
3 
4 

1995:1 
2 
3 
4 

4.1 
6.2 
5.1 
5.6 

5.3 
4.5 
4.9 
4.8 

6.3 
4.4 
4.4 
4.6 

7.8 
10.7 
5.4 
8.4 

6.3 
3.6 
3.9 
3.9 

9.4 
3.8 
3.8 
4.4 

2.8 
4.6 
5.0 
4.5 

4.9 
4.8 
5.2 
5.2 

5.2 
4.6 
4.6 
4.7 

4.2 
6.5 
9.0 
8.0 

7.1 
7.3 
8.4 
7.3 

6.8 
6.2 
6.1 
6.0 

4.7 
10.8 
11.7 
13.2 
14.3 

14.9 
12.7 
10.8 
7.9 
6.5 

6.7 
6.4 
6.2 
5.7 
5.5 

4.1 
6.7 
8.0 
6.1 

6.3 
5.6 
6.5 
5.9 

5.6 
5.6 
5.6 
5.6 

4.4 
12.6 
18.7 
15.8 
9.6 

5.0 
7.2 
6.2 
2.0 
-1.8 

0.7 
7.8 
12.7 
9.7 
7.9 

2.5 
5.1 
9.3 
13.3 

8.4 
13.8 
13.9 
12.7 

11.3 
9.4 
8.7 
8.0 

8.8 
8.7 
15.6 
12.1 
12.2 

7.9 
8.7 
6.9 
3.4 
-1.0 

-0.1 
0.6 
4.1 
4.0 
3.8 

-0.3 
0.7 
0.6 
1.3 

3.5 
3.8 
4.1 
4.8 

4.6 
3.7 
3.6 
3.8 

9.3 
9.7 
9.1 
31.6 
9.8 

12.1 
6.0 
9.3 
5.7 
7.4 

1.8 
7.1 
-2.6 
0.8 
3.4 

9.2 
11.9 
4.8 
1.7 

1.0 
-2.8 
-4.9 
-3.6 

-0.2 
0.4 
1.3 
1.8 

10.1 
12.5 
12.8 
12.4 
7.3 

8.1 
8.6 
5.8 
4.7 
-1.0 

0.7 
-0.4 
5.2 
1.0 
1.0 

-2.9 
1.5 
-2.2 
1.9 

9.1 
6.4 
3.0 
1.7 

1.5 
0.6 
0.7 
1.0 

3.2
11.0
9.1
7.0
4.7

8.0
7.7
6.0
4.7
3.5

6.4
5.0
6.5
4.6
4.4

4.4
4.2
3.8
7.7

6.1
7.2
5.9
6.9

6.3
4.7
3.9
3.6

1. Data  after  1994:3  are  staff projections.  Changes  are measured  from  end of  the preceding period  to

end  of  period  indicated  except  annual  nominal GDP  growth, which  is  Q4  to  Q4.

2. On  a quarterly  average basis,  total  debt growth  is  projected to be  5.3  percent  in  1994,  4.9  in  1995,

and  5.0  in  1996.  Federal debt  rises  5.7  percent  in  1994,  5.0  percent  in  1995,  and  5.8  percent  in  1996.
Nonfederal  debt rises  5.1 percent  in  1994,  4.9  percent  in  1995,  and  4.8  percent  in  1996.

2.6.3  FOF

Confidential FR  Class  II
December  14,  1994

FLOW OF  FUNDS  PROJECTIONS:  HIGHLIGHTS1
(Billions of  dollars)

1993 

Calendar  year 
1995 

1994 

1996 

-----------
Q1 

1994----------- 
Q3 

Q2 

Q4 

-----------
Q1 

1995-----------
Q3 

Q2 

Q4

----------- Seasonally Adjusted Annual Rates-----------

Net  funds  raised by  domestic
nonfinancial  sectors

1  Total 
2 
3 

Net  equity  issuance 
Net debt  issuance 

Borrowing sectors

Nonfinancial  business

Financing  gap 2  
Net  equity  issuance 
Credit  market borrowing 

Households

Net borrowing, of  which: 

Home mortgages 
Consumer  credit 
Debt/DPI  (percent)3  

4 
5 
6 

7 
8 
9 
10 

11 
12 

13 
14 
15 

649.4  580.8  637.4  677.5  647.6  556.4  565.3  554.1  788.5  570.4  579.6  610.9
-8.0
628.1  612.5  650.9  685.5  657.2  558.4  615.3  619.1  818.5  578.4  587.6  618.9

-2.0  -50.0  -65.0  -30.0 

21.3  -31.7  -13.5 

-8.0 

-8.0 

-8.0 

-9.6 

86.5  111.4  126.2  123.0  126.2
28.9 
21.3  -31.7  -13.5 
-8.0 
-8.0
21.9  154.5  154.5  152.6  131.4  144.7  156.4  185.5  177.4  145.4  143.5  151.6

62.1 
-2.0  -50.0  -65.0  -30.0 

56.7  121.7  120.5 
-8.0 

13.5 
-9.6 

-8.0 

64.6 

284.5  332.6  297.7  286.0  305.4  318.6  373.5  333.0  314.8  293.7  293.5  288.8
178.2  184.2  180.5  184.0  186.3  168.9  199.5  182.0  177.7  179.1  181.4  183.8
84.2
91.7

72.7  121.9  127.1  120.2  110.0 
90.4 
91.1 
90.9 

62.3  110.5 
90.0 
88.4 

94.2 
91.3 

89.2 
91.6 

94.4 
90.6 

84.2 
91.5 

90.5 

90.8 

State and  local  governments

Net  borrowing 
Current  surplus 4  

65.7  -25.5 

17.8
-56.3  -56.5  -44.0  -44.5  -49.8  -63.2  -67.6  -45.3  -41.7  -42.3  -44.4  -47.7

9.9  -27.8  -48.8  -35.2 

12.8 

32.8 

-2.2 

8.0 

3.8 

U.S.government

Net  borrowing 
256.1  150.8  190.6  214.1  210.6  122.9  134.1  135.7  328.5  135.5  137.8  160.8
Net borrowing;quarterly, nsa 
256.1  150.8  190.6  214.1 
61.1
Unified deficit;quarterly,  nsa  226.3  191.2  188.6  218.3 
81.9

79.8 
11.0 
97.9  -39.5 

51.2 
58.6 

38.7 
48.3 

37.0 
53.5 

54.9 
79.3 

7.7 
-0.2 

Funds  supplied by

16  depository  institutions 

140.2  204.5  164.6  191.8  198.2  154.8  228.1  237.1  171.4  155.1  160.6  171.3

MEMO:  (percent of GDP)
17 
18 
19 
20 

U.S.  government 5  
Private 

Dom.  nonfinancial  debt 3  
Dom.  nonfinancial  borrowing 

189.8  188.0  186.9  188.5  190.5  189.3  188.9  188.0  188.1  188.0  188.3  188.8
8.6
2.2
6.3

10.0 
3.2 
6.8 

11.7 
4.7 
7.0 

8.2 
1.9 
6.3 

9.0 
2.0 
7.0 

8.2 
1.9 
6.3 

9.1 
2.7 
6.5 

9.2 
2.9 
6.4 

9.1 
2.0 
7.1 

9.1 
2.2 
6.9 

8.3 
1.8 
6.5 

9.9 
4.0 
5.9 

1.  Data after  1994:3  are  staff  projections.
2.  For  corporations:  Excess  of  capital  expenditures  over U.S.  internal  funds.
3. Annuals  are  average  debt  levels  in  the year  (computed as  the  average  of  year-end  debt positions)  divided by  nominal GDP.
4.  NIPA  surplus,  net  of retirement  funds.
5.  Excludes  government-insured mortgage pool  securities.

2.6.4 

FOF

INTERNATIONAL  DEVELOPMENTS

Recent Developments

Since  the  November FOMC  meeting, the  weighted  average  foreign

exchange  value  of  the  dollar  in  terms  of the  other  G-10  currencies

has  risen  2 percent.  The  dollar  has  appreciated by  similar  amounts

in  terms  of  the  yen  and  the  mark.  The  larger-than-expected increase

in  U.S.  short-term rates  on  November  15  reassured markets  that

potential  U.S.  inflation  pressures  would be  contained  and

contributed to  the  dollar's  rise  early  in  the  period.  Subsequent

economic  news  showing  continuing  strength  in the  economy  was  a

factor  in additional  firming  of  the  dollar.

During the  intermeeting  period, three-month  interest  rates  in

Canada  rose  170  basis  points,  substantially  more than  the  50  basis

point  increase  in  the Bank  of Canada's  overnight  rate.  Much  of  the

increase  was  in  the  past  week as  the  Canadian  currency  came  under

pressure  in  response  to  concerns  about  central  and  provincial

government  fiscal  deficits.  In  addition,  the  Bank  of  Canada  is

concerned  about  further  stimulus  to  the  economy,  including  that  from

the  exchange  rate,  given  that  economic  activity  in  Canada  has

continued  to  expand briskly.  Elsewhere  abroad,  three-month rates

rose  much less.  U.K.  rates  rose  nearly  20  basis  points  as  the  Bank

of England  also  raised  short-term  official  rates  50  basis  points  in

an  effort  to  prevent  a reemergence  of  inflation  from threatening the

recovery.  Short-term  rates  in Germany  and  France  were up  30  and  50

basis  points,  respectively:  those  in Japan were  little  changed.

Long-term  interest  rates  declined  a bit  over  the  intermeeting

period  in  the  United  States  and  were  about  unchanged in most  of the

major foreign  industrial  countries.  In  Italy,  long-term rates  rose

45  basis  points,  reflecting  continued  political  turmoil  for  the

Berlusconi  government.

I-31

I-32

The Desk did  not  intervene.

In  the  major  foreign  industrial  countries,  economic  activity

continued  to  expand  rapidly  in  the  third  quarter,  and  indicators  for

the  current  quarter  generally  suggest  further  gains.  In  Japan,  real

GDP  grew  3.7  percent,  annual  rate,  in  the  third  quarter  after  a

small  increase  in  the  previous  quarter.  All  components  of  domestic

demand  contributed  strongly to  the  third-quarter  outcome.

Indicators  for  the  current  quarter  are  somewhat  mixed,  but  the

November  Tankan  report  registered  further  gains  in  business

sentiment.  In  western  Germany,  real  GDP  expanded  5.3  percent,

annual  rate,  in  the  third  quarter,  with  significant  gains  in  all

components  of  domestic  demand  except  inventories.  Industrial

production  rose  further  in  October,  and  orders  for  manufactured

goods  changed  little  in  October  from  their  high  September  level.  In

France,  Canada,  and  the  United  Kingdom,  growth  of  real  GDP,  while

slowing  from previous  very high  rates,  continued above  estimates  of

potential  growth  rates  in the  third  quarter.  In  October,  U.K.

industrial  production  and  retail  sales  were  moderately  above  their

respective  averages  for  the  third quarter.  Canadian  employment  grew

strongly through  November.

Consumer  price  inflation  remains  low in the  major  foreign

industrial  countries.  Price  increases  have  blipped up  in  Japan  and

I-33

the  United  Kingdom  as  a result  of  higher  food  prices  while  inflation

has  edged  down  further  in  Germany  and  has  remained  about  steady  in

France  and  Canada.

The  U.S.  nominal  trade  deficit  in  goods  and  services  widened  a

bit  in  September.  For  the  third  quarter, the  deficit  was

substantially  greater  than  it  was  for  the  second  quarter.  Exports

were  3 percent  higher  in  the  third  quarter  than  in  the  second

quarter,  with the  largest  increases  in  machinery,  industrial

supplies,  and  consumer  goods.  Most  of  the  increase went  to

developing  countries  in Asia  and  Latin America.  Imports  were  4.5

percent  higher  in  the  third  quarter  than  the  second-quarter rate.

Increases  were  spread  among  all  major trade  categories.  The

quantity  of  oil  imports  remained  high through  September  as  the  pace

of  inventory  accumulation  quickened.  Preliminary data  for  October

and  November  suggest  some  easing  of  oil  imports  in  the  current

quarter  as  consumption  is  met,  in  part,  by  stock  drawdowns.

In  October,  prices  of  U.S.  non-oil  imports  and  of

nonagricultural  exports  each  rose  somewhat  more  than  they had  in

September,  boosted  in both  cases  by  higher  prices  of  industrial

supplies.  Prices  of  imported  foods  also  rose  sharply.  Prices  of

agricultural  exports  fell  slightly in October.  While  the  price  of

imported  oil  in  October  remained  near the  September  average,  the

price  should  average  $15.40  in  the  fourth  quarter,  about  85  cents

per  barrel  below  the  third-quarter  average,  as  world  oil  production

has  rebounded  in  recent  months.  Spot  oil  prices  have  fallen  further

since mid-November.

Outlook

The  staff  projects  that  real  GDP  in foreign  industrial  and

developing  countries  will  increase  at  an annual  rate  of  about  4

percent  over  the  forecast  period,  a rate  essentially unchanged  from

I-34

that  projected  in  the  previous  Greenbook  and  well  above  the  rate  of

real  growth  forecast  for  the  United  States  in  1995  and  1996.  The

dollar  is  projected  to  remain about  unchanged  from current  levels.

As  a  result  of  these  developments  and  the  lagged  effects  of  the

decline  in  the  dollar  that  occurred  during  1994,  real  exports  of

goods  and  services  are  forecast  to  grow  at  a  slightly  faster  rate

than  real  imports  through  1996.  Consequently, with  the  level  of

real  imports  currently exceeding  real  exports,  real  net  exports  are

projected  to  remain  little  changed  over  the  forecast  period.

The  dollar.  We  project  that  the  foreign  exchange value  of  the

dollar  in  terms  of  the  other  G-10  currencies  will  remain  about

unchanged  from current  levels  through  the  end  of the  forecast

period.  This  projected path  is  somewhat  higher  than that  in  the

November  Greenbook  and  reflects  the  rise  in  the  dollar  over  the

intermeeting  period.  Our  projection  is  that  the  CPI-adjusted  value

of the  dollar  in  terms  of  the  currencies  of  key  developing countries

will  show  a  moderate  depreciation on  average  through  the  end  of  the

forecast  period,  little  changed  from  the  November  Greenbook.  We

expect  the  Mexican  peso  to  depreciate about  4  percent  in  nominal

terms  against  the  dollar through  the  end  of  1995,  with  the  peso

remaining close  to  the  lower  limit  of  its  steadily  depreciating band

as  currently set  by  the  Bank  of  Mexico.

Foreign  G-7  countries.  Real  GDP  growth in  the  foreign  G-7

countries  (weighted by U.S.  exports)  is  projected  to  average  about

3-1/2  percent  through the  end  of  the  forecast  period.  This  forecast

on  balance  is  little  changed  from that  in  the  November  Greenbook.

However,  the  level  of  GDP  is  slightly higher  in  this  forecast  as  a

result  of  upward  revisions  to  1994  projections,  especially  for

Japan,  Germany,  and  the  United  Kingdom.

I-35

In  Germany,  real  output  growth  is  expected  to  remain  quite

strong  in  the  current  quarter  and  then  to  slow to  about  3 percent

over  the  remainder  of  the  forecast  period,  as  the  income tax

surcharge  scheduled to  take  effect  in January  is  expected  to  slow

consumption  growth next  year.  In  France,  some  further  slowing  from

the  rapid  growth  seen  in  the  first  half  of  this  year  is  expected  in

the  current  quarter  as  the  growth  of consumption appears  to  be

slowing.  Real  GDP  growth  should  rebound  to  3-1/4  percent  next  year

and  then  strengthen  slightly more  in  1996  in  response  to  greater

investment  spending.  In  the  United Kingdom,  the  rate  of real  output

growth  is  expected  to  slow to  about  3-1/4 percent,  annual  rate,  in

the  current  quarter,  to  remain at  that  rate  in  1995,  and  then to

slow  further to  2-3/4  percent  in  1996  as  current  and  prospective

monetary tightening has  an  effect.  With  some monetary tightening

already  in  place  and  with  U.S.  output  growth  projected  to  slow next

year,  output  growth  in  Canada  is  forecast  to  slow from  5 percent  in

1994  to  4 percent  in  1995  and  then  to  slow  a bit  more  in  1996.  The

strong  Japanese  growth  recorded  for  the  third quarter  suggests that

recovery  there  is  becoming established.  After  some  slowing  in the

current  quarter  as  consumption  spending  returns  to  a more

sustainable  pace,  we  project  growth to  increase  gradually  over  the

forecast  period,  reaching 2-3/4  percent  in  1995  and nearly  3-1/2

percent  in  1996.

Consumer  price  inflation  in the  foreign  G-7  countries  is

projected to  remain  low but  to  rise  somewhat  over  the  forecast

period  as  continued  stronger  activity  reduces the  amount  of  slack  in

those  economies.  On  average,  inflation  in these  six countries

(weighted by  U.S.  import  shares)  is  projected to  increase  from  about

1-1/4  percent  this year  to  about  1-3/4  percent  in  1995  and  1996.

I-36

The  staff  forecast  incorporates  the  assumption  that  foreign

short-term interest  rates  on  average  will  move  up  further  as  most

central  banks  abroad  react  to  the  stronger  activity  in  their

respective  economies;  short-term rates  are  expected  to  move  up  on

average  nearly  100  basis  points  over  the  forecast  period, with  rates

moving  up  substantially more  in  the  United  Kingdom and  less  in

Canada,  where  significant  rate  increases  have  already  occurred.

This  assumed  path  for  short-term interest  rates  is  somewhat  above

that  in  the  previous  Greenbook.

Foreign  long-term  rates,  on  average,  are  expected to  change

little  through  the  end  of  the  forecast  period  in  light  of  the

persistence  of  favorable  inflation  performance.

Other  countries.  The  real  GDP  of  developing countries  that  are

major U.S.  trading  partners  (weighted by  bilateral  nonagricultural

export  shares)  is  forecast  to  increase  about  5-3/4  percent  per  year

over  1995-96.  The  external  sectors  of  Asian  developing  countries

should  benefit  from the  strengthening  recovery  in  the  foreign

industrial  countries  and  from the  appreciation of  the  yen.  In  Latin

America,  a  progressive  dismantling  of  trade barriers,  large-scale

privatization  efforts,  and  continued domestic  and  foreign  investment

should  facilitate  growth  in  1995-96.

The  aggregate  growth  forecast  for  developing  countries  has  been

revised  upward  by  about  1/4  percentage  point  for  1995-96  since  the

previous  Greenbook, mainly because  of  improved  growth  prospects  in

Mexico.  The  growth  forecast  for  Mexico  has  been revised  upward  by

3/4  percentage  points,  reflecting  stronger-than-anticipated  growth

during  the  third  quarter that  suggests  a  sustainable  economic

recovery  is  taking  hold.  Investment  is  expected  to  pick up  markedly

as  political  uncertainty  associated  with President  Zedillo's

transition diminishes.

I-37

U.S.  real  net  exports.  Real  net  exports  of  goods  and  services

are  expected to  fluctuate  narrowly  over  the  forecast  period  and  to

show  little  net  change  from  current  levels  through  the  end  of  1996.

Rapid  growth  of  real  exports  of  goods  and  services  will  be

sustained  by the  strong pace  of  foreign  output  growth  and  the  lagged

effects  of  the  decline  in  the  dollar  during  1994.  Growth  of

computer  exports  is  expected to  remain  rapid  through  the  forecast

period.  The  growth  rates  of  other nonagricultural  exports  and  of

services  are  projected  to  lie  in  the  5-6  percent  range  in  1995  and

1996.

QUANTITIES  of  GOODS  and  SERVICES

(percent change  from  end of  previous  period,  saar)

------ Projection------
1995 
1996

Exports  of  G&S: 

of  which:

Services 
Computers 
Other  goods  1/ 

1993 

5.8 

5.0 
23.1 
4.5 

H1 
6.1 

2.7 
14.8 
7.3 

1994 
Q3 
12.2 

-3.7 
38.3 
12.0 

Q4
13.7 

7.5 
33.5 
12.0 

8.3 

5.1 
28.6 
5.5 

Imports  of  G&S 

12.4 

14.1 

15.6 

10.4 

7.3 

of  which:

Services 
Oil 
Computers 
Other  goods  2/ 

8.7 
10.0 
38.3 
9.3 

-0.4 
7.7 
27.7 
15.7 

6.9 
30.1 
35.8 
11.7 

5.1 
-26.6 
33.6 
12.2 

3.2 
2.7 
25.6 
4.2 

*  NIPA  basis,  1987  dollars.
1. Nonagricultural  exports  of  goods  excluding computers
2. Non-oil  imports  of  goods  excluding  computers

8.7

5.2
26.2
5.9

7.2

2.9
1.2
21.6
4.5

In  the near  term,  growth  of total  imports  of  goods  and  services

reflects  the  stronger  outlook  for  U.S.  real  GDP  growth.  In  1995  and

1996,  the  growth  of  non-oil  imports  other  than  computers  slows  to

about  4-1/2  percent.  This  rate  reflects  the  projected  slowing  of

U.S.  GDP  growth  over  this  period,  the  tendency  for  these  imports  to

grow about  twice  as  fast  as  income,  and  the  lagged  effects  of higher

import  price  inflation  in  the  near term.  Service  imports  are  also

expected  to  slow  through  1996.  The  very  rapid  growth  of  computer

imports,  which  currently  have  a weight  in total  real  imports  of

I-38

about  20  percent,  boosts  the  growth  of  total  imports.  We  expect  the

quantity  of  oil  imports  to  fall  in  the  current  quarter  as  winter

consumption is  met  in  part  by  seasonal  stock  draws  and  inventories

return to  more  normal  levels.  In  1995.  oil  imports  are  projected  to

remain  on  a moderate upward  trend  as  U.S.  oil  consumption continues

to  increase in  line with  economic  activity.

SELECTED  PRICE  INDICATORS
(percent change  from end  of  previous  period  except  as  noted,  ar)

US  PPI  1/ 
Nonag.  exports  2/ 
Non-oil  imports  2/ 
Oil  imports

(Q4 level,  $/bl.) 

1993 

0.9 
0.7 
1.3 

H1 

2.8 
3.2 
2.1 

1994 
Q3 

5.6 
6.1 
6.2 

------ Projection------
1996
1995 

Q4

3.1 
3.8 
5.7 

3.5 
2.7 
2.5 

2.1
1.7
1.1

14.09 

14.67 

16.24 

15.37 

16.00  16.00

1. Selected categories  (ex computers) weighted by  U.S.  exports.
2. Excluding  computers.

Oil  prices. 

For the  current  quarter  and  the  first  quarter  of

next  year,  assumptions  for  the  oil  import  unit  value have  been

revised  down  $0.40  and  $0.90  per  barrel,  respectively.  With

inventories  ample  and  the  weather  unseasonably warm, the  twelve-

month  extension  of  OPEC's  quota  has  not  supported  prices.  We  expect

near-term  WTI  spot  oil  price  to  average  $17.25  per  barrel  in  January

and  to  reach  $18.50  per  barrel by June  1995,  consistent with

continued  global  economic  expansion.  By the  end  of  the  second

quarter,  the  oil  import  unit  value  is  projected to  rise to  $16.00

per  barrel  and  remain  at  that  level  through  1996.  This  price

forecast  assumes  that  members  will  not  strictly  comply with the

twelve-month extension  of the  current  quota;  if  OPEC  countries  were

to  adhere  to  their  quota, the  oil  price  path would be  roughly  $3.00

per  barrel  higher,  an upside  risk to  the  forecast.  Meanwhile,  we

continue to  assume  that  Iraq will  return to  the  world  oil  market  in

1996.

-39

Prices  of  non-oil  imports  and  exports.  The  prices  of  non-oil

imports  excluding computers  are  expected to  increase  nearly  6

percent,  annual  rate,  in  the  current  quarter  as  rising  world

commodity  prices  and  the  lagged  effects  of  dollar depreciation

earlier  in  the  year  continue  to  be  felt.  With  the  waning  of  these

effects,  import  prices  are  expected to  decelerate  in  1995  and  1996.

For  1995-96,  nonagricultural  export  price  increases  are  expected  to

slow in  line  with  the  slowing  of  U.S.  producer  price  inflation.

Nominal  trade  and  current  account balances.  The  trade  deficit

on  goods  and  services  is  projected to  narrow somewhat  over  the

forecast  period.  The  deficit  on  net  investment  income  is  projected

to  widen,  reflecting  the  path  of  interest  rates  and  rising  U.S.  net

international  indebtedness.  We  expect  that,  as  a  result  of these

developments,  the  current  account  deficit  will  average  about  $185

billion  in  1995  and  1996,  2.5  percent  of  GDP  and  approximately  $30

billion larger  than  our  estimate  for  1994.

STRICTLY  CONFIDENTIAL  - FR
CLASS II  FOMC

December  14,  1994

REAL GDP  AND  CONSUMER  PRICES,  SELECTED COUNTRIES,  1993-96
(Percent;  quarterly  change  at  an  annual  rate  except  as  noted)

Projected 

1994 

1995

Projected

Measure  and  country 

1993  1994  1995  1996 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4

REAL  GDP

Canada 
France 
Germany 

W.  Germany 

Italy 
Japan 
United  Kingdom 

3.2 
-0.5 
-0.1 
-0.5 
0.4 
-0.5 
2.7 

5.0 
3.3 
4.1 
3.6 
2.1 
2.5 
4.1 

4.1 
3.2 
2.9 
2.5 
4.0 
2.7 
3.1 

3.8 
3.6 
3.2 
2.6 
3.0 
3.4 
2.8 

6.7 
4.6 
4.5 
4.0 
5.7 
0.7 
5.5 

4.7 
4.5 
3.0 
2.1 
5.3 
3.7 
5.3 
3.0 
3.6  -2.4 
3.7 
2.3 
3.8 
3.2 

4.4  4.1  3.9 
2.8  3.2  3.3 
3.0  2.7  2.8 
2.4  2.3  2.4 
4.0  5.0  4.0  3.0
2.5  2.4  2.9  2.8
3.2  3.2  3.0 

4.0
3.5
3.1
2.7

3.0

Average, weighted by  1987-89 GDP  0.4 

3.2 

3.2 

3.3 

3.7 

3.9 

2.2 

3.1  3.2  3.2  3.1

Average, weighted by share  of

U.S.  nonagricultural  exports

Total  foreign 
Foreign  G-7 
Developing  countries 

2.7 
1.7 
4.8 

4.3 
4.1 
5.6 

4.0 
3.5 
5.3 

4.1 
3.5 
5.6 

NA 
4.9 
NA 

NA 
4.3 
NA 

NA 
3.4 
NA 

NA 

NA 

NA
3.6  3.5  3.5  3.4
NA

NA 

NA 

NA 

NA 

CONSUMER  PRICES(1)

Canada 
France 
Western  Germany 
Italy 
Japan 
United  Kingdom 

1.8 
2.1 
3.7 
4.1 
1.2 
1.6 

-0.0 
1.7 
2.7 
3.8 
1.2 
2.7 

1.8 
1.5 
2.3 
4.2 
0.8 
3.6 

2.1 
1.5 
2.5 
4.0 
0.7 
3.9 

-1.4 
2.5 
2.7 
3.4 
1.3 
7.4 

2.2 
0.5 
1.4 
3.0 
-0.9 
0.1 

1.2 
2.0 
1.0 
4.4 
3.8 
2.8 

1.6  1.6  2.0 
2.0
1.6  1.5  1.5 
1.4
4.5  2.8  1.0  1.0
4.5  4.5  3.6 
1.1  0.7  0.4 
3.1  7.4  1.5 

4.1
1.1
2.5

Average, weighted by  1987-89  GDP  2.2 

2.0 

2.1 

2.1 

2.6 

0.6 

2.8 

2.5  2.7  1.4  1.8

Average, weighted by  share of
U.S.  non-oil  imports 

1.9 

1.2 

1.7 

1.8 

1.1 

0.7 

2.5 

2.0  1.9  1.3 

1.6

Note.  Annual  values  are  measured  from  Q4  to  Q4.
1.  Not  seasonally adjusted.

Strictly  Confidential  (FR)  Class  II-FOMC

U.S.  INTERNATIONAL  TRANSACTIONS  IN  GOODS,  SERVICES, AND  THE  CURRENT  ACCOUNT

(Billions of  dollars,  seasonally  adjusted annual  rates)
(Billions of  dollars,  seasonally  adjusted annual  rates)

1992

1993

1994

ANNUAL

NIPA  Real  Net  Exports
of  Goods  &  Services  (87$)

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4

Q1 

Q2

1991 

1992 

1993

-17.9  -34.1  -38.9  -38.5

-57.6  -69.3  -86.3  -82.2 

-104.0  -111.8

-19.5  -32.3  -73.9

Exports  of G&S

Goods

Agricultural
Computers
Other  Goods

Services

Imports  of  G&S

Goods
Oil
Computers
Other  Goods

Services

Memo:(Percent  change  1/)

Exports  of  G&S
Agricultural
Computers
Other Goods
Services

Imports of  G&S

Oil
Computers
Other Goods
Services

571.0
416.0
38.9
47.1
330.0
154.9

588.8
489.5
47.2
51.2
391.1
99. 3

6.1

13.4
24.4

3.1
5.9

6.6
0.9

53.5

2.4
7.2

573.1
421.5
38.4
52.3
330.8
151.6

607.1
509.7
51.6
57.5
400.6
97.4

1.5
-5.0
52.0
1.0
-8.3

13.0
42.8
59.1
10.1
-7.4

580.5
427.4
40.5
56.2
330.7
153.1

619.4
521.7
53.1
64.7
403.9
97.7

5.3

23.7
33.3
-0.1
4.0

8.4
12.1
60.3
3.3
1.2

590.7
441.1
41.3
60.1
339.8
149.6

629.3
530.2
52.8
68.4
409.0
99.0

7.2
8.1
30.8
11.5
-8.8

6.5
-2.2
24.9
5.1
5.4

589.2
433.9
39.1
60.9
333.9
155. 3

646.8
546.6
53.4
73.3
419.9
100.1

600.2
443.3
39.3
62.9
341.1
156.9

669.6
567.4
57.7
80.0
429.7
102.2

-1.0

-19.7

5.4
-6.8
16.1

11.6

4.6
31.9
11.1
4.5

7.7
2.1
13.8
8.9
4.2

14 .9
36.3
41.9
9.7
8.7

595.3
438.5
36.9
68.5
333.1
156.7

681.6
577.1
56.7
87.8
432.  6
104.5

-3.2
-22.3
40.7
-9.1
-0.5

7.4
-6.8
45.1

2.7
9.3

625.2
468.1
39.1
74.0
355.1
157.1

707.4
599.9
58.1
94.6
447.2
107.6

21.7
26.1
36.2
29.2

1.0

16.0
10.2
34.8
14.2
12.4

619.6
464.4
36.6
76.9
350.9
155.2

723.6
615.2
56.5
99.7
458.9
108.5

-3.5

-23.2
16.6
-4.6
-4.8

9.5

-10.6
23.4
10.9

3.4

643.9
484.6
37.5
79.3
367.8
159.2

755.6
648. 3
60.3
106.9
481.0
107.4

16.6
10.2
13.1
20.7
10.7

18.9
29.7
32.2
20.7
-4.0

542.6
397.1
35.5
41.4
320.2
145.5

562.1
464.4
49.2
41.6
373.7
97.7

8.1
10.9
26.7
7.2
4.7

4.0
8.3

45.6

2.9
-6.2

578.8
426.5
39.8
53.9
332.8
152.3

611.1
512.8
51.2
60.5
401.2
98.3

5.0
9.5
34.8
3.8
-2.0

8.6
12.1
48.7
5.2
1.4

602.5
445.9
38.6
66.6
340.8
156.5

676.3
572.8
56.5
83.9
432.4
103.6

5.8
-5.3
23.1
4.5
5.0

12.4
10.0
38.3

9.3
8.7

Current Account Balance

-33.4  -66.2  -74.4  -97.5

-79.4  -102.4  -111.4  -122.3

-129.3  -147.3

-6.9  -67.9  -103.9

Goods  &  Serv  (BOP),  net

Goods  (BOP),  net
Services  (BOP),  net

Investment  Income,  net

Direct,  net
Portfolio, net

-15.5
-72.3
56.8

9.7

50.8
-41.1

-41.5  -51.1  -53.4
-97.3  -109.4  -105.3
52.0

58.3 

55.8 

-57.7
-116.8
59.1

-76.3
-134.9
58.6

-89.0
-145.9
56.9

-79.9
-132.7
52.8

6.5 
51.0 

47.1
-44.5  -42.2

4.9

-2.9
42.0
-44.9

7.4 
54.6 
-47.2 

2.7 
50.8 
-48.1 

8.1
55.9
-47.8

-2.4
48.4
-50.8

-97.3
147.8
50.5

-107.5
-166.5
59.0

-3.2
45.9
-49.1

-10.0
43.0
-53  0

-28.5
-74.1
45.6

14.8
55.4
-40.5

-40.4
-96.1
55.7

4.5
47.7
-43.2

-75.7
-132.6
56.8

4.0
52.4
-48.5

Unilateral  Transfers, net

-27.7  -31.1  -28.2  -41.2 
................................................................................................

-29.1  -28.8  -30.5  -40.1 

-28.7  -29.9 

6.7  -32.0  -32.1

1/  Percent  change  (AR) from previous  period;  percent  changes  for  annual  data  are  calculated Q4/Q4.

Strictly Confidential  (FR)  Class  II-FOMC

OUTLOOK  FOR  U.S.  INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTIONS  IN  GOODS,  SERVICES,  AND  THE  CURRENT ACCOUNT

(Billions of  dollars,  seasonally adjusted  annual  rates)
(Billions of  dollars,  seasonally adjusted  annual  rates)

Projection

1994

1995

1996

Projection

ANNUAL

Q3 

Q4

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4

1994 

1995 

1996

-120.8  -118.8

-121.6  -123.9  -123.1  -120.6

-118.7  -116.5  -116.6  -117.5

-113.9  -122.3  -117.3

662.7
505.0
40.6
86.0
378.4
157.7

783.5
674.4
64.4
115.4'
494.5
109.2

12.2
37.4
38.3
12.0
-3.7

15.6
30.1
35.8
11.7
6.9

684.3
523.7
42.0
92.4
389.2
160.6

803.1
692.7
59.6
124.1
508.9
110.6

13.7
15.0
33.5
12.0
7.5

10.4
-26.6
33.6
12.2
5.1

699.1
536.7
42.7
98.9
395.0
162.5

820.7
708.8
57.8
132.7
518.1
112.0

9.0
6.5
31.1
6.1
4.8

9.0
-11.4
31.1
7.5
5.3

713.6
549.1
42.8
105.8
400.5
164.5

837.4
724.5
60.0
140.7
523.7
113.0

8.5
0.4
31.1
5.7
5.1

8.4
15.7
26.3
4.4
3.8

727.1
560.5
42.6
112.2
405.7
166.6

850.3
736.7
60.8
148.4
527.4
113.6

7.8
-1.2
26.2
5.3
5.3

6.3
5.6

23.9

2.8
2.2

741.2
572.4
42.8
118.9
410.7
168.8

861.7
747.7
61.2
155.9
530.5
114.2

26.2

7.9
1.2

5.0
5.3

5.5
2.8
21.6
2.4
1.8

756.2
585.4
42.9
126.1
416.4
170.9

875.0
760.2
62.0
163.7
534.5
114.8

8.4
1.4

26.2
5.7
5.0

6.3
5.0

21.5

3.1
2.4

772.3
599.3
43.1
133.6
422.6
173.1

888.9
773.4
61.6
171.8
539.9
115.5

8.8
1.4
26.2
6.1
5.3

6.5
-2.3
21.6

4.1
2.5

788.8
613.5
43.2
141.  6
428.6
175.3

905.4
789.0
61.6
180.4
546.8
116.5

8.8
1.4
26.2
5.8
5.2

21.5

7.6
0.1

5.2
3.2

805.9
628.4
43.4
150.1
434.9
177.5

923.4
806.0
62.0
189.5
554.5
117.5

9.0
1.4
26,. 2
6.0
5.2

8.2
2.1

21.6
5.7
3.5

652.6
494.4
39.2
83.7
371.6
158.2

766.5
657.6
60.2
111.5
485.8
108.9

9.5
7.5
24.9

9.6
2.2

720.  3
554.7
42.7
109.0
403.0
165.6

842.  5
729.4
60.0
144.4
524.9
113.2

8.3
1.7

28.6
5.5
5.1

13.5
2.6

31.1
13.8

2.8

25.6

7.3
2.7

4.2
3.2

780.8
606.6
43.1
137.9
425.6
174.2

898.1
782.2
61.8
176.4
543.9
116.1

26.2

8.7
1.4

5.9
5.2

7.2
1.2
21.6

4.5
2.9

NIPA Real  Net  Exports
of Goods  &  Services  (87$)

Exports  of  G&S

Goods

Agricultural
Computers
Other  Goods

Services

Imports of G&S

Goods
Oil
Computers
Other  Goods

Services

Memo:(Percent  change  1/)

Exports  of G&S
Agricultural
Computers
Other Goods
Services

Imports of  G&S

Oil
Computers
Other Goods
Services

Current  Account  Balance

-164.6  -180.7

-174.8  -186.1  -184.1  -195.9 

-182.6  -181.5  -175.0  -188.7

-155.5  -185.2  -181.9

----------------------  Projection  ----------------------

Goods  & Serv  (BOP),  net

Goods  (BOP),  net
Services  (BOP),  net

-123.8  -123.3
-178.5  -180.9
57.6

54.7 

-122.8  -124.5  -122.7  -118.2
-182.1  -185.9  -186.7  -184.9
66.7

63.9 

61.3 

59.3 

-113.5  -108.6  -105.5  -104.0
-182.8  -180.4  -179.8  -180.7
76.7

74.3 

69.3 

71.8 

-113.0  -122.1  -107.9
-168.4  -184.9  -180.9
73.0

55.5 

62.8 

Investment  Income,  net

Direct,  net
Portfolio, net

-9.8
45.9
-55.7

-17.0
48.3
-65.2

-20.0
48.6
-68.6

-29.6
48.5
-78.1

-29.3
49.6
-78.9

-36.7
50.8
-87.6

-36.5
52.0
-88.5

-40.4  -37.0  -43.2
57.6
-94.2  -92.8  -100.8

53.8 

55.8 

-10.0
45.8
-55.8

-28.9
49.4
-78.  3

-39.3

54  .8
-94.1

Unilateral  Transfers,  net  -31.0  -40.5

-32.0  -32.0  -32.0  -41.0

-32.5  -32.5  -32.5  -41.5

-32.5  -34.2  -34.8

1/ Percent  change  (AR) from previous  period;  percent  changes  for  annual  data  are  calculated Q4/Q4.




==== GREENBOOK | 1994-12-20_fomc19941220gbpt219941214.txt ====

Prefatory Note 

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 

available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain. 

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 

gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.    

1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Confidential  (FR)  Class  III  FOMC

December  14,  1994

RECENT  DEVELOPMENTS

Prepared for the  Federal Open  Market  Committee
by the staff of the  Board  of  Governors of the Federal  Reserve System

__

DOMESTIC  NONFINANCIAL
DEVELOPMENTS

DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL  DEVELOPMENTS

The  economy  shows  every  sign  of continued  brisk growth,

Payroll  employment  surged  in  November  and manufacturing  output

posted  another  substantial  gain.  Consumer  spending  has  remained

robust;  and  consumer  sentiment  moved  up  to  the  highest  levels  since

before  the  last  recession.  Business  investment  in  both  equipment

and  nonresidential  structures  appears  to  be  rising  at  a rapid  clip

Despite  substantial  ongoing  inventory accumulation,  firms  do  not

thus  far  appear to  be  overstocked.

Although  prices  of  industrial materials  and  intermediate

supplies  have  continued to  post  large  increases,  recent  increases

in  the  "core"  CPI  have  been  quite moderate.  In  addition, tighter

labor  markets  have  yet  to  generate a  substantial  firming  of wages.

Labor Market  Developments

Nonfarm  payroll  employment  jumped  350,000  in  November,

following  a gain  of 164,000  in  October 

Although  the  average

workweek  of private  production or  nonsupervisory workers  fell  back

in  November  from  a high  October  level  total  hours  look to  be headed

toward  a growth  rate  of  around  4-1/2  percent  (annual  rate)  in  the

fourth  quarter 

In  the household  survey, the  unemployment  rate  fell

another  0.2  percentage  point  in  November  to  5.6  percent 

1

Since

January,  the jobless  rate  has  fallen  1 1 percentage  points,  the

largest  ten-month  drop  since  1984.

Private payrolls  expanded  324,000  in November,  with more  than

one-third of the  increase  in  the  goods-producing sector

Manufacturing  recorded  another sizable  advance,  showing widespread

production  gains  throughout  both  durable  and  nondurable  goods

1  The  Bureau  of Labor  Statistics  recently  reported  that  its

research  suggests  that  the  introduction of the  new  Current
Population  Survey and  new weights  based  on the  1990 Census  raised
the  unemployment  rate  0.2  percentage point  beginning  in January
1994.

II-1

II-2

CHANGES  IN EMPLOYMENT1
(Thousands of  employees;  based on seasonally adjusted data)

1994 

1994

1992  1993 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Sept.  Oct.  Nov.

------------ Average monthly changes---------

Nonfarm payroll  employment 2  

96 

194 

229 

345 

284 

272 

164 

350

Private 

Manufacturing 

Durable 
Nondurable 
Construction 
Trade 
Finance,  insurance, real  estate 
Services 

Health  services 
Business  services 

Total  government 

76 
-14 
-14 
0 
-1 
10 
4 
78 
22 
31 
20 

179 
-11 
-7 
-4 
19 
42 
10 
116 
23 
46 
15 

222 
13 
12 
0 
23 
44 
4 
133 
23 
61 
8 

Private nonfarm production workers 
Manufacturing production workers 

86 
-3 

164 
-1 

211 
22 

Total employment 3  
Nonagricultural 

127 
120 

209 
219 

459 
349 

320 
21 
21 
0 
40 
96 
6 
146 
22 
57 
26 

300 
24 

131 
195 

240 
17 
18 
0 
15 
79 
-1 
124 
20 
59 
44 

199 
19 

399 
341 

208 
1 
16 
-15 
30 
81 
-7 
102 
8 
55 
64 

186 
7 

462 
497 

180 
42 
30 
12 
4 
49 
-11 
100 
26 
35 
-16 

152 
39 

608 
522 

324
51
40
11
71
34
8
147
11
93
26

228
34

372
307

Memo:
Aggregate hours  of private production

workers  (percent change) 

Average workweek  (hours) 
Manufacturing  (hours) 

.1 

.3 

.2 
34.4  34.5  34.6  34.7  34.5 
41.1  41.5  41.7  42.1  42.0 

.4 

.4 

.6 

1.1 

-.5
34.6  34.9  34.6
42.0  42.1  42.1

1. Average change  from final month of  preceding period to  final month of

period indicated.

2.  Survey of  establishments.
3. Survey of households.  Data  for  1994  are not  directly

years  because  of  a redesign of the  CPS  in January 1994.

comparable with earlier

SELECTED UNEMPLOYMENT AND LABOR  FORCE PARTICIPATION RATES 1
(Percent; based on seasonally adjusted data)

Civilian unemployment  rate
(16 years and  older) 

Teenagers 
20-24 years  old 
Men,  25  years and older 
Women, 25 years  and older 

1994 

1994

1992  1993 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Sept.  Oct.  Nov.

7.4 

6.8 

6.6 

6.2 

6.0 

5.9 

5.8 

5.6

20.0  19.0  18.0  18.4  17.4 
11.3  10.5  10.6 
9.8 
5.8 
4.8 
5.3 
5.4 
5.3 
4.8 

9.6 
4.8 
5.0 

6.4 
5.7 

17.0  17.3  15.3
9.1
4.4
4.6

9.5 
4.6 
4.8 

8.9 
4.6 
4.6 

Full-time workers 

7.4 

6.8 

6.7 

6.2 

6.0 

5.9 

5.9 

5.6

Labor  force participation rate  66.3  66.2  66.6  66.5  66.5 

66.6  66.8  66.8

Teenagers 
20-24  years old 
Men, 25  years and older 
Women, 25 years  and  older 

51.3  51.5  52.7  53.6  52.2 
77.1  77.1  77.0  77.0  76.7 
76.6  76.2  76.3  75.8  75.8 
57.0  57.1  58.0  57.9  58.2 

51.1  52.6  51.7
76.9  77.4  77.1
75.9  76.2  76.3
58.6  58.4  58.5

1. Data  for  1994  are  not directly comparable with earlier years  because  of a

redesign of  the  CPS  in January 1994.

II-3

industries.  In  construction,  employment  was  up  71,000  in  November,

reflecting  increases  in  all  three  major  components.2  According

to  the  BLS,  some  of the  employment  growth  in  construction  likely

reflected  a bounceback from  a level  that  had  been  depressed by heavy

rains  in  the  Southeast  during  the  survey week in  October.  In

addition,  the  November  survey week  came  relatively  early in  the

month,  so  the  estimates  for  November may  incorporate  fewer  seasonal

construction  layoffs  than usual.

The  private  service-producing  sector  added  204.000 jobs  in

November,  following an  increase  of  137,000  in  October.  Gains  last

month  were  uneven.  Hiring  in  retail  trade  was  sluggish,  perhaps

because  the  early  survey week missed  some  temporary  Christmas-season

workers  who  normally  are  picked  up  in the  November  survey.  At

service  establishments,  net  hiring  increased a bit  in  November;

rapid  growth  in  personnel  supply  resumed  in  November  after  a pause

in  October.  Elsewhere,  renewed  hiring  in  trucking  and  warehousing

boosted  transportation payrolls  by  18,000  in November.

Employment  as  measured  by  the  household  survey rose  372,000  in

November,  and  the  unemployment  rate  fell  to  5.6  percent.  Jobless

rates  declined  for men  and  for teenage  women.  In  addition, the

number  of  long-term unemployed  dropped  noticeably.  On  net,  the

labor  force  rose  100,000,  and  the  participation  rate was  unchanged

at  66.8  percent.

Other indicators  are  also  consistent  with  robust  labor market

activity.  The  Conference  Board's  help-wanted  index jumped  11  points

in  October  to  its  highest  level  since  July  1990, 3  and weekly

initial  claims  for  unemployment  insurance have  remained in the

2. General  building  contractors,  heavy construction,  and  special

trades.

3. Adjusted  for  the  increased use  of  temporary  help,  the  help-
wanted  reading  approached  the high  levels that  prevailed in  1988  and
1989.

II-4

Labor  Market  Indicators
(Seasonally adjusted data)

Change  in  Payroll  Employment*

Thousands

1985 

1987 

1989 

1991 

1993

* Three-month  moving  average.

Initial  Claims  for Unemployment  Insurance*

Thousands

-

600

::D: 

:: . :32

Dec

3
8

retri 

,  , ,, 

, 

_ 

1984 

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

* Four-week moving  average of initial claims including  EUC  adjustment.

____
1990 

:!:, 
::::::: 
...
:...,:.:
.%o%= o,

I

,

I

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

Conference  Board's  Help  Wanted  Index 

Index,  196 7=100

1984 

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

* Help wanted index adjusted for personnel  supply services employment.

Manpower  index of  Net Hiring  Strength*

Percentage  points

1984 

1987 
" Percent  planning an  increase in employment  minus percent planning a  reduction.

1986 

1985 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

II-5

Wage  Rates  of  Production  or  Nonsupervisory  Workers

AVERAGE  HOURLY  EARNINGS
(Percentage change;  based on  seasonally adjusted data) 1

1994 

1994

1992  1993  Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Sept.  Oct.  Nov.

-Annual rate- 

-Monthly rate-

Total private nonfarm 

2.1 

2.6  2.2 

2.2  3.3 

.4 

.6  -.2

Manufacturing 

Durable 
Nondurable 

Contract  construction 
Transportation and

public utilities 

Finance,  insurance,

and real estate 

Total trade 
Services 

2.2 
2.1 
2.4 
1.2 

3.2  2.4 
3.4  2.6 
2.5  2.9 
1.2  1.7 

1.0  3.0 
.0  3.5 
1.4  2.5 
5.6  4.2 

.3 
.4 
.4 
.7 

.2
.2 
.3
.1 
.0
.4 
.5  -.6

1.6 

1.3  1.8 

-.3  3.2 

.1  1.1 

.1

3.6 
2.0 
2.4 

5.5  2.8 
2.3  2.4 
2.2  2.2 

1.7  5.2 
2.3  2.3 
3.0  3.3 

.8  1.3 
.2 
.4 

-.8
.8  -.3
.9  -.5

1. Annual  changes are measured from final month of preceding year

to  final month  of year  indicated.

Average  Hourly  Earnings

Twelve-month  percent change

1976 

1978 

1980

1982 

1984 

1986 

1988

1990 

1992

1994

II-6

GROWTH IN SELECTED COMPONENTS  OF  INDUSTRIAL  PRODUCTION
(Percent change  from preceding  comparable period)

Proportion 
in
total
IP
1993:Q4 

1994 

1994

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov.

----Annual rate-----  ---- Monthly rate----

Total  index 
Previous 

Major Market  Groups:
Products,  total 

Consumer  goods 

Business  equipment 

100.0 

7.1 
7.1 

6.0 
6.0 

5.0 
5.0 

-.1 
.0 

.5 
-6

60.7 

28.2 

14.7 

6.7 

6.8 

4.9 

4.0 

-.2 

.4 

2.1 

2.0 

-.6 

-.2 

10.4 

8.2 

11.1 

.2 

1.3 

.5

.5

.6

.7

Defense  and space  equipment 

2.8 

-10.2 

-7.9  -16.1 

-.6 

-.3 

-.1

Construction  supplies 

Materials 

Major  Industry Groups:

Manufacturing 

Manufacturing excluding

5.4 

39.3 

4.6 

11.4 

9.6 

7.9 

7.7 

6.6 

.2 

.2 

.6 

.6 

86.0 

7.2 

7.3 

5.5 

.0 

.6 

.8

.6

.8

motor vehicles and parts 

80.5 

5.7 

9.3 

5.6 

.0 

.6

Motor vehicles  and  parts 

Mining 

Utilities 

5.6 

6.4 

7.6 

30.2  -17.8 

4.9 

-.7 

.8 

2.

3.7 

5.7 

-2.3 

.2 

-.4 

-.6

11.7 

-6.7 

4.3 

-1.1 

-.7 

-1.6

CAPACITY UTILIZATION
(Percent of  capacity;  seasonally adjusted)

1988-89  1967-93 

1993 

1994 

1994

High 

Avg. 

Avg. 

Q2 

Q3 

Sept. 

Oct.  Nov.

Total  industry 

Previous 

Manufacturing 
Previous 

84.9 

81.9 

81.7 

85.2 

81.2 

80.9 

83.8 
83.8 

83.1 
83.1 

84.3 
84.3 

83.6 
83.6 

Primary processing 
Advanced processing 

89.0 
83.5 

82.3 
80.7 

84.6 
79.4 

87.6 
81.3 

88.1 
81.8 

84.3 
84.3 

83.6 
83.6 

88.2 
81.9 

84.5 
84.6

83.9 
84.0

84.7

84.4

88.5 
82.1 

8!
8

II-7

320,000  to  340,000  range,  a level  consistent  with  another  sizable

gain  in  employment  in  December.  Moreover,  the  Manpower  Inc.  index

of  net  hiring  plans  for  the  next  quarter  rose  to  its  highest  level

since  1989,  with notable  strength  evident  in  construction,

manufacturing, and  trade.

Despite  increasing  anecdotal  reports  of  labor  shortages,  recent

aggregate  measures  of wage  growth have  remained  in  the  moderate

range  that  has  prevailed  for  some  time.  Average  hourly  earnings  of

production  or  nonsupervisory  workers  fell  0.2  percent  in November,

partly  offsetting the  October  gain of  0.6  percent.  This measure  of

wage  growth  has  picked  up  somewhat  in  a  few  sectors,  notably

construction and  services.  For the  economy  as  a whole,  hourly

earnings  rose  2.6  percent  over  the  past  twelve months--1/4

percentage  point  faster than  the  pace  over  the  twelve  months  ending

in  November  1993.

Industrial  Production

Led  by continued  increases  in manufacturing  output, the

industrial  production  index  rose  0.5  percent  in November,  following

a revised  gain  of  0.5  percent  in October.  With  output  growth

running  faster  than  the  pace  of  capacity  expansion,  the  rate  of

industrial  capacity  utilization moved  up  0.2  percentage  point,  to

84.7  percent.

Motor  vehicle  assemblies  rose  to  12.3  million  units  at  an

annual  rate  in  November,  somewhat  below  planned  output  at  the

beginning  of  the month  but  still well  above  October's  rate.

Moreover,  current  schedules  show a sizable  increase  in  assemblies  at

4.  Utilization  rates  have  been marked  down  slightly  since  the

last  Greenbook  because  of  the  annual  revisions  to  the  production,
capacity,  and  capacity utilization  indexes.

II-8

the  turn  of the  year;  even  assuming  a typical  production

shortfall,  the motor  vehicles  and  parts  industry  should make  a solid

contribution to  overall  IP  gains  in  coming  months.  The  ramp-up  in

motor  vehicle  output may  be  motivated  in  part  by the  current  low

level  of  dealer  stocks  of  automobiles and  light  trucks  relative  to

the  recent  sales  pace.  Days'  supply  for  automobiles  and  light

trucks  remained  somewhat  short  of  the  level  of  sixty-five  days  that

the  industry considers  "comfortable."

PRODUCTION  OF  DOMESTIC AUTOS  AND  TRUCKS
(Millions of  units  at  an  annual  rate;  FRB  seasonal  basis)3

U.S.  production 

Autos 
Trucks 

Days'  supply

Autos 
Light  trucks 

Oct. 

11.9 
6.4 
5.5 

1994 
Nov. 

12.3 
6.5 
5.8 

60.8 
62.6 

58.0
62.5

1995
Q1

1994 
Dec. 
Q4 
-------- scheduled--------
12.3 
6.7 
5.7 

12.8 
7.1 
5.7 

13.3
7.4
5.9

1. Components  may  not  sum to  totals  because  of  rounding.

Unlike  October's  widespread  output  gains,  last  month's

production  increases  were  concentrated  in  durable  goods  industries,

where  output  climbed  1.1  percent 

Among  nondurable industries,

petroleum and  rubber  posted  large advances.

Capacity constraints  do  not  appear  to  be  leading  to  much

slowing  in  manufacturing  activity.  The  following table  reports

recent  production  growth  rates  in  three  manufacturing  groups.  The

first  group  includes  those  two-digit  SIC  industries  for  which

factory  operating  rates  had,  by  August,  exceeded  their  1988-89

5. General  Motors  has  indicated to  us  that  Wards'  schedules  for
production  at  GM may  be  overstated  for  the  first  quarter  by about
0.3  million  units.  If  this  is  correct,  total  schedules  for  the
first  quarter  of  1995  would  be  13.0  million  rather than  the
13  3 million  that  appears  in  the  table.

II-9

cyclical  peaks.6  The  second  group  comprises  those  industries  for

which August  rates  remained below  their  last  cyclical  peaks but

above  their  1967-93  averages.7  The  third  group  includes  those

for which  August  rates  were  below  their long-term  averages. 

The

first  column  reports  the  average  growth  rate  of  production  over the

past  year;  the  next  three  report  growth rates  in  the  last  three

months.  The  table shows  that  those  industries  with  high  operating

rates  in  August  have  continued  to  grow at  a robust  pace.

RECENT  PRODUCTION GROWTH  RATES

Past
12  mos. 

Manufacturing 

Above  peak  capacity 
Above  average  capacity 
Below  average  capacity 

.5 
.9 
.4 
.2 

Sept.  Oct. 

Nov.

.0 
.4 
-.2 
-.1 

.6 
1.0 
.7 
.5 

.8
1.4
.5
-.4

1. Compounded average  monthly  growth  rate  from  November  1993

to  November  1994.

Outside  of manufacturing,  activity  has  declined  in  the  past

couple  of months.  Mining  production  fell  another  0.6  percent  in

November,  after  a  0.4  percent  retreat  in  October.  Utilities  output

dropped  1.6  percent  in November,  the  fifth  straight  monthly  decline.

However,  short-run movements  in utilities  output  often  follow the

weather,  which was  unusually mild  over the  past  few months.

Owing to  the  run-up  in  manufacturing production,  the  factory

operating  rate  rose  one-half point,  to  84.4  percent,  in  November.

The utilization  rate  was  reduced  about  one-half  percentage  point  in

6. The  reference month  of  August  was  chosen to  allow a

substantial time  period  after the  reference  month  over  which  to
examine  growth  patterns.

The  above-peak  group  includes  petroleum,  fabricated  metals,

machinery,  electrical  machinery,  and motor  vehicles  and parts.

7. Food,  textiles,  lumber,  furniture,  paper,  chemicals,  rubber,

leather,  stone,  clay  and  glass,  primary metals,  and  miscellaneous
manufactures.

8. Tobacco,  apparel,  printing,  other  transportation equipment,

and  instruments.

II-10

SALES  OF AUTOMOBILES  AND LIGHT TRUCKS 1
(Millions of  units  at  an annual  rate;  FRB  seasonals)

1994 

1994

1992 

1993 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov.

Total 
(BEA seasonals) 

12.9 
12.9 

13.9 
13.9 

15.0 
15.5 

14.8 
14.8 

15.1 
14.6 

15.4 
14.9 

15.4 
15.3 

15.2
15.4

Autos 
Light  trucks 

8.4 
4.5 

8.7 
5.2 

9.2 
5.8 

9.1 
5.7 

9.3 
5.8 

9.5 
5.9 

9.1 
6.2 

9.1
6.1

North American 

Autos 

Big  Three 
Transplants 

Light  trucks 

10.5 
6.3 
5.1 
1.2 
4.2 

11.7 
6.7 
5.5 
1.3 
5.0 

12.9 
7.3 
5.9 
1.4 
5.6 

12.6 
7.2 
5.7 
1.5 
5.5 

12.8 
7.2 
5.6 
1.6 
5.6 

13.2 
7.6 
6.0 
1.6 
5.7 

13.2 
7.2 
5.6 
1.6 
6.0 

13.3
7.3
5.8
1.6
5.9

Foreign  produced 

Autos 
Light  trucks 

2.3 
2.1 
.2 

2.1 
2.0 
.2 

2.1 
2.0 

.1 

2.1 
2.0 

.2 

2.2 
2.0 
.2 

2.1 
1.9 
.2 

2.2 
1.9 
.2 

1.9
1.8

.2

Memo:  Domestic  name-

plate market  share

Total 

Autos 

.72 
.63 

.74 
.65 

.74 
.65 

.73 
.63 

.71 
.61 

.73 
.64 

.73 
.62 

.75
.64

Note:  Data  on  sales  of  trucks  and  imported autos  for  the most  recent month

are  preliminary  and  subject
1.  Components may  not  add
2.  Excludes  some  vehicles  produced  in  Canada  that  are classified  as  imports

totals  because of  rounding.

to  revis
to

ion.

by  the  industry;  before January  1994,  some  vehicles produced  in Mexico were
also  excluded.

Cavalier  and  Sunbird  Sales

Millions  of units. annual  rate

Small  Domestic  Auto Sales

Millions of units,  annual rate

1992 

1993

1994 

1992

1993 

1994

II-11

the  recent  revision,  in  large  part  reflecting  data  showing that

manufacturing  investment,  and thus  growth  of the  net  capital  stock,

was  stronger  than previously  thought.  Still,  the  primary  processing

utilization  rate,  at  89.2  percent,  is  now  above  its  peak  in  the  late

1980s,  while  the  advanced processing  utilization  rate,  at

82.5  percent,  is  only  one  percentage  point  below its  peak.

Motor  Vehicles

Sales  of  new light  vehicles  in  November  held  near the  strong

pace  that  has  prevailed since  August.  Sales  were  15.2  million units

at  an  annual  rate  (FRB seasonals),  as  a  slight  gain  among

North  American-produced vehicles  mostly  offset  small  declines  in

sales  of  imports.

Several  factors  that  have  affected  recent  sales  in  selected

segments  of the  light  vehicle market  are  likely to  prevail  through

the  turn  of  the  year.  Within  light  trucks,  an  ongoing  year-end

sales  race  between  GM  and  Ford  has  boosted  light  truck  sales  since

September.  And  although  sales  of  sport-utility  vehicles  continue  to

rebound  in the  wake  of  last  summer's  availability problems,  the  pace

of  production  since August  may  not  have  been  sufficient  to  eliminate

the  pent-up  demand  that  accumulated while  these vehicles  were  in

short  supply.

For  automobiles,  both  industry  sources  and  the  November data

suggest  that  GM's  production  problems  continue to  hold  down  sales  of

small  cars.  Since  last March,  sales  of  GM's  popular  Cavalier  and

Sunbird  models  have plunged  about  400,000  units  as  an  extended

changeover  and  slow  ramp-up  have  curtailed  supply.  Although  a

substantial  incentive  program for  Toyota's  small  cars  in August

siphoned off  some  of the  pent-up  demand  for  GM's  small vehicles,

sales  of  small  cars  have  continued to  decline  since then.  GM's  auto

II-12

RETAIL SALES
(Percent change;  seasonally adjusted)

1994 

1994

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov.

Total  sales

Previous  estimate

Retail  control1

Previous  estimate

1.6 

1.1 

1.1 

1.2 

Total  excl.  automotive group

.8 

1.5 

Previous  estimate

GAF 2

Previous estimate

Durable goods  stores
Previous  estimate

Bldg. material and supply
Automotive dealers
Furniture  and appliances
Other durable  goods

Nondurable goods  stores

Previous  estimate

Apparel
Food
General merchandise 3
Gasoline  stations
Other nondurables 4

.8 

1.8 

2.4 

1.5 

4.0
-. 2
4.0
4.4

.8 

-1.4
4.5
.1
.2

1.1

-1.0
1.0
1.9
2.4
.7

2.0
1.9

1.9
1.9

2.1
2.1

2.4
2.3

2.5
2.2

3.5
1.5
4.6
3.1

1.6
1.6

.9
1.2
1.9
3.1
1.5

1.2

.7

.9

.6

2.9
2.0
2.3
2.6

.4

.6
.6
-. 1
.9
.5

1.3 

.6 

.7
1.4
2.1
.3

.5
.5

-. 6
.7
.8
.0
.5

2.8
2.3

1.5
4.0
1.1
.5

.3
.4

2.2
.5
.3
-1.6
.3

1. Total retail  sales  less building material and supply stores  and

automotive dealers, except  auto and home  supply stores.

2. General merchandise, apparel,  furniture,  and appliance  stores.
3. Excludes mail-order nonstores;  mail-order sales  are also excluded

from the GAF grouping.

4. Includes  sales at  eating and drinking places, drug stores,  and

proprietary stores.

II-13

assembly  plans  for  the  first  quarter  show a sharp  rebound  in  small-

car  production.

Personal  Income  and  Consumption

The  latest  data  on  retail  sales  point  to  a large  gain  in

consumer  spending  in the  fourth  quarter,  supported  by  strong

employment  and  income  growth  and  substantial recent  gains  in

consumer  sentiment.

Total  nominal  retail  sales  increased  1.2  percent  in  November,

following an  upward-revised  gain  of  1.3  percent  in  October.

Spending  in the  retail  control  group,  which  excludes  sales  at

automotive  dealers  and  at  building material  and  supply  stores,  rose

0.7  percent  in  November;  revisions to  previous  months  were  small  and

offsetting.  Within  the  retail  control  category, nominal  sales  at

most  types  of  stores were  up  in November.  The  retail  sales  data  and

the  available  information  about  prices  suggest  that the  November

level  of  real  spending on  goods  other  than motor  vehicles  was

1.9  percent  above  the  third-quarter  average,  not  at  an  annual  rate.

Consumer  spending on  services  has  also  advanced  solidly,

growing  0.4  percent  in  October.  Outlays  for  energy  services

rebounded somewhat  from their  September  level,  which was  held  down

by  unusually mild  weather.  Gains were  widespread  among other

services,  with the  largest  increases  occurring in  transportation  and

personal business  services;  as  a whole,  spending  on  non-energy

services  was  0.6  percent  higher  in  October  than  the third-quarter

average.

Real  disposable  personal  income  grew rapidly  in  October,

advancing  1.3  percent  and  pushing the  personal  saving  rate  up  to

4.7  percent  in  that month.  Roughly  two-thirds  of the  growth in

disposable  income was  attributable  to  a sizable  gain in wages  and

salaries,  including  large  bonuses  paid  to  workers  in  the motor

II-14

(Average monthly change

PERSONAL  INCOME
at  an annual rate; billions  of dollars)

1993 

Q1 

1994 

Q2 

1994

Q3 

Sept. 

Oct.

Total personal  income 

.1  30.3 

22.5 

28.7 

34.1 

80.5

Wages  and  salaries 

Private 

Other  labor income 

Proprietors'  income 

Farm 

Rent 
Dividend 
Interest 

-8.8 
-10.2 

19.8 
17.0 

15.6 
14.0 

13.9 
12.7 

19.8 
18.5 

47.7
45.5

2.5 

1.8 

1.7 

1.8 

1.8 

1.9

2.9 

.5 
.7  -1.7 

1.9 
.8 
-2.7 

2.3 
.9 
3.2 

-4.0 
-5.5 

-1.9 
2.1 
7.5 

1.1 
-.8 

.2 
1.8 
6.7 

2.1 
.4 

.2 
1.8 
7.0 

20.0
16.5

-. 9
2.0
7.3

5.7

Transfer payments 

4.6 

4.9 

2.8 

4.2 

2.8 

Less:  Personal  contributions

for social  insurance 

Less:  Personal tax and nontax

payments 

1.1 

3.1 

1.3 

1.0 

1.4 

3.2

.1 

5.2 

4.1 

2.6 

3.6 

11.5

Equals:  Disposable personal  income 

.0  25.1 

18.4 

26.0 

30.4 

69.1

Memo:  Real  disposable  income 

-6.4 

11.8 

5.9 

11.2 

16.6 

49.2

REAL  PCE  SERVICES
(Percent change  from the preceding period)

1994 

1994

1993 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Sept. 

Oct.

------ Annual rate----- 

Monthly rate

4.0 

1.1 

2.4 

.1 

.4

5.9 

3.9 
1.9 
1.2 
3.4 
2.4 
8.1 
7.4 

-3.4 

-11.9 

-5.2 

2.9

1.3 
1.9 
4.1 
2.8 
3.6 
-6.7 
2.5 

3.3 
2.0 
6.5 
2.1 
2.7 
-1.7 
9.7 

.4 
.3 
.5 
.6 
.3 
.6 
.4 

.2
.2
.3
.4
.3
.4
.0

2.5 

2.2 

2.5 
1.6 
1.1 
4.8 
2.5 
3.5 
3.1 

PCE  services 

Energy 

Non-energy 
Housing 
Household operation 
Transportation 
Medical 
Personal business 
Other 

II-15

Consumer Sentiment

Michigan Survey: Current  Conditions and  Expected  Conditions Subindexes 

Current conditions

/ 
,-% 

4/ 

-

N 

S90

Index

150

-

120

Dec.(p)

SExpected 

conditions

1980 

1982 

1984 

1986 

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994

Overall Michigan  Survey 

index

Dec.(p) 

30

130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

1980 

1982 

1984 

1986 

1988 

III 

1990 

I 
1992 

1994

Conference  Board  Survey 

- 50

40

Index

-160

S 

Nov.

140

120

100

- 80

60

S40

- 20

190 

1980 

1982 
1982 

-19841986 
1984

1986 

198819901921990
1988 

1990

1992 

1994

II-16

PRIVATE  HOUSING ACTIVITY
(Millions of  units;  seasonally  adjusted annual  rates)

1993

0194

Anniiua 

04

01 

02 

o 3 r 

Au  .r  Sept. 

Oct

All  units
Starts
Permits

Single-family  units
Starts
Permits

1.29 
1.20 

1.48 
1.38 

1.37  1.44  1.47
1.29  1.35  1.37

1.46 
1.35 

1.50 
1.43 

1.42
1.40

1.13 
.99 

1.29 
1.13 

1.17  1.19  1.21
1.06  1.07  1.04

1.18 
1.05 

1.23 
1.05 

1.14
1.05

New-home  sales 
Existing-hone  sales 

.67 
3.80 

.77 
4.17 

.69 

.68
4.05  4.06  3.93

.66 

Multifamil1'  unics
Starts
Permits

.19
25

.20 
23 

.25
.29

Note 

p  Preliminary 

r  Revised. 

n.a.  Not  available.

Private  Housing  Starts
(Seasonally adjusted  annual  rate)

1 

L 

B

.68
3.93

.72 
3.89 

.73
3.91

Millions of  units

2.4

-

2

--  1.6

-
Oct.

12

-

0.8

. VII' 

.

.,'  vo11

~---- 

-
1994

1978 

1980 

1982 

1984 

1986 

1988 

1990 

1992 

II-17

vehicles  industry.  In  addition,  October  income  was  boosted  by  large

government  payments  to  farmers  who  had  voluntarily  put  farmland  in

the  Conservation  Reserve  program.  In  November,  farm proprietors'

income  should  drop  back,  and the  most  recent  labor market  data

suggest  that  wages  and  salaries  will  be  little  changed.

Nonetheless,  real  disposable  income  appears  likely  to  register  a

gain  in the  neighborhood  of  6 percent  (annual  rate)  in the  fourth

quarter.

The  Michigan  Survey Research Center's  index  of  consumer

sentiment  increased  sharply  in the  first  part  of December.

Consumers'  assessments  of  current  conditions  improved  solidly,  and

the  expected  future  conditions  index jumped  up  sharply;  if  its

early-December  level  is  maintained  for  the  remainder  of the  month,

it  will  be  the  most  favorable  reading  since  1984.  The  latest

Conference  Board  report  indicated  a  sharp  improvement  in  sentiment

in November.  Before  November, the  Conference Board  index  of

consumer  sentiment  had  been  depressed  relative to  its  pre-recession

values;  the  November  increase  put  the  series  in  line with  its

readings  in  the  first  half  of  1990.

Housing Markets

The  fundamental determinants  of housing  activity  have  weakened

substantially  since  late  last  year,  but  indicators  of  sales  and

production have  not  yet  shown  a commensurate drop.  The most  recent

readings  gave  mixed  signals  about the  current  direction  of  activity

in  the  housing market.

Single-family  starts  fell  7 percent  in  October, to  1.14  million

units,  the  lowest  figure  since  February,  and  the  strong  initial

estimate  for  September was  revised  down moderately.  However,  the

level  of single-family  permits,  which are measured  with considerably

less  statistical  error  than are  starts,  has  been essentially

II-18

Indicators  of Housing Demand
(Seasonally adjusted)

Consumer  Homebuying Attitudes
Millions of  units, annual  rate

Diffusion  index

1.6  F

- /\}

r-i

Consumer  homebuying attitudes (right scale)

Sr\A 

Dec.(p)  -

Single-family  starts  (left scale)

SI 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

Ncte.  The  homebuying  attitudes  index  is calculated  by the  Survey  Research Center  (University  of Michigan} as  the  proportion  of respondents

rating  current  conditions as  good  minus  the proportion  rating  such  conditions as bad.

Builders'  Rating of  New  Home  Sales
Millions of units, annual  rate

Diffusion index

Builders' rating of  new home  sales  (right scale)

Nov.

A
\,,'\ 

/

Single-family starts (left scale)

-

40

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

Note.  The index  is calculated  from  National Association of  Homeouilders  data as  the  proportion of respondents  rating  current sales  as  good

to  excellent minus  the proportion  rating them  as poor.

MBA  Index  of  Mortgage  Loan  Applications
Millions of units, annual  rate

1.2

0.8

Index,  March  16,  1990 = 100

i  210

Purchase index (right scale)

Dec.  2

^-Y

in 

family starts  (le  scale)
Single-family starts  (left scale)

I 

I 

1990 

1991 

1992 
1992 

1993 
1993 

1 
1994

I

II-19

unchanged  in  recent  months,  and  at  its  current  level  suggests  that

the  October  level  of  starts  may  understate  the  true  volume  of

construction  activity.

Sales  of  new homes  rose  1.3  percent  in  October,  to  726,000

units  at  an  annual  rate,  the  highest  level  since  December  1993.  The

September-October  data  on  sales  and  single-family  construction,  on

average,  placed the  two series  in  a typical  alignment  after  a period

when  sales  were  unusually  low relative  to  starts.  Sales  of existing

homes  edged  up  in  October,  but  the  September-October  average  sales

level  stood below  the  pace  in months  before  September.

The  survey  indicators  of  housing activity  have  been mixed

recently,  but  all  remain  substantially  below the  favorable  readings

registered  early  this  year.  Consumer  attitudes  about  homebuying

conditions  improved  slightly  in  early  December  after  a sharp  drop  in

November, while  builders'  assessments  of new home  sales  continued  to

worsen  in  November.  Applications  for  home  mortgage  financing  rose

somewhat  on  a month-average  basis  in  November,  after  dropping

sharply  earlier  in  the year.

After  approaching  a 28-year  low  early  this  year, the  cash-flow

burden  of  fixed-rate  mortgage  (FRM) financing has  risen  noticeably

in  recent  months,  although the  effect  of the  higher  FRM rates  may

have  been  cushioned  somewhat  by  a shift  toward  adjustable-rate

mortgages  (ARMs),  which  depository  institutions  have  offered  with

large  initial  rate  discounts.  According  to  the  Federal  Housing

Finance Board,  the  ARM share  of  newly  originated  conventional home

mortgages  rose  in October  to  49  percent,  the highest  proportion

since May  1989.

Since  the  last  FOMC meeting, however,  typical  ARM  rates  have

increased  about  55  basis  points,  while  rates  on FRMs  have  fallen

Cash-flow  Burden  of Homeownership

II-20

Mortgage  Financing

Fixed  rate  mortgages

12-13-94

Percent

Adjustabrate  mortgag
f
s 
Adjustable  rate mortgages 

e\ 

\^

94:Q4

\

i 

I 
I 
u

I 
I 
1965 

I 

I 

I 
i 

I 

r 
I  I 
1970 

I 
I 
I 

I 

I 
I  I 
I 
1975 

I 

I  1 

I 

* 
I 
I  I 

I 

I 
I 
I 
I  I  I .

* 
1 

r 
* 
I  1 

1980

1985

1  I 

t
I 
1990

I 
I
~~--  ~-~-
9951!

j  10

Note  Cash-flow burden  is  defined  as the  financing cost of aconstant-quality new home

as a  percentage  of average  household disposable  income.

FRM AND  ARM RATES AND  CORRESPONDING TREASURY  RATES

IN  THE  INTERMEETING  PERIOD
(Percent except  as  noted)

Se r  e s

Nov.  11 

Dec.  9

Change
(basis  points)

Week ended

Treasury  securities
10-year
1-year

FRM
ARM

8.00
6.42

9.37
6.01

7.79
7.09

9  33
6.56

-21
67

-4
55

Note.  FRM  rate  is  on  a  bond-equivalent  yield basis.  ARM  rate  is

the  average  initial  contract  rate  on  new commitments  for  thirty-
year  adjustable  rate mortgages  that  are  indexed  to  the  yield  on
one-year  Treasury securities.

II-21

9
4 basis  points. 

This  narrowing  FRM-ARM  spread  may  prompt  more

homebuyers  to  opt  for  the  less-risky  fixed-rate  alternative--and it

likely will  disqualify  some  would-be  buyers  who  can  qualify  for

loans  only  if  the  monthly  payments  are  lower  in the  early  years.

Multifamily housing  starts  rose  4.8  percent  in  October,  to

282,000  units.  In  general,  multifamily starts  have been trending  up

recently,  reflecting  emerging  demand  pressures  in  some markets.

Business  Fixed  Investment

Investment  in  producers'  durable  equipment  evidently  has

continued  to  expand  rapidly  this  quarter.  Shipments  of  nondefense

capital  goods  excluding  aircraft  were  up  a bit  in October  after

advancing  sharply  in  the  two  previous months,  yielding an  October

level  that  was  2-1/4  percent  above  the  third-quarter  average.

Nominal  shipments  of  computing  equipment  have  been  very strong  in

recent  months,  rising  in  October  to  a level  5-1/2  percent  above

their  average  for  the  third  quarter.  Reports  in  the  trade  press

suggest  that  both  business  and  consumer  demand  for  PCs,

workstations,  and  related  equipment  is  surging. 1 0  Shipments  of

other  capital  goods  were  also  at  a very high  level  in  October.

Moreover,  the  continuing  strength  in  new  orders  for both computers

and  other  capital  equipment,  along with  growing backlogs  for

computers  and  office  equipment,  suggests that  shipments  will  rise

further  in  coming months.

9. The  majority  of ARMs  are  linked  to  the  one-year  Treasury rate.

10.  Intel announced  recently  that  under certain  conditions  its
Pentium microprocessor might  malfunction.  This  problem has  received
a great  deal of  attention  in  the  press,  but  our  industry contacts  do
not  believe that,  thus  far,  it  has  had much  of  a depressing effect
on  computer  purchases,  owing to  the  small  share  of  Pentium machines
in  total  business  computer purchases.  However,  as  a  result  of  its
own  research  showing  that  the  problem is  more  severe than  Intel  has
indicated.  IBM  announced that  it  will  suspend  shipments  of  machines
with the  defective  chips.  These  developments  have  caused
uncertainty, which may  lead  some  customers  to  postpone  purchases  for
a  few months  until  the  situation is  clarified.

II-22

BUSINESS CAPITAL SPENDING  INDICATORS
(Percent change  from preceding comparable period;
based on seasonally adjusted  data,  in  current  dollars)

1994 

1994

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Aug.  Sept. 

Oct.

Producers'  durable  equipment

Shipments  of  nondefense capital goods 

Excluding aircraft and parts 

Office and computing 
All other categories 

1.0 
1.2 
3.3 
.5 

2.3 
4.6 
1.7 
5.4 

3.4 
3.2 
2.5 
3.4 

3.3 
3.3 
2.6 
3.5 

1.6 
1.4 
4.6 
.5 

-. 8
.2
1.5
-,2

Shipments  of  complete aircraft1 

9.6  -33.1  -4.5 

68.4 

11.6  -40.0

Sales  of  heavy trucks 

-1.0 

5.3 

1.3 

17.2 

-6.7 

4.8

Orders of  nondefense capital  goods 

Excluding aircraft and parts 

Office and  computing 
All other categories 

6.2 
1.7 
.8 
1.9 

.2 
4.2 
6.7 
3.5 

3.3 
3.4 
3.3 
3.5 

3.5 
2.1 
-. 1 
2.7 

3.9 
3.5 
7.0 
2.5 

-2.3
.1
2.8
-. 7

Nonresidential structures

Construction put-in-place 

Office 
Other commercial 
Institutional 
Industrial 
Public  utilities 
Lodging and miscellaneous 

-3.1 
-.3 
-6.0 
-6.7 
1.0 
-2.2 
-2.7 

3.6 
3.7 
11.9 

2.0 
2.6 
2.0 
7.4  -1.2 
3.4 
6.6 
4.4 
-4.5 
-.6  -7.3 

.3 
4.0 
-3.4 
-3.0 
5.2 
1.0 
2.3 

3.1 
.7 
5.2 
2.8 
2.7 
2.1 
6.3 

1.6
-.6
.5
3.6
.8
3.7
.1

Rotary drilling  rigs  in use 

.8 

2.2 

-.8 

-1.6 

3.1 

-4.9

Memo:

Business  fixed  investment 2  

Producers'  durable  equipment 2  
Nonresidential  structures 2  

10.9 
18.6 
-11.8 

9.2  14.4 
6.1  18.0 
2.9 

20.6 

n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 

n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

1. From the  Current Industrial  Report  "Civil Aircraft  and Aircraft  Engines."
Monthly data  are  seasonally adjusted using FRB seasonal  factors  constrained to
BEA quarterly seasonal  factors.  Quarterly data  are seasonally adjusted using
BEA seasonal  factors.

2. Based on constant-dollar data;  percent  change,  annual rate.
n.a.  Not available.

II-23

Orders  and  Shipments  of  Nondefense  Capital  Goods

Office  and Computing  Equipment

Billions of dollars

Months

Unfilled  orders to shipments

Oct.

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

Other  Equipment (Excluding  Aircraft and Computing  Equipment)

Billions of dollars

-

30

SOct. 
Li  Oct.

27

Orders 

, ,''
as 
' ' 

-

24

- 21

Shipments 

Months

Unfilled  orders  to shipments

1991 

1992 

1993

1992 

1993 

1994

II-24

Fundamental  Determinants  of Business  Fixed  Investment

Cost  of  Capital

Percent

1964 

1969 

1974 

1979 

1984 

1989 

1994

Acceleration of  Business Output

:.-.Eight-quarter  percent changeless

.t
^ 

.

Percentage points

1964 

1969 

1974 

1979 

1984 

1989 

1994

Real  Domestic  Corporate  Cash  Flow

Four-quarter  change 

:.

Percent

1964 

1969

1974 

1979 

1984

1994

II-25

As  for  transportation  equipment,  healthy business  demand  helped

push  up  light  vehicle  sales  in October  and  November.  In  addition,

heavy truck  sales  shot  up  in  October  and November,  putting  the

average  pace  in  the  two  months  roughly  10  percent  (not annual  rate)

above  their  third-quarter  rate.  The  demand  for  heavy  trucks  has

been  very  high  throughout  1994,  but  capacity  constraints have  slowed

deliveries,  and  orders  have  backed  up  considerably.  Several  truck

manufacturers  report  that  new capacity  is  coming  on  line  in the

fourth  quarter,  which  should  help  them whittle  away  at  the  large

backlog.  Aircraft  outlays  and  backlogs  have  continued to  fall.

Domestic  shipments  dropped  35  percent  from  December  1993  to

September  1994,  and  this  downtrend  has  continued  into  the  fourth

quarter.  Boeing's  domestic  orders,  which were  very slow  in  1993,

have  remained  weak so  far  this  year.

The  continued  strength  of spending  on  producers'  durable

equipment  is  broadly  consistent  with  recent  readings  on  several

fundamental  determinants  of  investment.  Despite  higher  interest

rates,  the  cost  of capital  continues  to  be  quite  favorable  for

equipment,  primarily because  prices  for  capital  goods  have  not

increased  very  rapidly  on  average--owing importantly to  the  drop  in

computer  prices.  In  addition,  the  acceleration  of business  output

continues  to  provide  a positive,  albeit  diminishing, 

stimulus  to

investment,  and  corporate  cash  flow has  been  growing  rapidly.

Outlays  for  nonresidential  structures  have  continued to  advance

strongly.  Construction put-in-place  for buildings  increased

1-1/2  percent  in  October  and has  been on  a modest  but  steady  uptrend

for  almost  two  years.  The  strength  is  concentrated in  the  "other

commercial"  sector  (which includes  retail  outlets)  and,  to  a  lesser

11.  The  accelerator  effect  relates  the  lagged  change  in  growth

rates  to  investment.  While  growth  in nonfarm business  output
excluding housing  (called "Business Output"  in  the  chart)  has
continued  strong,  the  change  in  growth  rates  has  declined.

II-26

Nonresidential  Construction and  Permits
(Six-month moving  average)

Total  Building

Index,  Dec.  1982 = 100,  ratio  scale

Construction  (C)

%J***~~I

**

-

IF

Permits  I?)

1982 

1983 

1984 

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

1982 

1983 

1984 

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

Office

Other Commercial

1982 

1984 

1986 

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994

1982 

1984 

1986 

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994

industrial

institutional

1982 

1984 

1986 

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994

1982 

1984  1986  1988 

1990  1992 

1994

II-27

extent,  in  the  "industrial"  category;  office  and  institutional

construction  (which includes  structures  related to  health  care and

private  educational  buildings)  have  been only  inching  up.  In  the

aggregate,  leading  indicators  of future  construction have  also  been

solid.  Although permits  for  nonresidential  construction  dropped

back  in  October,  after  smoothing through the  monthly volatility they

still  appear  to  be  on a healthy uptrend.

Drilling  and mining  is  one  sector where  investment  has  been

declining,  as  relatively  low  natural  gas  prices  and  substantial

inventories  have  depressed  drilling activity.  The  slowdown  in

activity  in  this  sector  may well  be  intensifying.  Rotary  drilling

rigs-in-use dropped  about  5 percent  in  October,  after  declining

1 percent  in  the  third  quarter.  In  addition, the  Baker-Hughes index

of  footage  drilled  registered a large  drop  in  October.

Inventories

The  recent  robust  business  inventory  expansion may  have

continued  into  October.  Census  data  available  at  this  point  show

that  inventories  in manufacturing  and wholesale trade  rose  in

October  at  a  $33.7  billion  annual  rate,  only  a bit  less  than the

rapid  $36.4 billion  pace  posted  during the  third  quarter.  The brisk

rise  in  stocks  appears  to  reflect  desired  accumulation  in  light  of

favorable  sales  expectations  and  concerns  about  prompt  availability

of  supplies.

In manufacturing, the  pace  of  stockbuilding picked  up  again,

with  an accumulation  of $17.5  billion  (annual  rate)  in  October

following  little  net  change  in  the  preceding two  months.  The

pattern  of manufacturers'  inventory  investment  in October  was  quite

similar  to  that  observed through much of this  year;  a sizable

portion  of the  increase was  in  stocks  at  producers  of  capital  goods,

reflecting the  continued  strength  in  demand  for  business  equipment.

II-28

CHANGES  IN MANUFACTURING AND  TRADE  INVENTORIES
(Billions of dollars  at  book value  and annual  rates;
based on  seasonally adjusted data)

Total 

18.4 

75.6 

74.8 

93.9 

63.5 

n.a.

1994 

1994

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Aug. 

Sept. 

Oct.

Excluding wholesale  and
retail  motor vehicles 

Manufacturing 

Defense  aircraft 
Nondefense aircraft 
Excluding  aircraft 

Wholesale 

Excluding motor vehicles 

Retail 

Automotive 
Excluding auto dealers 

Constant-dollar basis

Total 

Excluding motor vehicles 
Manufacturing 
Wholesale 

Excluding motor vehicles 

Retail 

Automotive 
Excluding  auto dealers 

21.1 
9.4 
-4.4 
-1.4 
15.2 
3.1 
8.3 
5.9 
2.6 
3.4 

9.9 
11.8 
9.9 
-2.0 
3.0 
2.0 
2.5 
-.5 

58.9 
13.3 
-4.7 
3.7 
14.4 
23.0 
16.6 
39.4 
10.4 
29.0 

39.0 
35.6 
.7 
16.C 
10.8 
22.3 
-1.9 
24.2 

55.6 
13.7 
-2.3 
-.8 
16.8 
22.7 
23.0 
38.4 
19.5 
18.9 

38.4 
31.2 
3.6 
14.0 
14.5 
20.7 
6.9 
13.8 

57.0 
4.4 
-4.9 
2.0 
7.3 
11.5 
16.7 
78.0 
44.0 
34.0 

34.5 
36.2 
-1.6 
5.8 
12.5 
30.2 
4.3 
25.9 

34.3 
-5.8 
-2.9 
-4.7 
1.8 
14.1 
11.7 
55.1 
26.7 
28.4 

8.2 
7.2 
-16.4 
4.2 
2.0 
20.4 
-2.3 
22.7 

n.a.
17.5
.2
-2.5
19.7
16.2
11.9
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

INVENTORIES  RELATIVE  TO  SALES1
(Months supply;  based on seasonally adjusted data at book value)

1994 

1994

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Aug. 

Sept. 

Oct.

Total 

1.41 

1.41 

1.41 

1.39 

1.40 

n.a.

Excluding wholesale  and
retail motor vehicles 

Manufacturing 

Defense aircraft 
Nondefense  aircraft 
Excluding aircraft 

Wholesale 

Excluding motor vehicles 

Retail 

Automotive 
Excluding  auto dealers 

Constant-dollar basis

Total 

Excluding motor vehicles 
Manufacturing 
Wholesale 

Excluding motor vehicles 

Retail 

Automotive 
Excluding auto dealers 

1.39 
1.40 
4.80 
5.00 
1.28 
1.31 
1.30 
1.50 
1.61 
1.47 

1.46 
1.52 
1.44 
1.39 
1.39 
1.53 
1.56 
1.52 

1.39 
1.39 
4.85 
5.84 
1.26 
1.33 
1.30 
1.54 
1.67 
1.50 

1.46 
1.51 
1.43 
1.41 
1.39 
1.56 
1.57 
1.55 

1.38 
1.36 
4.69 
5.54 
1.25 
1.32 
1.30 
1.56 
1.76 
1.50 

1.46 
1.51 
1.41 
1.40 
1.39 
1.57 
1.62 
1.56 

1.36 
1.34 
4.49 
5.62 
1.23 
1.30 
1.29 
1.53 
1.70 
1.48 

1.44 
1.49 
1.40 
1.39 
1.38 
1.56 
1.62 
1.54 

1.37 
1.35 
4.95 
5.38 
1.23 
1.31 
1.29 
1.54 
1.73 
1.49 

1.44 
1.50 
1.40 
1.39 
1.38 
1.56 
1.61 
1.55 

n.a.
1.37
4.79
5.76
1.25
1.32
1.29
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

1. Ratio of  end-of-period  inventories  to average monthly sales  for the  period.

II-29

Ratio of Inventories to Sales
(Book value)

Manufacturing

Ratio

2.2

1.95

1.7

1.45

1.2

1.5

1.4

1.3

1.2

11

1

1.7

1.6

1.5

1.4

1980 

1982 

1984 

1986 

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994

Wholesale  excluding  motor vehicles

Ratio

1980 

1982 

1984 

1986 

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994

Retail
Ratio

Ratio

1980

1982

1984 

1986 

1988 

1990

1992

1994

II-30

FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OUTLAYS AND RECEIPTS
(Unified basis, billions  of dollars,  except  where otherwise noted)

Oct. 
1993 

Oct. 
1994 

Dollar 
change 

Percent
change

Outlays 

Deposit  insurance  (DI) 

Oulays excluding DI 
National defense 
Net  interest 
Social  security 
Medicare  and health 
Income  security 
Other 

Receipts 

Personal  income taxes 
Social  insurance taxes 
Corporate  income  taxes 
Other 

124.1  121.5 
-.7 

.1 

124.0  122.2 
18.8 
18.7 
26.7 
19.7 
15.3 
23.0 

24.3 
17.1 
25.5 
20.0 
17.4 
19.7 

78.7 
37.7 
30.8 
2.2 
8.0 

89.0 
43.2 
32.7 
3.5 
9.6 

-2.6 
-.7 

-1.9 
-5.5 
1.6 
1.2 
-.3 
-2.1 
3.3 

10.4 
5.6 
1.9 
1.3 
1.6 

-2.1
---

-1.5
-22.6
9.3
4.6
-1.6
-12.0
16.5

13.2
14.8
6.0
60.8
20.3

Deficit(+) 

Excluding DI 

45.4 
45.4 

32.4 
33.1 

-13.0 
-12.2 

-28.6
-27.0

Details may not  add to totals  because  of rounding.

Federal  Unified  Budget  Outlays for Health  Programs
(Percent  change from  previous fiscal year)

Percent

-30

24

18

12

- 6

0

1 

1987 

I8 

SI 

198 
1988

I 
I98  1 

1990 

I 
I 

19 
1991 

I 
I 

199 
1992

I 

_  _ 

19 
1993 

I
.
I 

19
1994

1989 

II-31

In  particular,  inventories  at  producers  of  computers  and  computer

accessories,  office machinery,  and telecommunications  equipment--

industries  where  bookings  have  been  robust  for much  of  this  year  and

the  backlog  of unfilled  orders  has  been  relatively  high--accounted

for  the  bulk of  the  October  buildup.  By  stage  of processing,

investment  in  stocks  of materials  and  supplies  posted  another

sizable  rise  in  October  following a  string of  increases  since

January.  In  contrast,  factories  have  seen  little  net  accumulation

in  inventories  of  finished  goods  since  July.

Merchant  wholesalers  continued to  build their  inventories at  a

brisk  pace  in  October;  excluding motor  vehicles,  wholesale  stocks

expanded  at  a  $12  billion  annual  rate  in  October,  about  the  same

pace  as  in  September.  The  pattern  of  accumulation was  similar  to

that  of  the manufacturers, with  a significant  part  of the  buildup  in

the  categories  of machinery,  professional  and business  equipment,

and  metals.

Non-auto  retail  inventories  seemed well  in  line  with  sales  at

the  end  of  September,  as  a sharp  August-September  rise  in

inventories  was  matched by  sales  gains,  leaving  the  overall

inventory-sales  ratios  near  trend.  Moreover,  some  of  retailers'

stockbuilding  in  recent  months  may  reflect  optimistic  expectations

regarding holiday  sales.

Federal  Sector

Continuing  spending  restraint  combined  with rising tax  revenues

have  contributed  to  substantial  shrinkage  of  the  federal  budget

deficit.  On  a unified basis,  the  deficit was  $32  billion  in  October

compared with  $45  billion  a year  ago.  However,  October  outlays  were

artificially depressed this  year  by  about  $6 billion because  the

October  outlays  for  defense  payrolls,  veterans  benefits,  and  SSI

benefits  were  paid  in  September.  (October 1 fell  on  a Saturday.)

II-32

After  adjusting  for this  special  factor,  the  October  deficit  was

down  $7  billion  from  last  year,  with  adjusted  outlays  up  3 percent

and  receipts up  13  percent.  Falling  payroll-adjusted defense

spending, which  was  down  12  percent,  contributed more than  any  other

category to  the  overall  spending  decline.  The  strong  growth  in

receipts  was  due  primarily  to  a surge  in  personal  withheld  taxes  and

social  insurance  taxes,  and  likely  reflected  the  robust  growth  in

wages  and  salaries.

Defense  spending  for  operations  and maintenance  was  a bit  below

trend  in  October  after  surging  in  September.2  The  September-

October  military  operations  in Haiti  were  likely  sustained  primarily

by  September  spending  and  by  inventories;  additional  operations  and

maintenance  expenditures  will  probably show  up  in  future  months  as

inventories  diminish.  Nonetheless,  the  low  operations  and

maintenance  expenditures  in  October  could  signal  lower  levels  of

expenditures  for  Haiti  than  were  projected by  OB.13  In  addition,

OMB  sources  indicate  that  the  Persian Gulf buildup  will be  reflected

primarily  in  future defense  purchases  as  fuel  supplies  are

replenished and  equipment  is  returned  to  storage.14

OMB  and  CBO  reportedly  will  lower their  estimates  of  future

federal  spending for  health  programs  in  their  respective  fiscal year

1996  budget  documents  due  to  be  released  in  early  1995 

Last

summer,  the  average  annual  growth  rate  of health  spending  between

12.  Timing  of procurement  spending  also  contributed to  the  year-

over-year  decline  in  payday-adjusted  October  defense  spending.
This  year,  high procurement  spending  in  September  was  offset  by  low
procurement  spending  in  October.

13  OMB  estimates  that  outlays  for  Haiti  were  $514  million in

FY1994  and  $148  million  for  October.  Estimates  for  the  remainder  of
FY1995  are  not  yet  available.  In addition,  costs  associated  with
the  retention  of  Cuban  refugees  are  estimated  at  $119  million  for
FY1994  and  $243  million for  FY1995.

14.  Arab  countries  are  expected to  finance most  or  all  of the

costs  of the  Persian  Gulf operations  via a special  defense  account,
so  that  the  resource  costs  will  be  reflected  in offsetting  NIPA
purchases  and  transfers,  but  not  in  unified  outlays.  (Payments into
the  special  defense  account  will  be  scored  as  a negative outlay.)

II-33

fiscal  years  1994  and  1996  was  estimated at  10  percent  by  OMB  and  12

percent  by  CBO,  somewhat  higher  than  the  9 percent  growth  rate

experienced  in  fiscal  1994  (see  chart). 1 5

President  Clinton  recently  proposed  a  $2 billion  emergency

supplemental  appropriation for  the  Defense  Department  for  fiscal

year  1995  to  offset  the  costs  of  military  operations  in Haiti  and

Bosnia,  the  setup  of  a migrant  camp  for  Cuban refugees  at  Guantanamo

Bay,  and  the  buildup  and  builddown  in the  Persian  Gulf.  Under  OBRA-

93  budget  rules,  emergency  spending  need  not  be  offset  by  other

spending  reductions.  In  addition,  the  President  announced that  his

fiscal  year  1996  budget will  request  $25  billion more  defense

spending  over the  next  five  years  than was  requested  in  last  year's

budget.  Increases  in non-emergency  defense  spending  through  fiscal

year  1998  must  be  offset  by  reductions  in  other  discretionary

spending  under  OBRA-93  budget  rules.

Both houses  of  Congress  have  approved  legislation  implementing

the  Uruguay Round  of  the  General  Agreement  on Tariffs  and  Trade

(GATT) and  providing  for  offsetting  revenue  increases  and  spending

cuts  necessitated  by  the  OBRA-93  budgeting  rules.  The  five-year

financing  legislation  includes  $1 billion from  spending cuts,

$4  billion  from increased tax  compliance  and  changes  in  the  timing

of  tax  payments,  $1 billion  from reforms  to  the  operations  of  the

Pension  Benefit  Guarantee  Corporation, $2 billion  from  surpluses

attributable to  previous  legislation, and  $4 billion  from other

miscellaneous  sources.  The  President  signed the  legislation  on

December  8.

15.  OMB  revised  down its  estimates  of  health  spending this  past

August  but  CBO,  for  the  most part,  did  not.  CBO  chose  to  remain
consistent  with the  assumptions  used  to  cost  out the  various  health
care  reform  proposals put  forward  during  the  1994  legislative
season.

II-34

State  and  Local Sector

Government  Employment

Percent

1976 

1979 

1982 

1985 

1988 

1991 

1994

Real  Construction

F(Seasonally  adju.

Billions of  1987  dollars

1976 

1979

1982 

1985 

1988

1994

II-35

The  President's  Commission  on  Entitlements  and  Tax Reform,

chaired  by  Senator Kerrey,  was  scheduled to  have  voted  its

recommendations  on  December  14.  The  commission's  options,  which

were set  out  in  a staff report,  include  more  than  seventy-five

measures  to  restrain  entitlement  spending  or  increase  federal

revenues.  Which  options  will  be  chosen  and  the  net  impact  remain

quite  uncertain.

State  and  Local Government  Sector

Available  indicators  suggest  that  purchases  of  goods  and

services  by state  and  local  governments  will  post  another  solid  gain

in  the  fourth  quarter.  Although  the  increase  in  employment  in

November  largely  represented  temporary  election workers,  trend

employment  growth in  the  state  and  local  sector  appears  to  have

firmed  a bit  in  recent  months.  In  addition,  real  outlays  for

structures  jumped  in  October,  boosting  construction  to  a level

nearly 5 percent  above  the third-quarter  average.  Most  categories

of  construction  spending  saw  advances  in  October, with the  largest

increase in  outlays  for  educational  facilities.

With many  states  having ended  fiscal  year  1994  in  reasonably

good  shape,  pressures  to  raise  taxes  have  abated.  Although the

changes  in  state  tax  laws  made last  spring  raised  revenues,  on  net,

the  increase  is  forecast  by  the  National  Council  of State

Legislatures  to be  only  about  1 percent  of  total  collections  in

fiscal  1995,  the  smallest  increment  since  1988.  This  development

reflects  both  a drop  in the amount  of money  raised from tax hikes

and  a step-up  in  tax  cuts.

Further  reductions  in  taxes  are  likely  during the  1995

legislative  sessions.  Four  states  just  elected  governors  with

ambitious  tax-cutting  agendas,  and  a number  of others  have  similar

plans.  However,  in  light  of  the  recent  fiscal  difficulties  in many

II-36

RECENT CHANGES  IN CONSUMER PRICES
(Percent change;  based on seasonally  adjusted  data) 1

Relative 
importance,
Dec.  1993 

1992 

1993 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Oct. 

Nov.

1994 

1994

----- Annual  rate------ 

-Monthly rate-

All 

tems 2  

Food 
Energy 
All  items  less  food
and  energy 

Commodities 
Services 

100.0 
15.8 
7.0 

77.2 
24.4 
52.8 

2.9 
1.5 
2.0 

3.3 
2.5 
3.7 

2.7 
2.9 
-1.4 

3.2 
1.6 
3.9 

2.5 
-1.1 
4.7 

2.9 
.6 
4.2 

2.5 
2.8 
-4.9 

3.1 
4.2 
2.4 

3.6 
5.1 
10.9 

2.6 
.6 
3.6 

CPI-W3  

100.0 

2.9 

2.5 

2.5 

2.5 

3.6 

.1 
.0 
-. 7 

.2 
.0 
.2 

.1 

.3
.2
.7

.2
.1
.3

.3

1. Changes  are  from final month  of  preceding period  to  final  month of period indicated.

2.  Official  index  for all  urban consumers.
3. Index  for urban wage  earners  and clerical workers.

RECENT CHANGES  IN PRODUCER PRICES
(Percent change;  based on  seasonally adjusted data)l

Relative 
importance,
Dec.  1993 

1992 

1993 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Oct. 

Nov.

1994 

1994

----- Annual  rate------ 

-Monthly rate-

Finished goods 

Consumer  foods 
Consumer  energy 
Other  finished  goods 

Consumer  goods 
Capital  equipment 

Intermediate materials 2  

Excluding food  and energy 

Crude  food  materials 
Crude  energy 
Other  crude materials 

100.0 
22.9 
13.3 
63.7 
40.3 
23.4 

95.2 
82.3 

44.1 
34.4 
21.5 

1.6 
1.6 
-. 3 
2.0 
2.1 
1.7 

1.1 
1.2 

3.0 
2.3 
5.7 

.2 

2.4 
-4.1 
.4 
-. 4 
1.8 

3.6 
-. 6 
15.4 
3.0 
2.0 
4.3 

.8 
1.6 

2.8 
1.9 

-.3 

-5.5 
-1.0 

2.1 
1.5 
3.0 

3.1 
3.9 

2.6 
3.9 
3.2 
2.1 
2.0 
2.4 

5.9 
6.2 

-.5 
-. 2 
-1.2 

-.5 
-. 3 
-1.0 

.4 
.7 

.5
.2
2.1
-1
.2
.1

1.1

.9

7.2 
-12.3 
10.7 

-4.5 
10.1 
22.7 

-20.6 
21.0 
-.8 

-12.9 
-20.5 
18.8 

-2.0 
.0 
.9 

1.5
-1.0
3.4

1. Changes  are  from final  month of  preceding  period to final month of period indicated.
2. Excludes  materials  for  food manufacturing and animal feeds.

of  these  states,  most  recent  tax-reduction  proposals  have  been

II-37

relatively  small.

Prices

Although  inflation has  picked up  smartly  at  the  early  stages  of

processing,  thus  far this  acceleration has  not  been paralleled  in

prices  for  final  goods.16  The PPI  for  intermediate materials

excluding  food  and  energy  increased  4.8  percent  in  the  past  twelve

months--more than  three percentage  points  faster  than  its  pace in

the year-earlier  period.  In  contrast,  for  commodities  excluding

food,  energy,  and  tobacco, the  PPI  for  finished  goods  accelerated

just  0.1  percentage  point  in  the  past  year,  while  the  corresponding

CPI  decelerated  about  0.8  percentage  point.  Nor do the  recent data

give  a hint  of  a change  in  direction.  The  core  PPI  rose  just

0.1  percent  in November,  while the  CPI  excluding  food  and  energy was

up  only  0.2  percent.

PRICES EXCLUDING  FOOD  AND ENERGY
(Percent change  from November  to  November)

PPI 

Finished

CPI  ex.  tobacco

Crude 

Intermediate 

ex. tobacco 

Commodities  Total

1992 
1993 
1994 

3.0 
11.6 
15.4 

1.1 
1.6 
4.8 

1.8 
1.4 
1.5 

2.2 
2.1 
1.3 

3.3
3.3
2.8

Intermediate  goods  prices  excluding food  and  energy advanced  at

a 7-1/2  percent  annual  rate  in  the  past  six months--considerably

faster  than  during the  previous  six months.  The  increases  were  led

by  a variety  of materials  purchased  as  inputs  to  manufacturing.

Crude  prices have been increasing  even  faster,  and  have also  picked

16.  Logically, there  are  three possible  explanations  for  the lack

of a pass-through:  either  producers' margins  must  have  declined,
some  other  costs  (e.g.,  labor  costs)  must  have  declined,  or their
productivity must  have  risen.  It  is  not  possible at  this  stage to
determine the  relative  importance  of these  possibilities.

II-38

INFLATION RATES EXCLUDING FOOD AND ENERGY

Percent change  from twelve months
earlier

Nov. 

1992 

Nov. 

1993 

Nov.

1994

CPI 

Goods 

Alcoholic  beverages 
New vehicles 
Apparel 
House  furnishings 
Housekeeping  supplies 
Medical  commodities 
Entertainment 
Tobacco 

Services 

Owners'  equivalent  rent 
Tenants'  rent 
Other renters'  costs 
Airline  fares 
Medical  care 
Entertainment 
Auto  financing 
Tuition 

PPI  finished  goods 

Consumer  goods 

Capital goods,  excluding

computers 

Computers 

PPI  intermediate materials 

PPI  crude materials 

Factors  affecting price inflation

ECI  hourly  compensation1  

Goods-producing 
Service-producing 

Civilian  unemployment  rate2, 3  

capacity utilization 2  

(manufacturing)

Inflation expectations 4 ,5

Michigan Survey 
Conference  Board 

Non-oil  import  price 6  

Consumer  goods,  excluding  autos,

food,  and  beverages 

Autos 

3.4 

2.5 

2.9 
2.6 
0.9 
1.4 
0.5 
5.1 
1.8 
7.7 

3.9 

3.0 
2.5 
5.9 
9.0 
7.3 
2.8 
-14.0 
8.2 

2.0 

2.2 

2.7 
-15.7 

1.1 

3.0 

3.4 
3.9 
3.1 

7.3 

80.3 

3.3 
4.6 

2.8 

4.0 
2.3 

3.1 

1.6 

1.2 
3.2 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
3.3 
1.6 
-4.7 

3.7 

3.0 
2.0 
3.1 
14.5 
5.9 
3.7 
-5.7 
7.3 

0.3 

-0.5 

2.3 
-12.6 

1.6 

11.6 

3.7 
4.0 
3.6 

6.5 

81.4 

3.8 
4.3 

0.3 

0.6 
1.6 

2.8

1.5

1.3
3.4
-1.8
0.4
0.5
3.1
2.2
3.2

3.5

3.6
2.6
2.9
-5.6
5.2
3.0
17.5
5.9

1.6

1.5

1.9
-7.2

4.8

15.4

3.3
3.3
3.2

5.6

84.4

3.7
4.2

3.2

0.7
3.5

1. Private  industry workers, periods  ended  in September.
2.  End-of-period value.
3. Data  for  1994  are  not  directly comparable  with earlier values

because of  a  redesign of  the CPS  in January  1994.

4. One-year-ahead expectations.
5. Latest  reported value:  December.
6. BLS  import  price  index  (not seasonally adjusted),  periods  ended

in  September.

II-39

up  their  pace  in  the  past  six months  from that  of  the  previous  half

year.

Meanwhile,  the  PPI  for  finished  goods  rose  0.5  percent  in

November--a  sizable  increase,  but  one  that  only  partially  offset  a

1 percent  decline  registered  over  the  previous  two  months.  Gasoline

prices  increased  4-1/2 percent,  likely  reflecting  temporary

disruptions  to  supplies  from  the  pipeline  rupture  in Texas  in  late

October.  Food  prices  were  little  changed.  Excluding  food  and

energy,  the  PPI  edged  up  0.1  percent  after  a drop  of  0.5  percent  in

October.  Truck prices  declined  again  in  November  after  a  sharp  drop

a month  earlier,  the  fallout  of  an  end-of-year  sales  contest  between

Ford  and  GM.  November producer  prices  were  also  soft  for  apparel

and  tobacco.

Consumer  energy  prices  rose  0.7  percent  in November,  led by

increases  in  gasoline  prices  as  well  as  gas  and  electric utility

rates.  Although  crude  oil  prices  were  generally flat  over  the  past

couple  of months,  retail  gasoline  prices  in  November  probably were

boosted  by temporary  supply  disruptions  following  the  pipeline

ruptures  in  the  Houston  area.  For  natural  gas,  consumer  prices had

been  declining  for  several  months  before  November,  reflecting

pervasive weakness  in  spot  wellhead  prices  through much of  this

year.  The  November  increase  in natural  gas  prices  in  the  CPI

retraced  only  part  of  the  previous  declines.

The  prices  paid  by  gasoline wholesalers  and  consumers  are

expected to  increase  in  the  near term,  reflecting  government

mandates  for  gasoline  designed  to  reduce  emissions  of  carbon

monoxide,  benzene,  and  other  pollutants.  The  reformulated  gasoline

had  to  be  stocked  at  the  wholesale  level  by  December  1, and  at  the

retail  level  by January  1.  The mandate  is  expected to  add  six  cents

per  gallon  to wholesale  prices  and  nine  cents  per  gallon to  retail

II-40

prices  in  the  approximately  one-third  of the  national  market  that  is

affected;  as  a result,  the  mandate  is  expected to  add  two  and  three

cents  per  gallon  respectively to  the  national  averages  of  wholesale

and  retailer  prices.  The  price  increase  will  not  appear  in the  PPI

or  CPI,  because  (contrary to  our  earlier expectation)  the  BLS  has

ruled  that  the  mandate  is  a quality  improvement.

Consumer  food  prices  were  unchanged  in October  and  rose  only

slightly  in  November.  Meat  and  poultry  prices  were  down  a bit,  on

net,  over  the  two  months,  and  prices  of  fruits  and  vegetables  rose

moderately.  Prices  for  other  foods  increased about  a tenth  of  a

percent  per  month, on  average.  The  twelve-month  rise  in food  prices

held  steady at  2.4 percent.

Unlike  prices  at  the  earlier  stages  of  processing,  price

increases  for  consumer  commodities  other than  food  and  energy  slowed

a bit  over  the  past  year.  In  November,  they  increased  0.1  percent

after  showing  no  change  a month  earlier.  Apparel  prices  continued

to  fall,  while  car  prices  decreased  0.2  percent  and  truck  prices

were  off  0.7  percent.  In  the  past  year,  however,  new  car  and truck

prices  have  increased  slightly  faster  than  other  consumer  prices,

while  used  car  prices  have  well  outpaced  the  consumer market  basket,

increasing  1.4 percent  in  November  to  a level  6-3/4  percent  above  a

year  ago

Over  the  past  twelve  months,  non-energy  service  prices

increased  3.5  percent,  compared with  1 3.7  percent  rise  over  the

preceding  twelve-month  period.  Owners'  equivalent  rent  and

residential  rent  increased  0.3  percent  in  November,  about  in  line

with  the  pace  over the  past  year. 

Medical  service  prices  increased

0.8 percent  in  November  and  are  up  5  2 percent  over  the  past  twelve

months-  compared  with  a  5.9  percent  increase  during  the  year-earlier

II-41

period.  In  contrast,  auto  finance  charges  have  increased  sharply in

recent  months,  reflecting the  rise  in  interest  rates.

The  increase  in  materials prices  has  been most  notable  among

industrial  commodities.  In  the  past  month, prices  of  industrial

materials  increased sharply,  with the  Journal  of Commerce  Index of

Industrial  Commodities  up  1.1  percent.  In  the  past  year,  this  index

has  moved  up  22  percent.  Among  industrial  metals,  particularly

large  increases  have  been  registered  for  copper  and  steel  scrap.

Although  prices  of tin  and  zinc  fell  in  the  past  month, they  had

posted  large  increases  in  earlier  months.  Cotton  and  rubber prices

have  risen  rapidly  in  recent  months.  Plywood  prices  have  declined

6-1/2  percent  in the  past  month  but  had  increased  rapidly  in  earlier

months.  In  contrast,  gold  and  silver have  traded  lower  in  the  past

month  and  are  down  from their  year-earlier  levels.  Agricultural

prices  have  shown  no  clear  direction  in  the  past  month,  but  they had

generally  fallen  over  the  summer  and  early  fall,  reflecting  bumper

harvests  of  corn  and  soybeans  and  sizable  increases  in  livestock

production.  Coffee  prices  have  weakened  substantially  of  late,

reversing  some  of the  earlier  run-up.

II-42

SPOT PRICES  OF SELECTED  COMMODITIES

--------------- Percent change 1 ---------------

Current 
price 
($) 

1992 

1993 

Nov. 08 2 

To 

Nov. 08 2 

to 
Dec.  13 

Memo:
Year
earlier
to Date

------------- INDUSTRIAL  COMMODITIES------------  -------

Metals

Copper  (lb.)
Steel  scrap  (ton)
Aluminum, London  (lb.)
Lead  (lb.)
Zinc  (lb.)
Tin  (lb.)

Textiles  and  fibers

Cotton  (lb.)
Burlap  (yd.)

Miscellaneous  materials

Hides  (lb.)
Rubber  (lb.)

1.390
143.500
.816
.415
.570
3.996

.800
.292

.905
.773

4.1
1.1
9.9
-4.3
-10.3
6.5

-19.0
46.8
-10.7
3.0
-7.5
-14.1

-3.2 
-9.6 

19.6

8.2

11.4
12.3

1.3
-7.3

50.9
-4.3
66.7
18.4
26.3
25.6

14.5
9.2

17.7
58.7

7.8
7.5
-2.1
1.5
-3.4
-2.8

12.6
.9

-2.7
8.8

66.5
3.2
61.7
23.8
22.2
20.1

34.9
10.2

13.1
72.6

----------------- OTHER COMMODITIES-------------- -------

Precious metals
Gold  (oz.)
Silver  (oz.)
Platinum  (oz.)

Forest products

Lumber  (m. bdft.)
Plywood  (m.  sqft.)

Petroleum

Crude oil  (barrel)
Gasoline  (gal.)
Fuel  oil  (gal.)

Livestock

Steers  (cwt.)
Hogs  (cwt.)
Broilers  (lb.)

U.S.  farm  crops
Corn  (bu.)
Wheat  (bu.)
Soybeans  (bu.)

Other  foodstuffs

Coffee  (lb.)

379.100
4.750
414.000

287.000
365.000

15.650
.469
.488

70.000
32.000
.516

2.170
4.190
5.540

-5.9
-5.7
5.5

16.6
38.8
8.0

47.5 
53.5 

75.8
-6.3

-32.1
20.0

1.4
-2.9
21.9

10.6
10.4
-5.3

-16.1
-11.7
1.1

-25.0
-31.0
-22.4

-7.3
.6
6.1

41.7
5.8

24.5

28.5
49.1
16.4

-3.4
-31.3
-6.0

-29.8
10.4
-20.9

-1.4
-9.6
1.0

-8.9
-6.4

-9.8
-15.2
-4.1

.0
14.3

6.4

7.7
-3.0
.9

-2.0
-6.5
7.1

-34.0
18.5

14.2
30.9
15.7

-3.1
-23.8
-. 8

-21.9

5.5
-18.0

1.465

17.9 

-2.3

182.9

-19.7

132.5

Memo:
Exchange  value  of  the

dollar  (March 1973=100)

89.663

10.1 

3.4

-9.6

4.1

55

-6.5

274

217

to the  last week of the  year indicated and from

Yield on Treasury bill,

3-month 3

5.780

S1.  Changes,  if  not  specified,  are
the  last  week of  the preceding year.

2.  Week of  the November Greenbook.
3.  Changes  are  in basis points.

II-43

COMMODITY  PRICE  INDEXES

PPI  for crude materials 3  

Foods  and feeds 
Energy 
Excluding  food  and  energy 
Excluding  food  and  energy,
seasonally adjusted 

Commodity  Research Bureau

Futures  prices 
Industrial  spot prices 

Nov. 

Nov. 
Nov. 
Nov. 

Nov. 

Nov.  29 
Nov. 22 

Journal  of  Commerce  industrials  Nov.  29 
Nov. 29 

Metals 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 

n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a. 
n.a. 

n.a. 
n.a. 

n.a. 
n.a. 

n.a. 
n.a. 

Dow-Jones Spot 
IMF  commodity index 3  

Metals 
Nonfood agricultural 

Economist  (U.S. dollar index) 

Industrials 

Nov. 29 

n.a. 

n.a. 

Oct. 
Oct. 
Oct. 

Dec.  06 
Dec.  06 

-2.6 
-3.1 
2.4 

1.6 
4.5 

2.4 
-14.4 
0.2 

9.1 
4.4 

-1.6 

-10.6 
0.4 
13.9 

14.4 

3.8 
22.7 

20.3 
29.0 

14.0 

n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 

30.7 
31.3 

n.a. 

n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 

n.a. 

-1.4 
2.4 

1.3 
1.2 

-0.4 

n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 

-1.6 
3.6 

-2.7

-9.1
-5.5
15.4

15.7

5.8
28.6

23.4
38.8

18.5

18.5
30.3
12.7

30.7
39.4

CIBCR,  1994.

Note.  Not seasonally adjusted.  Copyright  for Journal of  Commerce data  is  held by

1.  Change  is  measured  to  end  of  period,  from  last  observation  of  previous  period.
2.  Week of the November  Greenbook.
3.  Monthly observations.  IMF  index  includes  items not  shown separately.
n.a. Not available.

INDEX  WEIGHTS

Energy 
DE 

' Food  Commodities 

Precious  Metals 
ID I

Others'

PPI for crude  materials

CRB  futures

CRB  industrials

Joumal  of Commerce  index

14 

12 

Dow-Jones

[MF  index

Economist

41 

41 

1 

18

57 

14 

14

t100

88

58 

Rs 

60 

17 

25

45

50~

1.  Forest products, industrial metals, and other industrial materials

II-44

Commodity  Price  Measures

I]

I
(1  1

\1 

' 

CRB  Spot  Industrials

Ratio scale,  index 1967=100

Nov. 22

1983  1984 

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995

CRB  Futures

Ratio scale, index  1967=100

Oct. 

Nov.
1994

CRB  Industrials

350

-344

- 320

296

Dec

Oct. 

iI .1 

I 
Nov. 
1994

320 

300 

280

260

240 

220

200

CRB  Futures

Dec.  13

Note. Weekly  data. Tuesdays.  Vertical  ines on small panels  indicate weekot last Greenbook  The Journal ot  Commerce  index is Uasad  almost

entirely on industrial commodities,  with a small weight  given to energy commodities,  and the CRB  spot price index consists entirely ol  iriaoiatrial
commodities,  exluding  energy.  The  CRB futures index gives about a 60 percent weight to tood commodities and  splits the remaining weight (ougNly
equally  among  energy  commodtee,  industrial commodities and precious  metals.  Copyright for Journal of Commeroe  data Is held by CIBCR,  1994.

DOMESTIC  FINANCIAL
DEVELOPMENTS

III-T-1

SELECTED  FINANCIAL MARKET  QUOTATIONS
(Percent except  as  noted)

1

1993 

Oct 
lows 

1994 

Change  to  Dec  13,  1994:

FOMC,* 
Feb  3 Nov  15  Dec  13 

From Oct  93 
lows 

From 
Feb  3 

From FOMC,
Nov 15

Instrument

SHORT-TERM  RATES

Federal  funds

Treasury  bills

3

3-month
6-month
1-year

Commercial  paper

1-month
3-month

Large  negotiable  CDs

1-month
3-month
6-month

4

Eurodollar  deposits

1-month
3-month

3.07 

3.07 

4.75 

5.48

3.01 
3.09 
3.23 

3.13 
3.27 
3.52 

5.28
5.69
6.11

5.78
6.38
6.84

3.13 
3.23 

3.16 
3.25 

5.32 
5.76 

6.13
6.32

3.08 
3.22 
3.23 

3.11 
3.25 
3.41 

5.27
5.71
6.01

6.08
6.33
6.85

3.06 
3.25 

3.06 
3.25 

5.25 
5.75 

6.06
6.31

Bank prime  rate

6.00 

6.00 

7.75 

8.50

INTERMEDIATE- AND  LONG-TERM  RATES

U.S.  Treasury  (constant maturity)

3-year
10-year
30-year

5

Municipal  revenue

(Bond Buyer)

Corporate--A  utility,

recently  offered

Home mortgages

6

FHLMC  30-yr.  fixed  rate
FHLMC  1-yr.  adjustable  rate

4.06 
5.19 
5.78 

4.60 
5.81 
6.31 

7.37 
7.94 
8.09 

7.80
7.83
7.86

3.74
2.64
2.08

5.41

5.49 

7.23 

7.17

1.76

6.79 

7.35 

8.89 

8.78

6.74
4.14

L 

-

6.97 
4.12 

9.19 
6.01 

9.15
6.56

2.41

2.77
3.29
3.61

3.00
3.09

3.00
3.11
3.62

3.00
3.06

2.50

1.99

2.41
2.42

2.41

2.65
3.11
3.32

2.97
3.07

2.97
3.08
3.44

3.00
3.06

2.50

3.20
2.02
1.55

1.68

1.43

2.18
2.44

1989 

1994 

Percentage  change  to  Dec  13:

Stock  exchange  index

Level 

Date 

Low, 

FOMC,* 
Jan.  3  Nov 15 

Dec  13 

Record  high

From 
record 
high 

From
1989 
low 

From FOMC,*
Nov  15

Dow-Jones  Industrial
NYSE  Composite
NASDAQ  (OTC)
Wilshire

3978.36
267.71
803.93
4804.31

1/31/94
2/2/94
3/18/94
a2/94

2144.64
154.00
378.56
2718.59

3829.73
254.84
768.14
4611.07

-6-.61
3715.34 
245.72 
-8.21
719.49  -10.50
-8.06

4416.93 

73.24
59.56
90.06
62.47

-2.99
-3.58
-6.33
-4.21

I

1. One-day  quotes  except  as noted.
2. Average  for  two-week reserve maintenance period  closest to  date  shown.  Last  observation  is

average  to date  for maintenance period  ending  Dec 21,  1994.

3. Secondary market.
4. Bid  rates  for Eurodollar  deposits  at  lla.m.  London time.
5. Most  recent  observation based on  one-day Thursday  quote  and futures  market  index changes.
6. Quotes  for week  ending  Friday  previous to  date  shown.
* Figures  are  as  of the  close  on Nov.  14.  1994.

Selected  Interest Rates

Short-Term

Statement-week  averages

-

I 

Prime  rate  (daily)
Federal  funds
Three-month  Treasury bill

-- 
.......  Discount  rate (daily)

Percent

Daily

FOMC
11/15

Percent

--  10

Prime rate

._.__

Federal funds

Three-month  T-bill

Discount rate

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

I 

tI 
11/18 

11/11 

I 
11/25

1994

t 
12/2 

I
12/9

Long-Term

Percent
-9r

Percent

10

9

Weekly/Daily
FOMC 
111 5  

Mortgage  rate
(weekly)

Corporate  bond
(weekly)

Thirty-year T-bond
(daily)

Ten-year T-note
(daily

11/11 

11/18 

-i 

l 
11/25

lI
12/2 

1994

12/9

1990 

1994
Note.  Statement  weeks are potted through  Dc. 7,  Friday weeks throgh

1993 

1992 

1991 

Dec. 9.

DOMESTIC  FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS

The  System  action announced  after  the  November  FOMC  meeting--a

75  basis  point  increase  in  the  discount  rate  that  was  fully  passed

through to  the  federal  funds  rate--was more  forceful  than  generally

anticipated in  the  markets.  Other  money market  yields  firmed  in

response,  and  major  commercial  banks  promptly  raised  their  prime

rates  by  an  equal  amount,  to  8-1/2  percent.  But  the  large move--and

the  unanimous  discount  rate  vote--evidently was  taken as  a  signal

that  the  Federal  Reserve  was  firmly  committed to  taking  such  steps

as  might  be  needed  to  contain  inflation:  Rates  further  out  the  yield

curve  increased  only  a few basis  points,  and the  thirty-year

Treasury  bond  yield  actually  fell  on  the  day  of  the  policy  action.

Bond  yields  continued  to  move  down  over the  balance  of  the

period,  despite  surprising  and  persistent  strength  of  incoming data.

These  data  were  read  as  suggesting  that  considerably  tighter  policy

was  likely  to  be  needed,  and  short-term  rates  rose  considerably.  In

early  December,  financial  markets  were  disrupted  for  a time  by  the

news  of Orange  County's  difficulties.  Municipal bond  markets  were

affected  by  concerns  that  other  issuers  might  have  similar  problems

and  that  tax-exempt  mutual  funds  would  experience  accelerated

redemptions.  Spreads  on  federal  agency  securities  widened  somewhat

in  response  to  sales  of  agency issues  held  as  collateral  by  Orange

County  creditors,  and the  equities  of such  agencies  fell  sharply.

After  a period  of  several  days,  however,  as  only  scattered  reports

of  other  such  situations  emerged, markets  settled  down.  Mutual

funds  generally  reported  little  change  in  investor  interest,  with

reports  of  unusual  redemptions  limited  to money  funds  that

specialized  in  California  paper.  By  December  13,  both  agency  and

municipal  spreads  had  returned  to  levels  prior  to  the  Orange  County

problems,  although  individual  tax-exempt borrowers,  especially those

III-1

III-2

associated  with the  Orange  County pool  investors,  continued  to

experience  difficulties.  Gross  issuance  in  tax-exempt  markets  also

was  disrupted  only briefly.

More  broadly,  borrowing by  businesses  and  households  has

continued  at  a brisk  pace.  Long-term bond  offerings  by  nonfinancial

firms  remained  fairly weak,  as  these  firms  have  continued  to  display

a  preference  for  short-term financing;  the  latter  was  reflected  in

further  solid  growth of  business  loans  at  banks  and  in  commercial

paper  issuance.  Mortgage  lending  is  estimated  to  have  proceeded

near  its  third-quarter  pace,  supported  by the  firmness  of home  sales

through  October.  Consumer  credit  recorded double-digit  growth again

in  October.

Bank  credit  expanded  at  an  annual  rate  of  3-1/4  percent  in

November,  as  robust  loan  growth  once  again  was  partly  financed by

run-offs  of  security holdings.  M3  growth  continued to  be  supported

by  rapid  expansion  of  large  time  deposits  to  help  fund  bank credit.

M2  rose  a  little  in  November,  the  first monthly  increase  since  July,

lifted  by  the  rapid  growth  of  small  time  deposits  and  retail  money

funds.

Interest  Rates

The  rise  in  short-term  rates  and  drop  in  bond  yields  combined

to  produce  the  flattest  yield  curve  (thirty-year minus  three-month

rate)  since  December  1991.  Contributing to the  upward  pressure on

very  short-term rates  was  the  approach  of year-end.  One-month

commercial  paper  rates,  for  example,  jumped  34  basis  points  on the

day  that  maturity  first  fell  in  1995,  implying  a turn-of-year

premium of  almost  3 percentage  points.  Orange  County's  chapter  9

bankruptcy  filing may  have  added  upward  pressure  on  Treasury yields;

in  particular, dealers'  efforts  to  sell  the  collateral  they  claimed

when  Orange  County  ran  dry  of  funds  may have  affected  the  three-  to

III-3

Upward  Turning  Points in the  Federal  Funds  Rate

Percent

1955 

1960 

1965 

1970 

1975 

1980 

1985 

1990 

1995

Note.  Vertical  lines mark  the onset of sustained  increases in the federal funds rate.

Movement  of Market  Rates
Following Upward  Turning  Points in the  Federal  Funds  Rate

Federal  Funds Rate 

-

Percentage  points 
-4 

1994

.M  Median

1955-1988 

4

3

2

0

i 

0 

I 

,,,,I 

I  I  lga 

i 

* 

2 

4 

6
Months

10 

12

Three-Year  T-Note Yield*

I  I 

*** 

..

I**\

1994

Ratio

I
i

Three-Month  T-Bill  Rate*

-

Ratio
-

'****. 

1994

.

0 

I 

I  I 

2 

4 

a-- 

I 

6
Months

Ten-Year  T-Note Yield*

Median
1955-1988

l 

I

10 

12

Ratio

S 

.

1994

I  -
0 

1 
2 

1 

1 
4 

I 

1 

I 
6 
Months

Median
1955-1988

1 
8 

1 

1 
10 

1

12

I 

I 

2 

0 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

1 

I 

4 

6
Months

Median
1955-1988
I
12

I 
10 

I 

" As a ratio  to the cumulative change  in the  federal funds rate.

III-4

five-year  sector,  where  rates  are up  20  to  40  basis  points  over  the

intermeeting  period.

With  the  November  move,  System  actions  in  1994  have  slightly

outpaced the  median  increase  in  the  federal  funds  rate  in  episodes

of policy  tightening  since  1955  (chart).  In  those  eight  prior

periods,  the  federal  funds  rate  rose  just  over  2 percentage  points

in  the  first  ten  months  of  rising  short-term rates,  compared  with

the  2-1/2  percentage  point  increase  since  February  1994.  It  is  the

market  reaction in  the  wake  of those  policy moves  that  stands  out

more.  Short-term market  rates  rose  by  a larger  amount  in  the  early

stages  of  tightening  this  year  than  the  historical  record  would

suggest.  This  pattern  may  partly  reflect  the  System's  announced

intention  to  move  to  policy  "neutrality" early  this  year,  enabling

markets  to  anticipate  further  actions.  In  addition,  the  incoming

news  suggested  that  aggregate demand  was  especially  strong  and  the

margin  of  slack was  dwindling  rapidly.  More  recently,  though,  the

pass-through to the  three-month Treasury bill  rate,  at  about  75

percent  of  the  total  change  in the  policy  rate,  has  been  similar  to

the  average  experience  over  the  1955-to-1988  period.  Three-  and

ten-year  note  yields  have  about  followed  that  same  pattern:  More  of

the  market  response came  sooner this  time  around,  but  the  reaction

looks  less  anomalous  ten  months  after  the  onset  of  tightening.

Municipal Markets

Revelation  of  the  financial  difficulties  of  Orange  County

dominated municipal  and  other  financial  market  news  in  early

December.  The  Orange  County  investment  pool managed  commingled

assets  of  187  municipalities  and  other  agencies,  including Orange

County.  The  fund  engaged  in  repurchase  agreements  to  lever  its

$7-1/2  billion in  capital  into  $20  billion  in  securities,  mostly

debt  of  federally  sponsored  agencies  (specifically, Fannie  Mae  and

III-5

the  Federal  Home  Loan  Banks).  With the  fund's  management  betting  in

1993  and throughout  1994  that  rates  would  fall  (or  at  least  would

not  rise much),  most  of those  securities  had  maturities  of  five  to

twenty  years.  More  than 40  percent  of  the  fund's  assets  were

structured  notes  with  coupons  that  vary  inversely with  short-term

market  rates.  With interest  rates  rising  fast  and  the  fund  deep  in

the  red,  the  county  and  its  fellow investors  added  to  their  bets

last  summer by  issuing  nearly  $1 billion  in  short-term taxable

notes.

On  December  2, the  county  released  to  the  public  an  estimate

that  its  investment  fund  had  lost  $1-1/2  billion,  or  about  one-

fifth,  of its  value.  More  recent  estimates  place  the  size  of  the

loss  at  upwards  of  $2 billion.  On  December  6, when dealers  became

reluctant  to  roll  over  maturing  repurchase  agreements,  or  demanded

additional  collateral,  and  concerns  grew that  its  own  pool  investors

would  clamor for  their funds,  Orange  County  filed  for  chapter  9

bankruptcy  protection;  it  actually  defaulted  on  $110  million  of

taxable  notes  on  December  8.  With few  exceptions,  dealers,  who held

$13  billion of  collateral  provided  by Orange  County  for money  lent

to  the  investment  pool  under  RP  agreements,  sold  off  those

securities  in  the  secondary market,  although  their  right  to  do  so

under  chapter  9 remains  unclear.  Standard  & Poor's  lowered  its

rating of  the  county to  CCC  from AA-,  and Moody's  suspended  ratings

on  all  noninsured  Orange  County  bonds.

The  reaction to  these  developments  was  widespread.  Municipal

bond  prices  fell;  dealers  bid  for  uninsured  Orange  County  debt  at

deep  discounts,  although  no  trading  has  been  reported,  and  its

insured  debt  traded  for  a while  at  a spread  of  40  basis  points over

other  municipal  securities,  but  such  spreads  have now  dissipated.

Much  of the  debt  issued by California municipalities  is  uninsured,

III-6

Ratio of Tax-Exempt  Yields to Yields on  Treasury
and Corporate Utility  Securities

Monthly

Weekly

Ratio

Treasury

Nov 

Dec

Treasury

Ratio

-

1

S\ 

I 

1  

\ i 

\ 

.

Nov.

S\  Corporate  utility 

V

II 
1980

1982

1984

I 
I 
1986 

I  I 
1988 

I 
1990 

!

1992 

1994

Note.  Weekly data from  Nov. 10  to  Dec.  8.

GROSS  OFFERINGS  OF  MUNICIPAL  SECURITIES1
(Monthly rates,  not  seasonally  adjusted, billions  of  dollars)

1992 

1993 

02 

03 

1994
Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov,

Total  tax-exempt 

22.2 

27.2 

17.0 

16.1 

9.1 

12.0 

12.0

Long-term  2 
Refundings 
New  capital 

18.9 
10.4 
8.5 

23.3 
15.7 
7.6 

13.3 
3.9 
9.4 

11.1 
1.9 
9.2 

7.8 
1.7 
6.1 

10.5 
1.6 
8.9 

10.8
1.4
9.4

Short-term 

3.3 

3.9 

3.7 

5.0 

1.3 

Total  taxable 

.6 

.7 

.4 

.3 

.5 

1.5 

2.4 

1.2

.4

1.  Includes  issues  for  public  and  private  purposes.
2.  Includes  all  refunding  bonds,  not  just  advance  refundings.

III-7

leaving  mutual  funds,  households,  and  other  holders  to  bear  the

brunt  of  any  losses  stemming  from defaults.  But  the  county may

still  decide to make  its  investors  whole, and  some  recoveries  may be

made through  lawsuits  against  brokers  who  sold  securities  to  Orange

County.

With  the  price  of municipal  securities  down,  the  net  asset

value  of tax-exempt money  market  funds  declined.  Reports  of  unusual

outflows  from these  funds,  however,  have  been limited  to  funds  that

specialize in  California  paper.  Several  fund  advisors  have

requested  SEC  permission to  shore up  their  funds'  portfolios  in

order  to  prevent  them  from  "breaking the  buck."

Earlier  in the  intermeeting  period,  the  ratio  of tax-exempt  to

taxable  yields  had  risen  above  91  percent  amid  a large  amount  of

muni  bond  fund  redemptions.  Subsequently,  large  purchases by

insurance  companies  led  to  a rally in municipals,  which  pushed the

ratio  below  90  percent.  The  Orange  County  developments reversed

that  rally,  sending  the  ratio back  up  to  91  percent.  The  ratio  is

at  its  highest  level  in  five  years,  apart  from  a few months  in  late

1993  when heavy  volume boosted  municipal  bond  rates  (chart).  In  the

first  week  of  December,  tax-exempt  bond  funds  experienced modest

inflows,  but  reports  from  a number of  funds  suggest  that  outflows

may have  resumed more  recently.

Gross  issuance  of long-term tax-exempt  debt  remained  light  in

November,  owing  to  a continued  low  level  of  refunding  activity.

Retirements  probably  roughly  offset  gross  issuance  last month,

leaving  the  stock of long-term tax-exempt  debt  about  unchanged.  The

level  of  such  debt  outstanding is  estimated to  have fallen  about  $5

billion  since the  beginning of the year.  Heavy  retirements

scheduled  to  occur  in  December  ensure  a further  run-off  of  long-term

debt  this  month.

III-8

TREASURY FINANCING1
(Total for  period;  billions  of  dollars)

1994 

1994

Item 

Q3 

p 

Q4 

Oct. 

p 

Nov. 

p

Dec.

Total  surplus/deficit  (-) 

-53.4 

-75.2 

-31.4 

-43.4 

-0.4

Means  of  financing deficit:

Net  cash  borrowing/repayments  (-)  37.1 
-3.4 
40.5 
-1.2 
41.7 

Nonmarketable 
Marketable 
Bills 
Coupons 

52.2 
-0.9 
53.1 
29.3 
23.9 

27.1 
-0.6 
27.7 
20.2 
7.5 

35.9 
-. 7 
36.6 
20.2 
16.4 

-10.8
0.3
-11.2
-11.2

.0

Decrease  in  the  cash balance 

15.0 

11.2 

-0.5 

9.8 

1.9

2
Other 

1.2 

11.7 

4.8 

-2.3 

9.3

Memo:
Cash  balance,  end  of  period 

35.9 

24.7 

36.4 

26.6 

24.7

1. Data  reported  on  a payment  basis.
2.  Includes  checks  issued  less  checks  paid,

accrued  items,  and  other

transactions.

p--projected.

Note:  Details  may  not  add  to  totals  because  of  rounding.

NET  CASH BORROWING  OF  GOVERNMENT SPONSORED  ENTERPRISES1
(Billions of  dollars)

Agency 

FHLBs 
FHLMC 
FNMA 
Farm Credit  Banks 
SLMA 

Q1 

1994
Q2 

Q3 

Oct.

5.7 
12.9 
15.3 
-0.7 
5.9 

13.5 
10.4 
11.5 
1.3 
2.3 

13.6 
10.6 
11.4 
0.6 
1.8 

11.5
5.62
2.67
-1.41
.10

1.  Excludes  mortgage  pass-through securities  issued by  FNMA

and  FHLMC.

Treasury  and  Sponsored  Agency Financing

III-9

Yield  spreads  for  federally  sponsored credit  agencies  widened

considerably  over  the  intermeeting period.  Some  market  participants

estimated  that  the  bankruptcy  filing by  Orange  County may  have

caused  spreads  on  short-term instruments to  increase  10  to  15  basis

points,  as  dealers  sold  collateral  backing  Orange  County's

repurchase  agreements.  But  spreads  had  been  widening for  unrelated

reasons  throughout  November.  The  value  of  the  stock  of major

agencies  fell;  the  stocks  of Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie Mac,  in

particular,  dropped more  than  2 percent  on  December  7, the  day after

the  bankruptcy  filing.  These  agencies,  which  grew  rapidly  in  1994,

may  feel  compelled to  scale  back the  aggressive  expansion  of  their

balance  sheet  if the  spreads  remain  wide.

The  staff  anticipates  that  the  Treasury will  finance  the

projected  $79  billion  fourth-quarter  fiscal  deficit  partly by

borrowing  $55  billion  from  the  public  and  by  drawing down  its  cash

balance  by  $9  billion.  With  no  long-term  bond  in  its  midquarter

refunding,  the  Treasury  has  relied heavily  on  bills,  which  are

expected  to  raise  $31  billion  this  quarter.  Since  September,  the

Treasury has  increased the  size  of  the weekly bill  auctions,  from

$23  billion  to  $27  billion,  while  the  sizes  of  the  coupon auctions

have  been  kept  unchanged.  It  also  auctioned  three  cash management

bills,  raising  $35  billion, to  help  cover  seasonal  financial  needs.

Monetary Aggregates  and  Bank Credit

M2  grew at  a  1 percent  annual  rate  in  November--the  first

monthly  increase  since  July.  From the  fourth  quarter  of  1993  to

November, M2  increased at  that  same  rate,  leaving  it  at  the lower

bound  of  its  growth  cone.

The  rise  in M2  last  month was  mostly  accounted  for  by  rapid

increases  in  small  time  deposits  and  retail  money  funds,  whose  rates

III-10

MONETARY  AGGREGATES
(Based on  seasonally adjusted  data,  except  where noted)

Aggregate  or  component 

1994 

1994 

1993 

Q2 

Q3 

Sept 

Oct 

1993:Q4 
to 

Level
(bil  $)
Nov  94  Oct.  94

(pe)

Nov 
(pe) 

Aggregate

Percentage  change  (annual rate)l

1.  Ml
2  M2
3.  M3

Selected  components

4  Currency

5. Demand deposits

1.9 
1 9 
0.7 

10.3 

10  6

13  3 

-2,5

3  0
0.8
1.7

9.1 

1  1 

6  6 

1  5 

9.0 

-6.5

6. Other  checkable deposits

8.4 

-1 1

-0  4

-4  7 

-

1  2

7  M2  minus  M1

-2  3 

2.0 

-0 

3 

-1.1

Savings  deposits
Small  time  deposits
Retail  money  market  funds
Overnight  RPs,  n.s  a.
Overnight  Eurodollars,  n s.a.

29
-10  5
-2.1
21.2
-15  5

13  M3  minus M2

Large time  deposits,  net 4
Institution-only money  market

mutual  funds
Term RPs,  n s.a.
Term  Eurodollars,  n s a

-3.3 

-6.2

-6 

9

-5.4 
18  8 
0  0 

-3.2 

-22.8 
24.6 
16  1 

-6.6
4.4
1  0
22.2
122.9

7.1 

9  2 

-5 8 
10.6 
23.7 

-8.2
8.5
-2-0
25.2
-9.6

12  1 

21  8 

-9  9 
13.2 
11.6 

0-1 

-13 

3

15.6
8.9
17  8
115  7

28.9

28.0

52.9
-1.2
18.4

1148  5
3593  4
4261.2

10% 

349  9

% 

2Y 

' 

-4% 
2 
6% 

21 
49 

2% 

6 

-10 

5% 
16'4 

385  9

404  4

2444  9

1173.4

793  4
365  0
88  9
27  3

667  9

355  0

175  3
101  2
53  0

10 

-7 

-5 

1 

14 
19 
16 
-1 
53 

12 

22 

2 
5 
43 

Memo

18  Monetary base
19  Household  M2 2

10  4
0  1

83 
1  7 

74 
-0 7 

53 
1 

-1 

67
-0.6

9 
2 

8}6 
M 

413  3
3084  9

Average  monthly change  (billions of  dollars) 3

Managed  liabilities  at  commercial

banks  (lines  22  +  23)
Large  time deposits,  gross
Nondeposi  funds

Net  due  to  related  foreign

institutions

Other 5

U.S.  government  deposits  at

commercial banks

12.2 
1.6 
10.7 

8.7 
2.0 

16.8 
4.3 
12.4 

10.3 
2.1 

20.8 
5.5 
15.3 

4  4 
10  9 

-4.2

5.8

-10.0

6

-1 
-8.3

S 

.

982
357
625

214
411

0.2 

-0.4 

-1.1

3.3 

-1.2

2 

.

.

17  3

1. For the years  shown,  fourth  quarter-to-fourth quarter percent  change. For  the  quarters  shown, based  on

quarterly  averages.

2. Sum  of  seasonally  adjusted currency, retail  money  funds,  and other  checkable, savings,  and small  time

deposits.

3. For  years,  "average monthly  change"  is  based on  the  dollar  change  from December  to  December  For  quarters.

it is  based on  the  dollar change  across the  last  months  of  quarters.

4  Net of  holdings  of  money market  mutual  funds,  depository  institutions,  U S. government,  and  foreign banks

and official  institutions.

5. Borrowing  from other  than  commercial  banks  in the  form of  federal  funds  purchased, securities

sold under agreements  to  repurchase,  and other  liabilities  for  borrowed money  (including borrowing  from  the
Federal  Reserve  and unaffiliated  foreign banks,  loan RPs,  and other  minor  items).  Data  are partially  estimate

pe  Preliminary  estimate 

n.s.a 

Not  seasonally adjusted.

III-11

kept  pace with  increases  in  market  rates  in  recent  months,  at  least

until  the  mid-November tightening.  In  addition,  small  time  deposits

have  probably  been buoyed  by  banks'  increased  issuance  of brokered

CDs,  as  indicated by  Call  Report  data  through  September.  Market

sources  suggest that  rates  on  brokered  deposits  have  risen more  than

those  on  nonbrokered  CDs  this  year.  Security dealers  may  be  using

these  instruments  to  lure  customers moving  out  of  mutual  funds,  and

banks  can  bid  up  rates  on brokered  CDs  without  raising  the  structure

of  rates  on their  core  retail  deposit  business.

In  contrast,  rates  on  OCDs  and  saving  deposits  have moved  up

only  slightly  in  recent  months,  considerably widening  the

opportunity  costs  of  such  deposits.  In  consequence, these  liquid

deposit  components  of M2  continued  to  contract  in November.

A  portion  of  the  growth in  M2  in  November may mirror  the  net

redemptions  of  bond  and  stock mutual  funds  (chart).  Outflows  from

bond  funds  apparently  accelerated  in November,  while  inflows  to

equity  funds  slowed  early  in the  month  and  briefly turned  to  out-

flows  around Thanksgiving.  Investors may  have  channeled  some  of

these  mutual  funds  outflows  into  direct  holdings  of  securities,

consistent  with heavy  net  noncompetitive tenders  at  Treasury

auctions  of bills  and  notes  again  in  November.

M3  grew at  a  2 percent  annual  rate  in  November,  a bit  slower

than  in  October.  The  continued  expansion  of this  aggregate  has

positioned  it  well  within  its  annual  range.  Growth  in  the  non-M2

component  of  M3  slowed  from  its  exceptional  October  pace,  as

institution-only money market  mutual  funds,  which had  spurted  in

October, were  about  flat  for  the  month.  Yields  on  these  funds  lag

market  rates,  inducing  some  investors  to  shift  into  direct  holdings

of  the  underlying  instruments  after  the  mid-November tightening.

Growth  of  large time  deposits,  while  slowing  slightly from  October's

III-12

NET  SALES  OF MUTUAL  FUNDS  CLASSIFIED  BY  TYPE
(Billions of  dollars,  monthly  rate,  NSA)

1994 

Memo:
Oct.

Q1 

Q 2 

Q 3 

Aug. 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. e  assets

Total  stock 

International 
Domestic 

Total  bond 

GNMA 
Government 
High-yield 
Tax-exempt 
Income 
Other 

Total  money  fund 

Taxable 
Tax-exempt 

13.7 
6.2 
7.6 

3.7 
-1.6 
-1.1 
0.0 
1.0 
4.9 
0.5 

5.7 
1.9 
3.8 

10.9 
3.0 
8.0 

-0.8 
-1.4 
-1.6 
0.5 
-0.3 
2..2 
-0.2 

-1.9 
-0.7 
-1.2 

11.2 
3.9 
7.3 

-1.3 
-1.0 
-1.5 
0.1 
0.0 
1.7 
-0.6 

3.2 
3.4 
-0.2 

14.5 
5.5 
8.9 

-0.8 
-0.9 
-1.3 
0.3 
-0.2 
1.7 
-0.5 

-10.6 
-10.3 
-0.2 

9.4 
2.8 
6.6 

-2.1 
-1.0 
-1.5 
0.1 
-1.0 
2.1 
-0.9 

11.4 
12.0 
-0.5 

9.5 
3.3 
6.2 

2.2 
1.0 
1.2 

-6.0  -12.0 
-1.8 
-1.3 
-2.1 
-2.4 
-0.5 
-0.3 
-4.7 
-2.0 
-1.2 
0.3 
-0.7 
-1.4 

11.2 
10.5 
0.7 

7.5 
4.9 
2.6 

891.0
170.1
720.8

746.4
56.6
91,5
46.0
236.4
219.0
61.3

597.4
486.2
111.2

e  Estimate.
Source:  Investment  Company  Institute.

Net  Noncompetitive  Tenders

billions  of  dollars

Monthly

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4

1993

1994

Note.  The  series  is a 3-month  moving  average  of total net  noncompetitive tenders.

III-13

brisk  pace,  nevertheless  proceeded  at  an annual  rate  exceeding  20

percent  for  the  third  consecutive month.  The  strength  in  large time

deposits  over  the  last  few months  has  contributed to  the  funding  of

rapid  loan  growth  in  the  face  of  weak  retail  deposits,  compensating

for  the  weakness  in  other managed  liabilities.  To  fund  credit

growth  over much  of  1994,  banks  had  been  relying heavily on managed

liabilities;  although  credit  growth continued,  these  liabilities

declined  in  both  October  and  November.

Bank  credit  grew at  an  annual  rate  of 3-1/4  percent  in

November.  Following  the  same  pattern  since  August,  robust  loan

growth  offset  runoffs  in  security holdings.  Consumer  loans

decelerated to  an  annual  rate  of  7-1/2  percent  from more  than  twice

that  pace  in October,  partly because  of  increased  securitization,

while  the  growth  of  real  estate  loans  accelerated to  7-3/4 percent.

About  half of  the  pickup  in  real  estate  loans  was  accounted  for by

the  purchase  of  a thrift by  a large  commercial bank and  half by  a

slowing  of  the  run-off  in  real  estate  loans  at  branches  and  agencies

of  foreign  banks.

Growth  in  business  loans  remained  robust,  at  a 9-1/2  percent

annual  rate  in  November.  In  addition to  a shift  from  longer-term

sources  of  funds  owing to  relatively high  bond yields,  this  growth

may be  due  in  part  to  a continued  easing  of terms  and  standards  for

commercial  and  industrial  loans,  as  reported by  respondents  to the

November  senior  loan officer  opinion  survey.  Recently  available

data  on loan  rates  from the November  survey  of  terms  of bank

lending, conducted  the  week before  the  most  recent  tightening,  show

a narrowing  of  spreads  for  small  loans,  while  spreads  remained

narrow for  larger  loans  (chart).

In  the last  several  senior  loan  officer  surveys,  banks  have

attributed  their  easing of  terms  and  standards  to  increased

III-14

COMMERCIAL  BANK  CREDIT  AND  SHORT-  AND  INTERMEDIATE-TERM  BUSINESS  CREDIT1
(Percentage  change  at  annual  rate, based on  seasonally adjusted  data)

Type  of  credit

1. Total  loans and securities

2.  Securities

3. 

U.S. government

4. 

Other

5.  Loans

Dec. 
1992 
to  Dec. 
1993 

5.3

8.6

9.6

4.8

4.0

6. 

Business

-1.8

10.1

1994 
Q2 

1994 
Q3 

1994 
Sep 

1994 
Oct 

1994 
Nov 

Level,
Nov
1994
($billions)

Commercial bank credit

5.8

6.8

6.3

2.6

19.3

5.5

-3.4

-6.1

5.9

11.2

11.5

3.4

-5.2

-9.8

10.7

6.9

8.5

9.3

2.8

3.2

3,294.9

-12.0

-9.2

949.9

-19.9

-13.7

719.5

13.2

9.0

11.3

5.8

19.0

50.3

5.8

230.5

8.3

2,345.0

9.5

7.7

7.6

20.0

638.7

989.9

444.6

73.3

4.5

9.0

5.4

9.6

13.4

18.2

13.7

35.8

-34.5

-36.7

-92.8

-.

7

-7.0

21.8

15.1

-18.5

4.9

198.5

Short-  and intermediate-term business  credit

7. 

Real estate

8. 

Consumer

9. 

Security

10. 

Other

11.  Business  loans net  of bankers

-2.1

9.7 

11.6

8.6 

12.6 

10.8

630.2

acceptances

12.  Loans  at  foreign branches2

13.  Sum of  lines  11 and 12

14.  Commercial paper issued by

nonfinancial firms

-12.1

-2.5

4.4

18.8

10.0

-9.2

17.9

11.7

11.0

15.  Sum of  lines  13  and 14

-1.2

6.2

11.7

10.4

14.9

-12.2

-13.3

-3.9

-11.8

-35.8

21.0

-36.1

5.3

22.7

8.9

15.8

10.9

32.8

10.6

22.8

12.8

n.a.

652.9

160.7

813.5

19.5

5

5

1.3

-. 7

13.5

7.2

7.9

10.1

22.0

13.2

17.0

14.8

n.a. 

343.9

n.a.  1,168.3  5

16. Bankers acceptances, U.S.

trade-related 3,4

17.  Loans  at  finance  companies4

18.  Total  (sum of  lines  15, 16,

and 17)

1

1.  Except  as  noted,  levels  are  averages  of Wednesday  data  and  percentage  changes  are  based  on  aver-
ages  of  Wednesday  data;  data  are  adjusted  for  breaks  caused  by  reclassification;  changes  are measured
from  preceding  period  to  period  indicated.

2.  Loans  to  U.S.  firms  made  by  foreign  branches  of  domestically  chartered  banks.
3.  Acceptances that  finance  U.S.  imports, U.S. exports, and domestic  shipment and storage of

goods.

4.  Changes  are  based  on  averages  of  month-end  data.

5. October 1994.
n.a.  Not  available.

III-15

competition.  This  relatively more  aggressive  lending  behavior  may

reflect  the  improved  quality  of  bank balance  sheets.  The  September

Call  Report  data  show  continued  sharp  declines  in  delinquency  and

charge-off  rates  for  all  three major  loan  types  (chart,  page  16),  as

well as  a preservation  of  comfortable  capital  ratios.  Indeed,  this

relaxation  of  standards  on  business  lending  stands  in  contrast  to

previous  episodes  of monetary  tightening  (chart, below).

Banks'  holdings  of  securities  declined  at  a  9-1/4  percent

annual  rate  in  November  after  having fallen  at  a  rate  of  12  percent

in  October.  In  both  months,  a significant  part  of  the  drop

reflected  declines  in  the  market  value  of  securities  that  banks  mark

to  market.  A  little  over  half  of  securities  at  domestic  banks  are

marked  to  market--all  of  those  held  in  trading  accounts,  plus  those

held  in  investment  accounts  that  are  classified  as  available  for

sale.

Quarterly

Net  Percentage  Tightening  Standards  For  C&I  Loans

Percent

80

60

-20

-

-

I 
1967 

g  I 

I 
I 
1970 

I 

I 
1 
1973 

-

I 

I 
1976 

I 

I1 

I 

I 

1979 

I 

I  P 
1982 

I 
I 
-- 
1985 

I 

I 

I 
I 
1988 

I 
I 
1991 

I 

-20

-
I  -

1994

Note.  Vertical  lines  mark the onset  of sustained increases  in the federal  funds rate.

III-16

Loan  Rate Spreads,  by  Loan Size
From the Survey  of  Terms  of Bank  Lending

Basis points

-- 

500

Under  $100  thousand

$100  thousand  to $1  million  V 

"

'

''

""

''

''  '

''

$1  million and  over

-1  200

-I 

4'

I 

__

I

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990

Note.  Spread  over intended  federal funds rate,  Q4 data are preliminary.

'-4 

*--

1994

Call  Report  Data  on  Delinquency and  Charge-Off  Rates

Delinquency  Rates,  by Type  of Loan 

Percent

9

8

Charge-Off  Rates, by  Type of Loan

Percent

Real  estate

\ 

: 

l 

J  Al

AA: 

--

Consumer

-5

4

I 

I 
1987 

I 

I 

I 

I 

2  1

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

1985 

1987 

1989 

1991 

1993

Business  Finance

III-17

While  lending  by  banks  and  commercial  paper  issuance was  brisk

in  November,  public  bond  issuance by  nonfinancial  firms  remained

fairly  subdued.  The  $6-3/4  billion  pace  of  bond  issuance  last  month

was  more than  50  percent  below the  average  monthly  rate  in  1993,

when many  firms  satisfied  their  long-term  funding needs  by locking

in  relatively  low  interest  rates.  The  rise  in  bond  rates  has

depressed  bond issuance  this  year  and has  reduced  considerably the

average maturity  of  nonfinancial  bond  issues  (chart).

Although  yields  on most  corporate bonds,  from  investment  grade

to  junk,  have  remained  close  to  those  on  Treasuries,  spreads  on junk

bonds  of  the  lowest  quality widened  considerably  in November.

Weighted  Average  Maturity of  Domestic  Nonfinancial  Corporate Bond  Issuance*

Quarterly

Years

Q3 

-13

17

16

15

14

12

Oct.-Nov.  Avg

---  11

10

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

Source:  Securities Data Corp.
*  Excludes medium-term  notes.

III-18

GROSS  OFFERINGS OF  SECURITIES  BY U.S. CORPORATIONS 1
(Billions of dollars;  monthly rates,  not  seasonally  adjusted)

Type of  security 

1992 

1993 

Q2 

Q3 

Sept. 

Oct.p  Nov.p

All  U.S.  corporations 

Stocks2  
Bonds 

40.84 
7.04 
33.80 

53.20 
9.43 
43.77 

43.29 
5.50 
37.79 

33.22 
4.15 
29.07 

31.00 
4.42 
26.58 

29.98 
3.38 
26.60 

34.65
5.85
28.80

1994

Nonfinancial  corporations
Stocks 2  

Sold  in  U.S. 
Utility 
Industrial 
Sold  abroad 

Bonds 

Sold  in U.S. 
Utility 
Industrial 

Sold abroad 

By quality 3

Aaa  and Aa 
A  and  Baa 
Less  than  Baa 
Unrated or  rating  unknown 

Financial  corporations
Stocks2  

Sold  in  U.S. 
Sold abroad 

Bonds 

Sold  in  U.S. 
Sold  abroad 

4.42 
4.03 
.87 
3.16 
.39 

13.67 
12.83 
5.33 
7.50 
.84 

2.18 
7.74 
2.86 
.09 

2.62 
2.51 
.11 

5.18 
4.91 
1.05 
3.82 
.27 

16.19 
15.55 
7.34 
8.21 
.64 

2.56 
8.70 
4.17 
.09 

4.31 
4.06 
.25 

3.36 
3.17 
.44 
2.73 
.19 

6.91 
5.96 
1.90 
4.06 
.96 

.59 
3.33 
1.99 
.01 

1.79 
1.65 
.20 
1.45 
.14 

5.82 
5.01 
1.08 
3.93 
.81 

.41 
3.59 
.93 
.00 

2.33 
2.03 
.30 
1.73 
.30 

5.78 
5.38 
1.46 
3.92 
.39 

.98 
3.33 
1.07 
.00 

1.81 
1.77 
.08 
1.69 
.04 

6.33 
5.00 
1.20 
3.80 
1.33 

.80 
3.66 
.54 
.00 

2.14 
1.98 
.15 

2.36 
1.80 
.56 

2.09 
1.32 
.77 

1.57 
1.52 
.05 

4.53
4.03
.67
3.36
.51

6.67
5.80
2.20
3.60
.87

1.88
2.40
1-53
.00

1.32
1.30
.02

20.13 
18.67 
1.46 

27.58 
25.02 
2.56 

30.87 
26.79 
4.08 

23.25 
20.27 
2.98 

20.81 
17.95 
2.85 

20.27 
17.00 
3.27 

22.13
18.20
3.93

By quality 3

Aaa  and  Aa 
A  and  Baa 
Less  than  Baa 
Unrated  or  rating  unknown 

1.55 
6.77 
.31 
.04 

1.78 
9.01 
.49 
.08 

6.12 
9.66 
.17 
.11 

2.56 
7.44 
.14 
.00 

1.26 
7.39 
.20 
.00 

1-85 
6.21 
.20 
.00 

1.65
7.10
.00
.00

1.  Securities  issued  in  the  private  placement market  are not  included.  Total

reflects gross  proceeds  rather  than par value  of  original discount  bonds.

2.  Excludes  equity  issues  associated with  equity-for-equity swaps  that  have

occurred  in  restructurings.

3.  Bonds  categorized according  to  Moody's  bond  ratings,  or  to  Standard &  Poor's

if  unrated by  Moody's.  Excludes mortgage-backed  and  asset-backed bonds.

p  Preliminary.

III-19

Several  planned  issues  of  junk bonds  have  been  withdrawn  in  recent

weeks,  and  the  deals  that  were  completed  generally  required higher

coupons  than  first  anticipated  or  additional  equity  to  attract

investors.  The  high-yield market  remains  particularly wary of

unseasoned  and  lower-quality  issuers.

Gross  public  equity issuance  by  nonfinancial  corporations

increased  to  $4-1/2  billion  in November,  up  sharply  from the  anemic

pace  that  had  prevailed  since  midsummer,  and  the  issuance  thus  far

in  December  has  slackened  only  slightly.  Despite  this  pickup  in

gross  issuance,  spurred  by  increases  in  both initial  public

offerings  and  seasoned  issues,  net  equity  issuance  is  expected to  be

negative  again  in the  fourth  quarter,  reflecting  another  slug  of

merger-related  share  retirements.

Merger  activity  has  continued  heavy  in  recent  weeks.  Since  the

November  FOMC meeting,  eight  mergers  of  nonfinancial firms  have been

announced  in  which the  target  company  was  valued  in the  neighborhood

of  $1 billion.  Three  of these transactions  are  structured  as  stock

swaps,  and  the  other  five  involve  equity  retirements,  which  will  be

debt  financed  to  some  degree.  So  far  this  year,  $70  billion  of

large  nonfinancial mergers  (those with  targets  valued  at  $1 billion

or  more)  have  been completed,  and  deals  valued  at  another  $30

billion  have been  announced  for  later  this year  or  early next  year.

By  comparison,  only  $22  billion  of  large  nonfinancial mergers  were

completed  in  1993.

Issuance  of  commercial  paper by  nonfinancial  companies  has

continued  to  be  robust  on  net,  largely to  provide  funding  for merger

activity.  Nevertheless,  strong corporate  profits  reportedly  enabled

some  firms  to  pay  down  outstanding  paper--including  paper  that  was

issued  earlier  to  finance  acquisitions.  Further,  cash  from balance

III-20

S&P 500  Price-Earnings  Ratio

....  ..  .... 

Ratio

35

30

20

15

10

5

1958 

1963 

1968

1973 

1978 

1983

III-21

sheet  restructurings  and  asset  sales  reportedly was  used to  reduce

commercial  paper  outstanding.

Recently  released  reports  on corporate  earnings  for the  third

quarter  have  been strong  on  the  whole  and  generally  have  come  in

above  analysts'  forecasts.  Nonetheless,  over the  intermeeting

period,  broad  indexes  of  stock  prices moved  down  3 to  6-1/2  percent,

as  investors  apparently were  lured  away  from equities  by the  higher

rates  on  fixed-income  instruments  and  by the  potential  for  some

slowdown  in the  growth  of  corporate  earnings.  At  the  end  of

November,  the  ratio  of the  Standard  and  Poor's  500  price  index to

the  earnings  of  companies  in  the  index  over the  previous  twelve

months  stood  at  about  16-1/2,  the lowest  level  during  the  current

expansion  (chart).

Mortgage Markets

Contract  rates  on  thirty-year  fixed-rate  conventional  mortgages

climbed  to  their  highest  levels  since  late  1991  after  the  November

FOMC meeting but  subsequently  edged  down  and,  on  net,  are  little

changed  from the  November meeting.  Initial  rates  on  adjustable-rate

mortgages  indexed  to  the  one-year  Treasury  constant  maturity  yield

are  up  about  55  basis  points,  somewhat  less  than  the  one-year

Treasury  benchmark and  adding to  the  already  large  teaser  discounts.

As  a result,  the  FRM-ARM  initial  rate  spread has  narrowed  to  260

basis  points,  around  the  levels  prevailing  in  September  1993.  The

ARM  share  of  new  conventional  loan  originations  moved  up  to  49

percent  in October,  which was  the  highest  ARM share  since May  1989

(chart).

Upward  adjustments  to  ARM rates  this year  are  estimated  to  have

added  less  than  $5 billion,  on net,  to  annual  household mortgage

interest  costs,  while  interest  rate  adjustments  on  home  equity  lines

contributed  about  half as  much to  these  costs.  The  increase  in

III-22

FRM-ARM  Spread  and  ARM  Origination Proportion
(Not seasonally  adjusted)

Percent

Basis points

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

Note.  ARM  origination proportion  data from  Federal  Housing Finance Board.

Issuance  of Agency  Mortgage  Pass-Through

Securities

(Monthly;  not seasonally adjusted)

Billions  of dollars

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

III-23

these  interest  costs  has  been  partly  offset,  however,  by  further

savings  on  FRMs  in  1994,  something  over  $3 billion,  associated  with

the  large  volume  of  refinancings  earlier  this  year.

In  the  secondary  mortgage market,  gross  issuance  of pass-

throughs  by  the  agencies  slipped  to  about  $20  billion  in  October,

and  net  issuance  totaled  $4.8 billion,  near  September's  pace  but

substantially  below January's  peak of $17  billion  (chart).  Spreads

of  newly  originated  fixed-rate  mortgage pass-through  securities  over

Treasuries  have  increased  in  recent  weeks,  owing  to  the  flatter

yield  curve  and  uncertainty  surrounding the  Orange  County

developments.

Total  mortgage debt  outstanding  grew at  an  estimated  5-1/4

percent  annual  rate  in the  third  quarter,  as  all  four  property

categories  registered  positive  growth.  Residential  mortgage debt

outstanding  on  single-family  dwellings  grew at  an  annual  rate  of

roughly  6-1/4  percent,  while the  comparable  figure  for multifamily

dwellings  is  2-1/2  percent.  Farm mortgage debt  outstanding

increased  at  about  a 4-1/2  percent  annual  rate,  and  outstanding debt

on  nonfarm,  nonresidential  properties  expanded  at  1-1/4  percent,  the

second  consecutive quarter  of  growth  after  3 years  of decline.

Compared  with previous  cycles,  growth  in  total  mortgage  debt  in

the  current  expansion  has  been weak, owing both  to  the  runoff in

debt  outstanding on  income properties  and to  the  sluggish  growth in

single-family mortgage  debt  outstanding.  Historically,  growth  in

the  latter  debt  category has  tended  to  rise  sharply  after  cyclical

troughs,  reach  a local peak  around mid-cycle,  and  then  decline,

usually  bottoming  out  around  the  end  of  each  economic  downturn

(chart).  In  the  most  recent  cycle,  however,  single-family  mortgage

debt  has  failed to  register  the  spurt  in  growth that  has

characterized  previous  expansions,  despite  relatively  strong  housing

III-24

Growth  of  Single-Family  Mortgage  Debt  Outstanding
and Single-Family  Housing  Construction Expenditures

Billions of dollars

160

Percent

.. Quarterly 

;; 

;;::: 

: : 
i: 

::; 
: 
::: 

S::: 

Construction  exp.e.nditu

saar (left scale)

,--  - - "  -v' 

-:::: 

'- 

:V 

Mortgage  debt, ns&:(right  scale)

1960  1962  1964  1966  1968  1970  1972  1974  1976 1978  1980  1982  1984  1986 1988  1990  1992  1994

* Four-quarter  percent change.

Change  in Household  Mortgage  Debt
(Quarterly;  seasonally adjusted  annual rate)

Billions of  dollars

Actual

r\
It

;I

Ij

I 

Fitted/

1972 

1974 

1976 

1978 

1980 

1982 

1984 

1986 

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994

*Fined  through  1992:Q4.

III-25

activity,  and  has  consistently  fallen  short  of  model-based  forecasts

(chart).  Anecdotal  reports  of  a  pickup  in  the  number  of  borrowers

making  additional  principal  payments  on  their  outstanding mortgages

may  provide  part  of  the  explanation  for  the  unusually  slow  growth  of

home mortgage  debt.

The  Federal  Housing  Finance  board  announced  last  month that  the

national  average  single-family  house price  was  $141,900  for  October

1994,  down  from $144,000  a  year  earlier.  Normally,  the  percentage

change  in  the  national  average  home  purchase  price  as  reported  in

the  FHFB's  October  interest  rate  survey  is  used  by  Fannie  Mae  and

Freddie  Mac  to  determine  the  conforming  loan  limit;  that  is,  the

maximum size  of home  loans  that  they  will  purchase  or  securitize.

But,  despite  the  1.5  percent  drop  in  the  home  price  index, both

agencies  have  announced  that  the  current  limit  of  $203.150  will be

retained.  This  would be  only  the  second  time  since  the  statutory

formula  was  established  in  1973  that  the  conforming loan  limit

remained the  same  for  three  consecutive  years;  the  first  such

episode  occurred  in  the  1975-1977  period, when  the  limit  remained  at

$42,000.

Consumer  Installment  Credit

Growth  in  consumer  installment  credit  remained  brisk in

October,  at  an  annual  rate  of  16  percent,  slightly above  the  third-

quarter  average.  Revolving  credit  registered  an  18  percent  annual

rate  of  increase,  and  the  large  "other"  category also  expanded

rapidly.  After  a  very  strong  September,  growth  in  auto  credit

moderated to  an  annual  rate  of  11  percent.

Interest  rates  on  consumer  loans  at  banks  rose  between the

August  and November  surveys,  as  they  have  throughout  1994,  but  by

considerably  less  than  yields  on  Treasury  securities  of  similar

III-26

GROWTH OF  CONSUMER CREDIT
(Percent change;  seasonally  adjusted  annual  rate)

Type  of  credit 

1994 

1994 

Memo:
Outstanding
Oct.  1994
(Billions

Installment 

Auto 
Revolving 
Other 

1992 

1993 

H1 

.4 
-. 7 
4.9 
-3.3 

8.6 
9.5 
11.9 
3.8 

13.5 
15.2 
15.0 
9.2 

0 3 r 

15.2 
15.3 
17.3 
12.4 

14.3 
21.1 
5.4 
17.3 

15.8 
11.1 
18.2 
19.0 

Sept.r 

Oct.p 

of  dollars)

Noninstallment 

6.4 

-4.9 

-1.8 

-8.7 

16.1 

.8 

Total 

.8 

7.7 

12.5 

13.8 

14.4 

15.0 

r  Revised.
p  Preliminary.

891.6
318.1
327.7
245.8

51.6

943.2

INTEREST RATES  ON  CONSUMER LOANS
(Annual percentage  rate)

Type  of  loan 

1991 

1992 

1993 

May 

Aug. 

At  commercial  banks
New cars  (48  mo.) 
Personal  (24  mo.) 
Credit  cards 

At  auto  finance  cos.

2

11.1 
15.2 
18.2 

9.3 
14.0 
17.8 

8.1 
13.5 
16.8 

7.8 
13.0 
16.2 

8.4 
13.3 
16.3 

1994

Oct. 

.. 
... 
...

Nov.

8.8
13.6

New  cars 
Used  cars 

12.4 
15.6 

9.9 
13.8 

9.5 
12.8 

9.9 
13.5 

10.3 
13.9 

10.4 
14.0 

...
...

1. Average  of  "most
the  first week  of  the

common"  rate  charged  for  specified  type  and  maturity  d
middle month  of  each  quarter.

uring

2. For  monthly data,  rate  for  all  loans  of  each  type  made  during the  month

regardless  of maturity.

Note:  Annual  data  are  averages  of  quarterly  data  for  commercial  bank  rates  and

of monthly  data  for  auto  finance company  rates.

III-27

New-Car  Loan  Interest  Rates  and  Spreads

New-Car  Rate

Percent

20

1976 

1979 

1982 

1985 

1988 

1991 

1994

Spread:  New-Car  Rate  Minus 3-Year  Treasury

.

... :.::...7.
.. ..-..

10

A. ' 

/\.:.: 

....

-7.515

.......
... .... .. ..-.. 

..... 
. . . .

..
.

1976 

1979

1982 

1985 

1988

1994

III-28

maturity,  and  they  remain  low by  historical  standards.  Rates  on  48-

month  new-car  loans  were  up  34  basis  points  to  8.75  percent,  and

rates  on  unsecured  personal  loans  rose  26  basis  points  to  13.59

percent,  while  yields  on  three-year  Treasury securities  climbed  94

basis  points  over  the  same  period. 

The  spread  between  rates  on

newly  originated  new-car  loans  and  yields  on  three-year  Treasuries

has  dropped  from  400  basis  points  early  last  year  to  130  basis

points  most  recently  (chart).  The  narrowing  spreads  between

consumer  and  Treasury  market  rates  reflect,  in  part,  a typical  lag

in  consumer  rates,  which  tend  to  track  the more  sluggish movements

in  lenders'  costs  of funds  but  are  also  consistent  with an  easing  of

banks'  lending  standards.

1. Credit  card  rates  were  not  reported in  the  latest  survey.  A
new  survey for  credit  card  rates  was  initiated  in November  that  will
better  reflect  the  broader  spectrum  of  rates  offered than the
previously  reported  "most  common  rate."  Results  of  the  new survey
are  expected to  be  available in  mid-January.

GROWTH  OF  THE  CREDIT AND  MONETARY AGGREGATES  IN  1994

APPENDIX

Summary

Growth  in  M1  and M2  slowed  in  1994  while  growth in M3  and the

broad  credit  aggregates  rose  this  year  at  least  as  rapidly  as  in
1993.  Of particular  note were  changes  in  the  composition of  asset
flows  which were  greatly  affected by  the  rise  in interest  rates  this
year.  Higher  long-term interest  rates  induced  borrowers  to  shift
into  shorter-term or  floating  rate  obligations;  lenders,  concerned
about  future  capital  losses,  seemed eager  to  reduce  their  exposure
to  long-term market  instruments thereby accommodating,  and  perhaps
even  encouraging, the  change  in borrowers'  preferences.  A byproduct
of the  rise  in  market  interest  rates  and  the  deceleration of M1  was
a sharp  weakening  of  reserve  aggregates.

Total  debt  of nonfinancial  sectors  increased  5-1/4  percent
through  November--the  same  as  in  1993--leaving  it  in  the  lower  half
of  its  monitoring  range.  A  slower  expansion of  federal  debt  this
year  offset  a pickup  in  the  debt  growth of  nonfederal  sectors  from 4
percent  in  1993  to  5 percent  in  1994.

Business  borrowing was  boosted  by  a  rising  financing  gap  and  a
surge  in  merger  and  acquisition activity.  However,  the  weakness  in
bond  and  equity markets  led  firms  to  shift  their  credit  demands
toward  shorter-term debt  such  as  commercial  paper  and  bank  loans.
Households,  in  turn,  redirected  mortgage borrowing  into  adjustable
rate  loans,  and mortgage  debt  continued  to  expand  at  a moderate  pace
despite  the backup  in  rates.  Households  also  greatly  increased
usage  of  consumer  credit.  The  change  in  business  and  household
borrowing  may have  been encouraged  by bank behavior:  Survey
evidence  indicated  continued relaxation  of  standards  and  nonprice
terms  of  credit  for  business  loans,  and  rates  on  consumer  credit
lagged  the  rise  in  market  rates.  Bank  credit  overall  grew  at  a 6-
1/2  percent  pace  through November,  with  bank  loans  advancing
7-1/4  over  the  same  period.

Depositories  elected  to  meet  increased  loan  growth primarily

through  sales  of  government  securities  and  reliance  on wholesale
funds.  The  shift  toward  wholesale funding  in  the  form of  large  time
deposits  helped  push M3  growth up  to  1-1/4  percent  through  November.
This  was  in  the  lower half of  the  Committee's  range,  and  somewhat
faster  than in  1993.  Banks  were  reluctant to  raise  retail  deposit
rates,  however,  and the  resulting  rise  in  the  opportunity cost  of
holding  money  constrained  M2  growth to  1 percent  this  year--a  bit
below the  pace  in  1993  and  at  the  lower  bound  of  its  target  range.
The  sluggish  expansion of M2  was  quite  consistent  with  long-run
historical  relationships  and,  in  contrast to  1992  and  1993,  was  not
a consequence  of  unusually  large  portfolio  shifts  into  mutual  funds.
Higher  opportunity costs  produced a  sharp  deceleration  in M1  growth
from  10-1/2  percent  in  1993  to  2-1/4  percent  through November  of
this  year.

Domestic  Nonfinancial  Debt  Growth

Although changes  in  the  growth  of the  broad  debt  aggregates

were  rather modest,  rising long-term  interest  rates  produced  some
notable  shifts  in  the  underlying  pattern  of  credit  flows.  Falling
bond  prices  and  greater market  uncertainty  led  households  to  scale

III-A-1

III-A-2

back their  holdings  of bond  mutual  funds  in  favor  of  investments
that  posed  less  risk  of  capital  loss.  Outflows  from bond  mutual
funds  began  in  February  and  continued  at  a  rapid  pace  through
November.  A  portion  of  the  outflow  from bond  funds  likely  helped
bolster  inflows  to  money  funds  and  bank  retail  certificates  of
deposit  in M2.  In  addition,  short-term Treasury  securities  appeared
to  be  a popular  safe  haven  for  investors  fleeing bond  mutual  funds.
Indeed,  net  noncompetitive  tenders  for  Treasury  bills  averaged  $1.2
billion  per  month  through November,  the  highest  level  in  more than  a
decade.

Households made  adjustments  on  the  liability side  of  the
balance  sheet  as  well.  The  pace  of mortgage  refinancing  fell
sharply  toward  the  end  of  1993  and  was  further  depressed by  the
increase  in  long-term  rates  this  year.  Nonetheless,  total  household
mortgage  debt  continued  to  expand;  ARMs  became  increasingly  popular,
rising  to  nearly  half  of  originations,  with  many mortgage  lenders
offering  attractive  terms  relative  to  those  on  fixed-rate  mortgages.
Consumer  credit  accelerated  as  household  spending  on  consumer
durables  strengthened.  In  addition,  convenience usage  of credit
cards  likely  increased with  the  proliferation  of  cards  offering
incentives  tied  to  transaction volumes.

In  the  business  sector,  declines  in  bond  and  stock prices
sparked  a  change  in  funding  patterns.  Bond  and  equity  issuance  fell
off  sharply  during  the  year  from the  extremely heavy pace  in  1993.
In  the  face  of weak investor  demand  and  higher  interest  rates,  junk
bond  offerings,  in  particular, were  depressed.  Stronger  earnings
allowed  many  firms  to  finance  a large  portion  of their  capital
outlays  with  internal  funds.  In  addition, many  firms  turned  to
shorter-term instruments  for  their  external  financing  needs.
Commercial  paper  grew rapidly  in  the  second  half  of the  year,  while
bank  loans  to  businesses  increased  for  the  first  time  since  1990,  in
part  reflecting  a more  accommodative  stance  by bank  lenders.  A
portion  of the  rise  in commercial  paper  and  business  loans  was
associated  with a  resurgence  of merger  activity  during  the  year.  In
addition,  lending by  finance  companies  accelerated  sharply  over  the
year,  paced  by  auto-related loans  and  equipment  leasing.

In  the  state  and  local  sector,  tax-exempt  bond  issuance was

also  depressed  by  the  rise  in interest  rates.  Much  of  the  proceeds
of  new  tax-exempt  bonds  in  recent years  had  been targeted  to
refinance  higher-cost  debt  issued  in  1980s.  Refunding offerings
subsided  early this  year,  as  the  amount  of  bonds  eligible  for
advance  refunding dwindled  and  borrowing  costs  rose.  The moderate
pace  of new  offerings,  coupled with  an unusually  large  volume  of
bond  retirements,  will  result  in  a contraction  in  outstanding long-
term tax-exempt  debt  is  projected to  decline  this  year.

Depository Credit  Growth

Bank credit  expanded  at  a 6-1/2  percent  pace  from the  fourth

quarter  of  1993  through November--the  fastest  rate  of  growth  since
1989.  Indeed,  through October,  a little more  than  30  percent  of the

1. Individuals  can  purchase Treasury  securities  at  auction  by
submitting  a noncompetitive  tender through  a Federal  Reserve  Bank  at
no  cost.  In  addition,  they  can  buy Treasury  securities  through  a
bank or  brokerage  firm  for  a modest  fee.  The  data  on  noncompetitive
tenders  thus measure  only a portion  of  the total  retail  demand for
Treasury  securities.

III-A-3

increase  in  total  domestic  nonfinancial  debt  was  intermediated
through  the  banking  sector--the  largest  share  since  the  1 970s.

Business  and  consumer  loans  were the  fastest  growing  components

of  bank  credit,  with the  increase  in  business  loans  especially
striking  following the  previous  three  years  of  runoffs.  Responses
to  survey  questions  throughout  the  year  indicated  that  many banks
were  easing underwriting  standards  and  nonprice  terms  for  such
loans.  Moreover,  data  on  bank  loan  pricing  indicate that  spreads  of
bank loan  rates  over  Treasuries  held  roughly  constant  over  the  year
despite  the  strength  of  loan  demand,  remaining well  below levels
prevailing  earlier  in  the  1990s.  Continued  declines  in delinquency
and  chargeoff  rates  for  all  major  loan  categories  likely  contributed
to  banks'  renewed  interest  in lending.  Banks  were  also  eager  to
book  consumer  loans  as  suggested  by historically  low spreads  of
rates  on  such  loans  over  benchmark  rates.  Through November,  growth
of  consumer  loans  at  banks  strengthened to  about  14-1/2  percent  at
an  annual  rate--comparable to  the  growth  of  overall  consumer  credit
--even  as  securitization  of consumer  loans  picked up.

The  measured  change  in bank  securities  during the  year was
significantly  affected by two  changes  in  accounting  standards, which
on  net  added  perhaps  three-quarters  of  a percentage  point to  the
growth  of bank  credit. 
banks  appeared  to  rely  on  liquidations  of  U.S.  Treasury  securities
to  make  room for  new business  and  consumer  loans,  especially  in the
second  half  of  the  year.  Through November,  growth  of  total bank
securities  slowed  to  5 percent  compared  with 8-1/2  percent  last
year.  Growth  of  Treasury  securities  was  slightly  negative  through
November.

Aside  from these  accounting  changes,

The  long-running  contraction  of the  S&L  industry  drew to  a

close  in  the  first  quarter, tending  to  buoy  growth of  depository
credit.

M3  Growth

Helping to  fund  the  pickup  in depository  credit,  M3  expansion

picked  up  this  year  to  1-1/4  percent,  comfortably within  its  0 to  4
percent  annual  target  range.  With M2  deposits  weak, domestic  banks
issued  large time  deposits to  fill  a portion  of  their  funding  gap.
Growth  of  large time  deposits  for  the year  is  expected  in  the
neighborhood  of  6-1/4  percent,  marking  the  first  yearly  increase  in
this  component  since  1989.  In  an  effort to  avoid  deposit  insurance
premiums,  much  of the  past  year's  large  time  deposit  issuance  took
the  form of  senior bank notes.  Another  substantial  portion  of
domestic  banks'  funding  gap  was  filled  by borrowing  from  (or
reducing lending  to)  their  foreign  offices--an  item not  included  in
M3.  The  reasons  for this  trend  are  not  clear, but  may  be  related  to

2. A new accounting  rule  implemented  at  the  start  of this  year

(FIN 39)  limited  banks'  ability  to  net  their  gross  positions  on
certain  items  that  are  included  in  "other  securities."  This  rule
change,  which inflated  both sides  of banks'  balance  sheets,
substantially  boosted  the  growth  of  securities  early in  the  year  and
may  have  added  as  much  as  1-1/4  percentage  points  to  bank credit
growth  for  the  year through  November.  A second  accounting  rule
change  (FAS  115)  required  banks  to  begin marking-to-market
securities  held  in  "available-for-sale" accounts.  Estimates  suggest
that  revaluations  of  securities  under  FAS  115  pared perhaps  1/2
percentage  point  from  the  growth  of bank credit  during the  year.

III-A-4

the  profitability  of  investment  opportunities  at  banks'  domestic
offices  relative  to  those  overseas.  In  addition,  borrowing  from
foreign  affiliates  is  not  included in  the  deposit  insurance
assessment base  and,  since  December  1990,  has  not  been  subject to
reserve  requirements.

M2  Growth

M2  hovered  at  or  near  the  1 percent  lower  bound  of  its  target

range  throughout  the  year,  with banks  not  bidding very  aggressively
for  retail  deposits.  As  noted,  banks  evidently  found wholesale
funding  less  expensive than mounting  a campaign to  attract  retail
deposits  with  attendant  advertising,  administrative,  and  deposit
insurance  costs.  On balance,  though, M2  growth was  more in  line
with the  historical  relationships  embodied  in  the  staff's money
demand  models  than  in  recent  years.

In  part,  weaker-than-expected  adjustments  of  retail  deposit

rates  help  explain  why outflows  from bond mutual  funds  and  reduced
inflows  into  stock funds  did  not  translate  into  faster  M2  growth.
Indeed, with households  evidently favoring  direct  holdings  of
Treasury  securities.  M2  plus  stock and  bond  funds  grew at  about  the
same  1 percent  pace  as  M2.

M1  Growth

Consistent with  its  historical  behavior,  Ml  growth slowed
sharply  in  1994  in response  to  widening  opportunity costs.  From the
fourth  quarter  of  1993  through November,  MI  grew only  2-1/4  percent
at  an  annual  rate--down  substantially from the  double  digit  growth
recorded  over  the  previous  two  years.  Following the  typical
pattern, demand  deposits  and  other  checkable  deposits  (OCDs) were
especially  responsive  to  the  rise  in  short-term  interest  rates.  On
balance,  demand  deposits  edged up  only  1/2  percent  through November
compared with  growth  of  13-1/4  percent  in  1993.  OCDs  were  depressed
early  in the  year  by  a reserve  avoidance  program  introduced by
in  which  customers' OCD  balances  are  swept  into  MMDA

accounts  at  the  end  of  each  day.  In  addition, 
holding  company  with  affiliates  operating in many  of  the  same
markets 
sweep  account  program  in  September.  further  depressing  OCD  growth.
More  important,  the  sluggish adjustment  of  interest  rates  offered  on
OCD  accounts  throughout  the  year  encouraged households  to  shift
funds  into  higher-yielding  assets.

implemented  a  version  of the

a

In  contrast  to  transaction  deposits,  the  currency  component  of
Ml  continued  to  register  strong  growth.  Through  November,  currency
advanced at  a  10-1/2  percent  pace,  a  bit  faster  than last  year  and
close  to  the  record  annual currency  growth  rate  of  1990.  As  in  1990
and  subsequent  years,  much  of  this  year's  currency  growth  was
associated with strong  demands  from  abroad.  In  1994,  foreign  demand
appeared to  be  heavily concentrated  in Russia  and  the  other  former
Soviet  republics.

The downturn  in  transaction  deposits  during the year  led  to  a

decline  in  required  reserves.  Given the  strength  of currency
growth, however,  the monetary  base  expanded  at  a 8-1/2  percent  rate
through  November,  down only  a little  from the  10-1/2  percent  pace
recorded  last  year.

III-A-5

THE  GROWTH AND  FLOW OF  MONETARY AND  CREDIT AGGREGATES
(Q4 to  Q4  averages,  seasonally  adjusted  unless  otherwise  noted)

Growth rates 
or  flows 

Growth Rates  (percent)

M1

M2

M3

Domestic  nonfinancial debt

Bank  credit

Thrift assets

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

19941 

($  billions)1

Memo:
Recent
1994
levels

7.9

2.9

1.2

4.6

3.5

14.3

10.5

2-1/4 

1.147.6

1.9

.5

4.7

3.7

1.4

.7

5.2

4.9

1 

3.595.4

1-1/4 

4.269.4

5-1/4 

12.925.4

6-1/2 

3,294.9

-10.8

-5.4

-2.5

-1/4 

1.309.8

Flows  ($  billions,  December  to  December)

Currency

Demand  deposits

Other  checkable  deposits

31.7

24.1

-1.9

8.6

71.3

127.1

103.6

20.4

12.1

38.8

25.1

49.6

52.1

29.2

45.2

29.4

M2

113.2

102.2

53.8

58.9

19.2

31.5

-1.3

-11.4

27.5

8.3

-55.6

20.0

1,147.6

352.9

383.5

402.9

3,595.4

2,447.8

1,159.9

805.7

30.9

-73,3

-44.7

120.7

142,5

31.9

-107.1

-196.9

-84.8

81.5

29.4

20.8

35.1

-8.1

14.9 

-18.4 

-3.2

21.0

369.8

.2 

1.5 

15.2

14.4

5.2 

3.1 

-1.5 

-3.5

8.4

88.9

26.2

4,269.4

674.0

175.6

361.5

101.6

54.6

49.0

-9.9

-4.5

37.4

9.9

-21.4

22.5

4.8

7.6

-59.6

-9.4

-10.8

-63.7

-17.1

-11.1

-65.5

-21.3

8.6

15.7

-11.9

1.3

Nontransactions  M2

Savings  &  MMDAs

Small  time  deposits

General  purpose  and

broker/dealer
money  market
mutual  fund
assets

Overnight RPs.
net  (NSA)

Overnight  Eurodollars,

net  (NSA)

Institution-only

money  market  mutual
fund  assets

Large  time  deposits

Term RPs.  net  (NSA)

Term Eurodollars,
net,  NSA)

M3

58.4

54.7

2.6

Non-M2 component

-54.8

-47.5

-51.2

26.5

46.0

20.5

1.  For  monetary  aggregates,  bank credit,  and
assets,  through June.

domestic  nonfinancial  debt,  through  November;  for  thrift
debt.  through November;  for  thrift

domestic  nonfinancial

INTERNATIONAL  DEVELOPMENTS

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS

U.S.  International  Trade  in  Goods  and  Services

The  U.S.  trade  deficit  in  goods  and  services  was  a bit  larger

in  September  than  in  August  (exports declined  marginally and  imports

increased  slightly)  and  the  deficit  for  the  third  quarter  as  a whole

was  substantially  greater  than  in  the  second  quarter.  Data  for

October  will  be  released  by  the  Commerce Department  on December  20.

NET  TRADE  IN  GOODS  & SERVICES
(Billions of  dollars,  seasonally  adjusted)

Year 
1993 

94Q1 

Quarters
94Q2 
(annual rates) 

94Q3 

Real  NIPA  1/
Net  Exports  of  G&S 

-73.9 

-104.0  -111.8  -120.8

Nominal  BOP
Net  Exports  of  G&S 

Goods,  net 
Services,  net 

-75.7 
-132.6 
56.8 

-97.3  -107.5  -124.0 
-147.8  -166.5  -178.6 
54.6 

59.0 

50.5 

Jul

Months
Auga 
Sep
(monthly rates)

-11.2 
-9.7
-15.9  -14.1
4.4

4.8 

-10.1
-14.6
4.5

1/ In  billions  of  1987  dollars,  SAAR.
Source:  U.S.  Dept.  of  Commerce,  Bureaus  of  Economic  Analysis  and
Census.

Exports  in  September  were  slightly  less  than  in  August  as  rises

in  exported  aircraft,  passenger  cars  shipped  to  overseas markets,

and  service  receipts  from  foreigners  traveling  in  the  United  States

were  more  than  offset  by  declines  in  most  other  categories  of  trade.

Nonetheless,  third-quarter  exports  were  3  percent  higher  than  in  the

second  quarter;  the  largest  increases  were  in  machinery,  industrial

supplies,  and  consumer  goods.  Most  of  the  rise  was  in quantity,

with  the  exception of  industrial  supplies  (where virtually  all  of

the  increase  was  in  prices).  By  area, most  of  the  increase  in  the

third  quarter  went  to  developing countries  in  Asia and  Latin

America.  Over  the  past  year,  exports  to  developing  countries,  and

to  Canada  and  Japan,  rose  15-20  percent  on  average, while  exports  to

countries  in  Western Europe  rose  an  average  of  6  percent.

IV-1

IV-2

U.S.  International  Trade  in  Goods  & Services

12/14/94

Net  Exports  of Goods  & Services

Bil$,  SAAR

Real  NIPA Goods  & Services

Ratio  Scale, Bil  87$, SAAR

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

Selected  Exports

Bil  87$,  SAAR

-- 

180

Selected  Imports 

87$,  SAAR
Bil  87$, SAAR

-

- - -
-- 

Machinery  Ex  Computers
Automotive
Ind.  Supp.  (Nonag  Ex  Gold)

-
- - --  - Automotive

Machinery  Ex Computers

C-onsumer Goods

-

** 

--

i 

l IiiiiiiiiIIiIllllliii

1992 

1993

1994

1992

1993

IV-3

U.S.  EXPORTS  AND  IMPORTS  OF  GOODS  AND  SERVICES
(Billions of  dollars,  SAAR,  BOP  basis)

Quarters 

Months

Levels 

94Q2 

94Q3 

$Change  1/ 

Q2 

Q3 

Levels 

Aug 

Sep 

$Chg  1/
Sep

Exports  of G&S

684.6  703.8 

25.1 

19.1 

719.3  716.1

Goods  Exports
Agricultural
Gold
Computers
Other  Goods

Aircraft  & Pts
Semiconductors
Other  Cap  Gds

Automotive
to  Canada
to  Mexico
to  ROW

490.7
43.8
5.7
31.9
409.2

34.1
24.0
114.1

55.9
30.6
8.4
16.9

511.2
46.7
4.6
33.8
426.1

28.6
25.3
119.5

58.1
31.1
7.6
19.3

18.6
0.1
-3.6
0.6
21.5

-0.2
0.6
8.5

1.6
1.7
0.5
-0.6

20.5
2.9
-1.1
1.8
16.9

-5.4
1.3
5.4

2.1
0.5
-0.8
2.4

529.5
49.7
6.4
33.8
439.6

30.3
25.6
122.2

62.5
35.8
7.8
18.8

522.5
47.7
2.9
34.5
437.3

32.4
26.6
120.8

60.5
31.0

8.2
21.3

Ind  Supplies
Consumer  Goods
All  Other

102.3
58.3
20.5

111.7
61.4
21.5

6.1 
2.9 
2.1 

9.4
3.1
1.0

113.0
63.7
22.4

112.9
62.3
21.9

-3.2

-7.0
-2.0
-3.5
0.7
-2.3

2.1
1.0
-1.4

-2.0
-4.8
0.3
2.5

-0.1
-1.4
-0.5

Services Exports

193.9 

192.6

6.5 

-1.3 

189.8  193.6

3.8

Imports  of G&S

792.1  827.8 

35.3 

35.6 

835.5  837.6

Goods  Imports

Petroleum
Gold
Computers
Other  Goods

Aircraft  & Pts
Semiconductors
Other  Cap  Gds

Automotive

from Canada
from Mexico
from ROW

Ind  Supplies
Consumer Goods
FFB
All  Other

657.2
51.4
4.7
44.3
556,8

12.3
23.7
98.6

116.5
41.2
14.2
61.1

106.5
144.5
30.5
24.2

689.8
60.7
2.8
47,1
579.1

9.9
27.0
104.0

123.4
44.2
13.9
65.3

111.0
148.6
32.2
23.1

37.3
9.8
-4.1
2.6

29.1

1.0 
0.6 
4.2 

8.4
4.3
0.8
3.3

5.2
6.7
1.1
1.8

32.5
9.3
-1.8
2.8
22.3

-2.5
3.3
5.4

6.9
3.0
0.3
4.2

4.5
4.1
1.7
1.1

698.6
62.1
3.7
46.2
586.7

8.2
27.4
101.9

132.7
50.3
14.9
67.4

112.1
149.8
32.4
22.3

697.7
59.1
2.2

50.6
585.9

11.4
28.4
107.6

118.6
45.3
15.6
57.6

111.1
151.6
32.6
24.5

2.1

-0.9
-3.0
-1.5
4,4
-0.8

3.2
1.0
5.6

-14.1
-5.0
0.7
-9.8

-0.9
1.9
0.2
2.2

Services  Imports

134.9 

138.0

-2.0 

3.1 

136.8  139.9

Memo:

Oil  Qty  (mb/d)

9.59  10.24 

0.59 

0.65 

10.18  10.46 

0.28

1/ Change from previous  quarter
Source:  U.S.  Dept.  of  Commerce,

or  month.

Bureaus  of Economic  Analysis and  Census

IV-4

Imports  in  September  were  marginally higher  than  in  August.  A

sharp  drop  in  imported  automotive  products  (from strong  levels

reported  in  August)  was  offset  by  a  large  increase  in  imported

capital  goods  (aircraft, computers,  and  other machinery).  Imported

consumer  goods  moved  up  slightly  from the  high  levels  reported in

August.  The  value  of  oil  imports  declined  in  September;  a drop  in

price  was  only  partly offset  by  a moderate  increase  in  the  quantity

imported.  The  quantity of  oil  imports  remained  over  10  mb/d  in

September  (for  the  fourth  consecutive month)  as  the  pace  of

inventory accumulation  quickened.

For  the  third  quarter,  imports  were  4.5  percent higher  than  in

the  second  quarter;  the  increases were  spread  among  all  major  trade

categories  and  reflected  the  strength  of  consumption and  investment

spending  in  the  United  States.

In  October  and  November,  preliminary  Department  of  Energy

statistics  indicate  that  higher  oil  consumption was  met,  in  part,  by

stock  draws  resulting  in  an  easing  of  imported  oil.  Oil  imports  are

expected  to  be  less  in  the  fourth  quarter  than  in  the  third  quarter.

Prices  of  Merchandise  Imports  and  Exports

After  rising  since  April,  the  price  of  imported  oil  fell  $1.25

per  barrel  in  September.  Prices  fell  as  world  oil  production

rebounded  from  low  levels  associated  with  effects  of  summer  oilfield

maintenance  and  the  strike  in Nigeria.  In  October  and November,  the

price  of  imported  oil  appears  to  have  remained  near  the  September

average.  In early November,  spot  oil  prices  (West Texas

Intermediate)  fell  as  concerns  over  new  shipping  insurance

regulations  (COFRs)  abated.  Prices  have  continued  to  ease  downward

on  balance  in  late November  and  early December.  The  twelve-month

extension of  OPEC's  quota  has  not  put  upward  pressure  on  prices

IV-5

PRICES  OF U.S.  IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS
(percent change  from previous  period)

9401 

Quarters
9402

(annual  rates)
-----------------

9403 

Aug 

Months
Sep 

Oct

(monthly rates)

BLS  Prices----------------

Merchandise  Imports

Oil
Non-Oil

Foods,  Feeds,  Bev.
Ind Supp  Ex Oil
Computers
Capital  Goods  Ex  Comp
Automotive  Products
Consumer Goods

Memo:

-2.1
-30.2
1.3

0.8
5.4
-5.1
-0.1
2.0
-0.1

7.4
67.5
2  8

16.0
4.4
-6.7
2.7
2.4
1.0

8.1
36.6
5.3

37.8
8.9
-8.5
4.2
2.4
1.1

0.5
-1.2
0.6

2.4
1.1
-0.3
0.7
0.5
0.1

-0.5
-7.4
0.3

0.7
1.1
0.3
-0.1
0.2
0.2

Oil  Imports  ($/bbl)

12.67 

14.67 

16.23 

16.70  15.46

Merchandise  Exports

Agricultural
Nonagricultural

Ind  Supp  Ex Ag
Computers
Capital  Goods  Ex  Comp
Automotive  Products
Consumer Goods

4.1
19.9
2.2

7.8
-10.0
0.9
1.5
0.8

1.4
-7.4
2.9

9.4
-6.2
-0.2
0.9
0.4

2.0
-14.4
4.4

17.1
-11.2
0.3
1.2
-0.5

0.2
-1.2
0 3

1.3
-2.6
0.0
0.0
0.2

0.3 
0.5 
0.3 

0.7
0.0
-0.1
0.1
0.2

0.8
0.9
0.7

1.4
1.2
-1.0
0.4
1.1
0.1

0.5
-0.2
0.5

1.7
-0.5
-0.1
0.5
0.1

-------- Prices  in  the  NIPA Accounts--------

Fixed-Weight

Imports  of Gds  &  Serv.

Non-oil  Merch  Ex  Comp

-2  8
0.5

Exports  of Gds  &  Serv.
Nonag Merch  Ex  Comp

Oil  Prices

S 

Spot WTI
Import  Unit Value

$  per bbl

1987 

1988

1989 

1990 

1991

1993

IV-6

because  of  rising  concern  over  the  potential  effects  of  a warm

winter  on  needs  for  fuel  at  a time  when there  are  ample  product

inventories.  Overall,  the  price  of  imported  oil  in  the  fourth

quarter  should  average  about  $0.85  per  barrel  less  than  in  the  third

quarter.

Prices  of  U.S.  non-oil  imports  rose  strongly  in  October,  pushed

by a  continued  advance  in  the  price  of  imported  industrial  supplies.

Also  contributing  to  the  rise  was  an upswing  in  the  prices  of

imported  passenger  vehicles  (primarily associated  with model

changeovers)  and  foods.  In  the  third  quarter,  non-oil  import  prices

rose  significantly more  than  in  the  second  quarter,  largely  because

of  prices  of  industrial  supplies  and  foods.

Prices  of  exported nonagricultural  products  rose  somewhat

faster  in October  than  in  recent  months;  in  both  October  and  the

third  quarter  increases  were  led  by  rising  prices  of  industrial

supplies.  Prices  of  U.S.  agricultural  exports  fell  slightly  in

October;  declines  were  recorded  in  four  of  the  last  five  months.

U.S.  International  Financial  Transactions

Foreign  official  assets  in  the  United  States  rose  by  more  than

$10  billion  in  October.  (See  line  1 of  the  Summary  of U.S.

International  Transactions  table.)  There were  large  increases  in

holdings  of  several  developing  countries  in  Asia and  Latin America.

In  addition,  holdings by  Israel  also  rose  substantially,  probably

reflecting the  proceeds  of  U.S.  aid  and  bonds  issued with U.S.

guarantees.  Partial  information  from FRBNY indicates  little

increase  in  G-10  reserves  in November.

Private  foreign  net  purchases  of  U.S.  Treasury bonds  were  large

in  October  (line 4a).  Entities  in the  Netherlands  Antilles

accounted  for most  of the  total.  Net  purchases  of  U.S.  corporate

IV-7

SUMMARY  OF  U  S.  INTERNATIONAL  TRANSACTIONS
(Billions of  dollars, not  seasonally  adjusted except  as  noted)

I 

I 

Quarter 

1993  | 

1994 

I

Month

1994

Year 
_ 

I 

_ 
1992 

1993 

Q4 

I
| Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Aug. 

Sept. 

Oct.

Official  capital

1.  Changes  in  foreign official  reserve

assets  in U.S.  (+ = increase) 

a. G-10  countries 
b. OPEC  countries 
c. All  other countries 

2. Changes in U.S.  official  reserve 
assets  (+ = decrease)

Private  capital
Banks

3. Change  in net  foreign positions of

banking offices  in the U.S. 

Securities

3

38.3 
4.8 
4.9 
28.6 

70.2 
29.9 
-5.1 
45  4 

23.3 
4.8 
-.9 
19  4 

10.3 
8.7 
10.8  15.7 
-2.3  -4.7 
1.9  -2.4 

18.4 
9 0 
3.3 
6.0 

2.3 
3.3 
1.1 
-2.2 

1.5 
-.5 
.7 
1.3 

10.4
1.0
5
8.9

3.9 

-.7 

-.7 

-.1  3.5 

-.2 

-.1 

-.1 

-.2

35.6 

8.5 

4.7 

38.0  38.1 

10.0 

-8.1 

7.7 

1.3

4. Foreign  net purchases of
U.S.  securities  (+) 
4
a. Treasury securities 
b. Corporate and other  bonds 
c  Corporate stocks 

5- U.S.  net purchases  (-) of

foreign securities 

a. Bonds 
b. Stocks 

Other flows  (quarterly data,  s a.)

6. U.S.  direct  investment  (-) abroad 
7. Foreign direct  investment  in U.S. 
6
8. Other  (+ = inflow) 

45.8 
68.1  105.5 
8.1 
24.7 
37.4 
61  2  25.5 
34.3 
12.2 
19.6 
-3.7 

31.1 

6.3 
9.5  -7.3 
13.7  14.8 
8.0  -1.3 

19.7 
5  2 
13.3 
1.1 

18.5 
9 3 
6 2 
3.0 

5.9 
5.3 
1.7 
-1.2 

-47.9  -132.8  -34.6  -25.1  -18.0 
-6.6  -5.3 
-15.6  -69.5  -13.9 
-32  3  -63  3  -20.7  -18.5  -12.7 

-9.2 
-2 3 
-7.0 

-3.7 

-.2 
- 9  -.9 
.7 

-4.6 

8.9
8.0
2.7
-1.9

-7.9
-3 9
-4 0

-41.0  -57.9  -22.7  -24.8  -7.8 
3.9 
6.9 

21.4 
18  1  68.4 

12.0 
4.4 

8.1 
2.7 

9.9 

n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 

n.a. 
n.a 
n.a. 
n.a 
n.a.  n.a. 

n.a.
n.a.
n.a

U.S.  current  account balance  (s.a.) 

-67.9  -103.9  -30-6  -32.3  -37.0 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n a. 

n a.

Statistical  discrepancy  (s.a.) 

-17.1 

21.1 

4 0  -14.5  -3 5  n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a.  n.a.

1. The sum  of  official  capital, private  capital,  the  current  account balance, and the  statistical

discrepancy is  zero.  Details may not  sum to  totals  becuse of  rounding.

2. Changes  in  dollar-denominated positions of  all  depository institutions and bank holding  companies
plus certain  transactions between broker-dealers  and unaffiliated foreigners  (particularly borrowing and
lending under  repurchase  agreements).  Includes  changes  in  custody liabilities  other than U.S.  Treasury
bills.

3. Includes  commissions on  securities  transactions and  therefore does  not match exactly  the data on

U.S.  international  transactions published by the  Department of  Commerce.

4. Includes  Treasury bills.
5. Includes  U.S.  government  agency bonds.
6. Transactions by nonbanking concerns  and other banking and official  transactions not shown  elsewhere

plus  amounts  resulting from  adjustments made by the  Department  of  Commerce and revisions  in  lines  1
through  5 since  publication of  the  quarterly data  in  the Survey of  Current Business.

,n.a  Not available 

* Less  than $50  million.

IV-8

and  government  agency bonds  (line 4b)  were  also  significant,  but

foreigners  continued  to  sell  U.S.  corporate  stocks  (line  4c).

U.S.  net  purchases  of  foreign  stocks  and  bonds  (lines  5a  and

5b)  rebounded  strongly  in October.  Bond  purchases  were  almost

entirely  from Europe  and  Canada.  More than  half  of  stock  purchases

were  also  from  developed  countries.  However,  there  were also  net

purchases  of  stocks  from  Indonesia,  China,  Hong  Kong,  and  South

Korea.

For  the  first  ten months  of  1994,  U.S.  net  purchases  of  foreign

bonds  were  down  sharply  from  the  1993  pace.  In  fact,  U.S.  residents

were  net  sellers  of  bonds  in  Europe.  Bond  purchases  in Latin

America  (excluding the  Caribbean financial  centers)  were  up  in  1994,

but  only because  of  more  than  $5 billion  in Brazilian  bonds  acquired

as  part  of  that  country's  bank  debt  rescheduling.  Rising  interest

rates  on  bonds  denominated  in  dollars  and many  other major

currencies  produced  capital  loses  for holders  of  long-term bonds  and

outflows  from U.S.  international  bond  funds.

U.S.  net  purchases  of  foreign  stocks  in  the  first  ten  months  of

1994  have  come  closer  than  bonds  to  maintaining  the  record  1993

pace.  Net  purchases  of  stocks  in  Japan were very  large,

particularly  in  the  first  quarter,  and  accounted  for  one-third  of

U.S.  net  purchases  in  the  first  10  months  of  1994.  Net  purchases  in

the  rest  of  the  world were  down  from the  1993  pace.  In  particular,

the  developing countries  that  received  the  largest  net  equity

inflows  from the  United  States  in  1993  (Hong Kong, Mexico,

Argentina,  Brazil,  and  Singapore)  have  all  received  smaller  inflows

in  1994.  U.S.  investor  interest  has  picked  up,  though,  in a wide

assortment  of  other  developing countries,  including  South Korea,

Chile,  Indonesia,  China,  India, and  Peru.

IV-9

INTERNATIONAL BANKING  DATA 1/
(Billions of  dollars)

1991 
Dec. 

1992 
Dec. 

1993 
Dec. 

Mar. 

June 

1994
Sep. 

Oct. 

Nov.  2/

1. Net  claims  of  U.S.

-35.8 

-71.6 

-122.1

-157.5  -175.4  -200.7  -213.0  -209.6

banking  offices
(excluding IBFs)
on  own  foreign
offices  and  IBFS

a. U.S.-chartered

12.4 

17.0

-15.1 

-29.9 

-53.0 

-62.7 

-63.2

banks

b.  Foreign-chartered

-48  3 

-88.6 

-126.3

-142.4  -145.6  -147.7  -150.2

-146.4

banks

2. Credit  extended to

U.S.  nonbank
residents
a.  By foreign

branches  of
U.S.  banks
b. By  Caribbean
offices of
foreign-chartered
banks

3. Eurodollar holdings
of  U.S.  nonbank
residents

a. At  all  U.S.-

chartered banks  and
foreign-chartered
banks  in  Canada  and
the  United Kingdom

b. At  the  Caribbean
offices  of
foreign-chartered
banks

23.9 

24.8

21.8

21.4 

22.2 

23.2 

22.8 

22.9

n.a. 

n.a.

90.9

88.6 

83.9 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a.

102.9 

90.0 

77.8

75.1 

73.6 

80.9 

85.0 

86.2

n.a. 

n.a.

79.2

84.2 

82.1 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a.

MEMO:  Data  as  recorded in  the
4.  Credit  extended to  U.S.

nonbank  residents

U.S.  international  transactions accounts

179 

192 

202 

207 

n.a.

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a.

5. Eurodeposits  of  U.S.

239

237

234 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a.

nonbank  residents

1. Data  on lines  1 through  3 are from  Federal  Reserve  sources  and sometimes differ  in  timing

from the  banking data  incorporated in  the U.S.  international  transactions  accounts.

Lines  la,  Ib,  and 2a  are  averages of  daily data reported on the FR 2950  and FR  2951.
Lines  2b  and  3b  are end-of-period data  reported quarterly on the  FFIEC  002s.
Line  3a  is  an  average of  daily data  (FR 2050)  supplemented by the  FR 2502  and  end of  quarter
data  supplied by  the  Bank of  Canada and  the  Bank of  England.  There  is a  break in  the  series  in
April  1994.

Lines  4 and  5 are  end-of-period data estimated by BEA on the  basis of  data provided by  the
BIS,  the  Bank of  England, and  the  FR  2502  and  FFIEC 002s.  It  includes some  foreign-currency
denominated deposits and loans.  Source:  SCB

2.  Data  for  November is  a monthly average  through November 28.

Foreign  Exchange  Markets

IV-10

Since  the  November  15  FOMC meeting,  the weighted  average  value

of  the  dollar,  shown  in  the  chart,  has  risen  2 percent.  The  dollar

rose  by  similar  amounts  against  the  mark  and  the  yen.  The  larger

than  expected  increase  in  U.S.  short-term  rates  on  November  15

reassured the  market  of  the  Federal  Reserve's determination  to

contain  inflation  and  contributed to  the  dollar's  rise  early  in  the

period.  The  dollar  continued  strengthening for  most  of  the  period,

buoyed  in  large  part  by  strong U.S.  labor  market  data  and  the  rising

expectation that  the  Federal  Reserve  would  tighten  again before  the

end  of  the  year.  The  dollar  rose  only  1-1/2  percent  on  balance

against  British  sterling;  tightening by  the  Bank  of  England helped

stem  the  decline  of the  U.K.  currency.

Three-month  interest  rates  rose  about  20  to  40  basis  points  in

most  foreign  G-10  countries  during  the  intermeeting period,  but  rose

about  170  basis  points  in  Canada,  70  basis  points  in  Italy,  and  50

basis  points  in  France.  Three-month  rates  remained  about  unchanged

in  Japan.

The  large  rise  in  Canadian  short-term rates  is  mainly  a

response  to  concerns  about  large  and  stubborn  fiscal  deficits  of  the

provincial  and  central  governments,  which weighed  on  the  Canadian

dollar  over  the  period.  The  rise  in  three-month  rates  to  a  lesser

extent  reflects  the  Bank  of  Canada's  50  basis  point  tightening  of

overnight  rates  during  the  period  and  anticipated  further  tightening

in  response  to  strong  growth of  economic  activity.

U.K. short-term  rates  rose  20  basis  points  during  the  period

after  the  Bank  of England  raised  its  minimum  lending  rate  by  50

basis  points  on  December  7.  Most  market  participants  had  not

expected  a rate  rise  of  this  magnitude  until  early  next  year.

IV-11

Weighted  Average  Exchange  Value  of the Dollar

March  1973=  100

September 

October 

November 

December

INTEREST  RATES  IN  MAJOR  INDUSTRIAL  COUNTRIES

Three-month
Dec.  14

Nov.  15 

Rates

10-year Bond Yields

Change

Nov.  15  Dec.  14 

Change

Germany
Japan
United  Kingdom
Canada
France
Italy
Belgium
Netherlands
Switzerland
Sweden

Weighted-average

foreign

United States 

5.15
2.33
6.13
5.77
5.50
8.63
5.10
5.11
3.81
8.36

5.08

5.74

5.45
2.34
6.31
7.45
5.97
9.31
5.50
5.54
4.13
8.60

0.30
0.01
0.18
1.68
0.47
0.68
0.40
0.43
0.32
0.24

5.46 p 

0.38

6.40 p 

0.66 

7.40
4.64
8.61
9.09
8.12
11.86
8.25
7.50
5.38
10.85

7.71

7.92

7.49
4.51
8.53
9.20
8.08
12.30
8.34
7.67
5.35
10.89

0.09
-0.13
-0.08
0.11
-0.04
0.44
0.09
0.17
-0.03
0.04

7.74  p

0.03

7.82  p 

-0.10

IV-12

In  Italy,  short-term  increases  in  interest  rates  reflected

ongoing  turmoil  within the  Berlusconi  government.  In France,  short-

term  rates  moved  higher  after  Jacques  Delors  announced  that  he  does

not  intend  to  run  for President.  Delors  was  viewed  as  a  strong

proponent  of  EMU,  and his  withdrawal  from the  race  is  viewed  as

increasing  the  chances  that  EMU  could  emerge  as  an  issue  in  the

Presidential  election,  or  that  the  next  President  of France  may not

be  as  staunch  a  supporter  of  EMU.

Weighted  average  foreign  long-term interest  rates  were  little

changed  on balance  during the  intermeeting  period.  Long-term  rates

rose  about  10  basis  points  in  Germany  and  Canada  and  declined  by

about  the  same  amounts  in the  United Kingdom  and  Japan.

Developments  in Foreign  Industrial  Countries

In  the  third  quarter,  growth  of  real  GDP  appears  to  have

exceeded  potential  output  growth  in  all  of  the  major  foreign

industrial  countries  for  the  first  time  in  the  current  recovery.

Growth  in  Japan  and  Germany  accelerated  in  the  third  quarter  on  the

strength  of  private  consumption  and  investment.  In  France,  the

IV-13

United  Kingdom,  and  Canada,  growth  slowed  in  the  third  quarter  but

remained  at  least  3 percent.  The  slowdowns  in  France  and  the  United

Kingdom  were  largely  accounted  for  by  declines  in  the  contribution

of  net  exports.  In  contrast,  deceleration in  Canada was  more  than

accounted for  by a  decline  in  domestic  demand,  particularly in

investment.  Italian  industrial  production  grew  robustly  in  the

third  quarter  but  somewhat  slower  than  in  the  second  quarter.

(Third-quarter GDP  data  are  not  yet  available  for  Italy.)  In  the

fourth  quarter,  the  pace  of  activity  in the  major  foreign  industrial

countries  generally  appears  to  have  slowed  somewhat  and  may  have

fallen  in  Italy  due  to  recent  strikes  and  a major  flood.

Consumer-price  inflation  remains  subdued  in  most  major  foreign

industrial  countries.  Unemployment  rates  have  stabilized  or  begun

to  fall,  although  they  generally  remain well  above  estimates  of

structural  unemployment  rates.

Individual  country notes.  In  Japan,  real  GDP  increased  3.7

percent  (SAAR)  in  the  third  quarter,  after  increasing  a revised  0.7

percent  in the  second  quarter.  The  third-quarter  increase was

driven by  a strong  recovery  in private  consumption  and  the  first

positive  growth  in  private  plant  and  equipment  investment  since  the

third  quarter  of  1991.  The  latest  rise  in  GDP  was  the  third

consecutive  quarterly  increase,  pointing  to  a firming  of the

economic  recovery.

JAPANESE  REAL GDP
(percent change  from  previous  period,  SAAR)

GDP 

1992 
Q4/Q4 
-0.4 

1993 
Q4/Q4 
-0.5 

1993 

1994

Q3 
1.0  -3.2  3.2  0.7  3.7

Q1  Q2  Q3

Q4 

Total  Domestic  Demand 
Consumption 
Investment 
Government  Consumption 

Exports 
Imports 
Net  Exports  (contribution) 

-0.9 
0.2 
-2.2 
2.9 

3.6 
-0.7 
0.6 

2.0  -1.3  2.1  0.7  3.9
0.5 
2.8  5.3  -0.9  4.3
1.5 
1.8 
2.0  -6.2  -7.0  1.9  3.7
-1.4 
0.9  10.6  -0.3  4.4  0.1  6.6

-2.3  -1.6  -8.0  15.3  14.2  0.7
9.2  7.0  13.6  4.4
-1.0  -0.5  -2.4  1.2  0.1  -0.5

5.0 

1.6 

IV-14

Data  for  the  fourth  quarter  are  mixed,  but  on  balance  suggest  a

continuation  of  growth,  albeit  at  a  slower  pace.  In  October,

industrial  production  edged  down  somewhat,  while  housing  starts

rebounded.  There was  a  large  decline  in  new car  registrations.  The

recent  stability  in the  unemployment  rate  and  in the  job

offers/applicants  ratio  suggest  that  the  labor market  has hit

bottom.

JAPANESE  ECONOMIC  INDICATORS
(percent change  from  previous  period  except where  noted,  SA)

1993 

1994

Q4 Q1 Q2 
Industrial  Production  -3.7  1.9 
1.1  1.7  n.a. 
1.7  -1.7  n.a. 
-2.0  3.7 
Housing  Starts 
Machinery  Orders 
-0.7  6.9  -16.5  19.3  n.a. 
New  Car  Registrations  -3.3  8.5  -7.5  8.9  n.a. 
2.8  3.0  n.a. 
2.7 
Unemployment  Rate  (%) 
0.66  0.66  0.64  0.63  n.a. 
Job  Offers Ratio* 
-56  -56 
Business  Sentiment** 

Q3  Q4 

-50  -39 

2.8 

-29 

Aug.  Sept.  Oct.
3.9  -1.3  -0.3
1.4
4.1  -6.9 
1.8 
3.4 
n.a
1.6  -12.2
7.8 
3.0
3.0 
3.0 
0.63  0.64  0.64
-- 

-- 

-

*  Level  of  indicator.
** Percent  of manufacturing  firms  having  a favorable  view of

business  conditions  minus  those  with an  unfavorable  outlook.

In  the Bank  of  Japan's  November  economic  survey  (Tankan),  the

index  of  business  sentiment  of major manufacturing  firms  registered

-29,  up  from  -39  in  the  previous  survey  taken in  August,  the  third

consecutive  increase  after  more  than  four  years  of  decline.

However,  firms  predicted  a roughly  4 percent  decline  in  investment

in  the  fiscal  year  that  began  in April,  about  the  same  predicted

decline  as  in  August's  survey.

Economic  recovery  is  continuing  at  a brisk  pace  in western

Germany.  Real  GDP  rose  5.3  percent  (SAAR) in  the  third  quarter

following  a 4 percent  gain  in  the  second  quarter.  Since  the

recession  trough  in the  first  quarter  of  last  year,  real  GDP  has

risen  4 percent  and  is  now almost  1 percent  above  its  previous  peak.

IV-15

The  largest  increase  in  third  quarter  spending  was  in

consumption,  which  rose  6.1  percent,  more  than  reversing  the  second-

quarter  decline.  Investment  spending was  up  moderately,  due  to  a

substantial  gain  in  equipment  purchases.  Construction expenditures,

which  surged  during the  mild  winter,  were  unchanged  in  the  third

quarter  after  falling  a  little  in  the  second  quarter.  Net  exports

dropped  somewhat.

WEST  GERMAN  REAL  GDP
(percent change  from  previous  period,  SAAR)

GDP

Total  Domest
Consumption
Investment
Government  C
Inventories

Exports
Imports
Net  Exports

ic  Demand 

onsumption. 
(contribution) 

(contribution) 

1992 
Q4/Q4 
0.3 

1.7 
3.7 
-2.8 
4.4 
-0.6 

-2.8 
1.2 
-1.3 

1993 

1993

Q4/Q4  Q3 
-0.5 

44 -1.2

Q4

1994
C 

Q1 
2.2  4.0  5.3

Q3

-2.4 
-0.8 
-8.2 
-1.8 
0.2 

0.8 
-5.1 
1.7 

4.6  -5.2
8.4  -1.3
1.3  -9.3  1
4.1  2.4  -
-1.3  -2.8  -

3.4  3.6  6.4
1.4  -3.9  6.1
8.0  -2.7  5.0
3.9  -1.7  4.4
0.1  6.4  0.3

5.2  9.2
6.2  -2.9
0.1  3.7  -

3.4  20.3  -0.5
8.1  23.3  1.7
1.0  0.6  -0  7

Recent  data  suggest  that  economic  growth  is  continuing  at  a

robust  pace  in  the  fourth  quarter,  and  forward-looking indicators

are  positive as  well.  Industrial  production  in  October was  about

1-1/2  percent  above  the  third-quarter  level,  while  orders  for

manufactured  goods  surged  in  September  and  remained  at  a  high  level

in  October.  Most  of  the  recent  strength  in  orders  was  due  to

foreign  demand,  suggesting  renewed  strength  in  exports  in  the  coming

months.  Other  business  indicators,  including manufacturers'

production plans  and  firms'  assessment  of  their  inventory  situation,

also  showed  an  improvement  in  October.  However,  retail  sales

dropped  sharply  in  October  and  were about  2  percent  lower  than  the

third-quarter  average.

The  recovery has  still  had  only a  minor  impact  on  the  labor

market,  as  the  unemployment  rate  edged  down  to  9.1  percent  in

IV-16

November 

Meanwhile,  inflation continues  to  decelerate.  In

November,  12-month  consumer  price  inflation  for  western  Germany was

2.7  percent,  the  lowest  rate  since  early  1991.  Wage  growth

continues  to  be  relatively  moderate,  with  earnings  per hour  up  only

about  1-1/2  percent  in  the  year  ending  in  September.

WEST GERMAN  ECONOMIC  INDICATORS
(percent change  from  previous  period  except  where  noted,  SA)

1993 
Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Aug. 

Sept.  Oct.  Nov.

1994

Industrial  Production  -0.3 
Manufacturing  Orders 
-0.7 
78.1  79.5  81.4  82.9 
Capacity  Utilization 
Retail  Sales  Volume 
-1.9 
1.4  -3.2  1.2 
Unemployment  Rate  (%) 
9.2  9.3  9.2 
9.0 

0.4  2.6  1.0  -2.5 
2.5  4.0  1.9  -2.0 

-
2.4 
9.3 

1.1 
1.6 
5.4  -0.2 

n.a.
n.a.

1.2  -3.7e  n.a.
9.2 
9.2 

9.1

Production  Plans* 

-8.0 

3.3  7.7  8.7 

6.0  11.0  13.0 

n.a.

e Estimated
* Percent  of  manufacturing  firms  planning  to  increase  production in

the  next  three  months  minus  those  planning  to  decrease  production.

Production  in  eastern  Germany  has  continued  to  expand  at  a

rapid  rate,  with  industrial  production in  September  up  14  percent

from  its  year-earlier  level.  Orders  for  manufactured  goods  were  16

percent  above  their  previous-year  level  in  September.  The

unemployment  rate  fell  in  November  to  13  percent,  2 percentage

points  below its  year-earlier level.

In  France,  real  GDP  growth slowed  to  3 percent  (SAAR) in  the

third  quarter  from  4.6  percent  in the  second.  The  slowdown  occurred

because  the  contribution  from net  exports  turned  negative  as  imports

continued  to  grow at  a relatively  rapid  pace  and  exports were  almost

flat.  Also  contributing was  a modest  slowing  in  consumption growth.

Inventories made  a significant  positive contribution  to  growth.

Monthly  indicators  suggest that,  on balance,  growth  may  slow

further  in  the  fourth  quarter.  Consumption  of manufactured  products

(one-third  of total  consumption) fell  very  sharply  in  October, while

retail  sales  (SA) were  flat.  Preliminary  data  for  large  stores

IV-17

FRENCH REAL  GDP
(percent change  from  previous

period,  SAAR)

GDP 

1992 
Q 4/Q 4 
0.3 

1993
Q 4/Q4
-0.5

0 
Total  Domestic  Demand 
Consumption 
1.4 
-2.9 
Investment 
Government  Consumption 
2.3 
Inventories  (contribution)  -0.6 

Exports 
2.0 
Imports 
1.0 
Net  Exports  (contribution)  0.3 

-2.0
0.4
-4.6
0.2
-1.3

2.9
-2.6
1.5

1993

1994

0.7 

0.5  3

.4 

4.6 

3.0

-1.8  -0.5  8
2.1  -0.1  0
0 
-0.2  -0
0.7  1
1.2 
-3.3  -0.5  7

.1 
.2 
.6 
.9 
.5 

3.3 
4.4 
3.5 
1.6 
-0.4 

4.7
3.5
3.5
2.6
1.3

14.4 
4.3 
2.5 

3.8  -3
0.3  13
0.9  -4

.7 
.2 
.5 

11.0 
6.6 
1.1 

0.5
6.5
-1.6

suggest  they were  weak  in  November  as  well.  INSEE's  index of

consumer  sentiment  worsened  slightly  in  November  for  the  second

month in  a row.  Output  indicators  were  somewhat  more  favorable.

INSEE's  October  business  survey  showed  orders  were  strong  in  all

sectors  except  automobiles.  Foreign  orders  were  especially  strong.

Also,  inventories were  considered  to  be  below desired  levels.

Unemployment  edged  down  in October  from  its  all-time  peak of  12.7

percent.

FRENCH  ECONOMIC  INDICATORS
(percent change  from  previous  period  except  where noted,  SA)

1993 
Q4  Q2 

1994

Aug. 
Industrial  Production*  -0.7  1.2  2.7  1.6  1.8 
12.3  12.5  12.6  12.6  12.6 
Unemployment  Rate  (%) 
-1.9  0.7  1.5  1.5  1.0 
Consumption  of 

Q3 

Sep. 
-0.3 
12.7 
0.1 

Oct. 
n.a 
12.6 
-2.5 

Nov.
n.a
n.a
n.a

Manufactured  Products
Consumer Prices  (NSA) 

0.5  0.4  0.6  0.1  0.0 

0.3 

0.3 

0.0

*French  statistical  authorities  release an  average  for  July  and

August.

Consumer  price  inflation  edged  up  in November  to  1.6  percent

at  a  12-month  rate.  However,  underlying inflation,  which  excludes  a

large  increase  in  fruit  and  vegetable  prices,  declined  slightly to

1.5  percent.  This  good  inflation  performance has  been  supported  by

a  slight  slowing  of wage  inflation to  2.3  percent  in  the  third

quarter.

IV-18

In  the  United  Kingdom,  the  pace  of  activity  slowed  in  the

third  quarter  from  very  rapid  increases  in  the  second  quarter,  due

primarily  to  a decline  in  the  contribution  of net  exports.  In

addition,  domestic  demand  growth decelerated  for  the  third

consecutive  quarter  as  inventory accumulation  slowed.

UNITED  KINGDOM REAL  GDP
(percent change  from  previous  period,  SAAR)

GDP 

1992 
Q4/Q4 
0.3 

1993 
Q4/Q4 
2.7 

1993 

Q3 
3.7 

Q4 
Q1 
3.5  3.8 

1994
Q2 
5.5 

Q3
3.8

0.8 
Total  Domestic  Demand 
1.3 
Consumption 
0.0 
Fixed  Investment 
-0.6 
Government  Consumption 
Inventories  (contribution)  0.0 

3.9 
Exports 
6.5 
Imports 
Net  Exports  (contribution)  -0.8 

2.9 
3.1 
1.7 
1.9 
0.3 

4.3 
3.9 
0.0 

2.4 
4.1 
7.0 
1.4 
-1.7 

2.2 
2.0 

1.8
4.0  3.1 
3.7  1.4 
2.0
9.1  9.4  -4.8  -3.8
1.3
0.8  1.2 
0.9
0.0  0.4 

1.6 
1.6 

12.5 

9.2  11.6 

5.5
7.2  12.1  8.7  -4.3  -0.2
1.5
1.1  -1.0  0.5 

3.4 

8.3 

Non-oil  GDP 

0.2 

2.4 

3.3 

2.4  3.2 

4.9 

4.0

In  the  fourth  quarter,  growth may  slow  somewhat  further,  but  it

appears  to  have  remained  robust.  Although essentially  flat  in

October,  industrial  production  and  retail  sales  were  0.9  percent  and

0.3  percent  above  their  third-quarter  averages,  respectively.

Producer  and  consumer  confidence  edged  back slightly  in October  and

November  from  their  strong  showing  in  the  third  quarter.  In

November,  the  unemployment  rate  fell  to  8.8  percent,  and  job

vacancies  increased to  their  highest  level  in  over  four  years.

Underlying  wage  inflation  in  October  picked up  to  4 percent  (SAAR)

from  3.75  percent  recorded  most  of  this  year,  and  underlying

inflation  increased  to  2.3  percent  in  November  on the  strength  of

food  price  increases.

On November  29,  the  government  released  its  budget,  in  which

the  projected  public  sector  borrowing  requirement  (PSBR) for  the

current  fiscal  year was  lowered  to  \34.5  billion  (5 percent  of  GDP)

UNITED  KINGDOM ECONOMIC  INDICATORS
(percent  change  from  previous  period,  SA,  except  where noted)

IV-19

1993 
Q4 
Industrial  Production  1.3 
Retail  Sales 
0.8 
Unemployment  Rate  (%)  10.0 

1994
Aug.  Sep. 

Q3 
Q1 
Q2 
1.1  2.2  1.2 
0.3 
1.1  0.9  0.7  -0.2 
9.8  9.4  9.2 
9.2 

RPI  ex.  MIP  * 
Input  Prices  * 

2.7 
-0.7 

2.7  2.4  2.2 
-3.0  0.6  4.5 

2.3 
4.1 

Oct.  Nov.

1.1 
0.4 
9.1 

2.0 
6.3 

0.1 
0.1 
8.9 

2.0 
6.9 

n.a.
n.a.
8.8

2.3
7.9

*  NSA,  percent  change  from  preceding year.  Retail  price  inflation

excludes  mortgage  interest  payments.

from  \45.4  billion  in  FY1993-94.  The  PSBR for  FY1995/96  was  lowered

to  \21.5  billion  (3 percent  of  GDP)  from  the  summer  forecast  of  \28

billion.

On  December  7, the  government  increased  the  minimum  lending

rate  50  basis  points  to  6-1/4  percent.  The  rate was  last  changed  on

September  12  when  it  was  also  raised  50  basis  points.  According  to

Chancellor  Clarke,  the  increase  was  taken  "in order  to  sustain

economic  recovery  with low  inflation"  and  followed  the  surprising

defeat  of  a government  budget  measure  in  Parliament  the  previous

night.  (The measure would have  increased  the  VAT  on home  fuel  to

17.5  percent  from  8 percent.)

Indicators  in  Italy  suggest  that  the  recovery  continued  to

move  ahead  in  the  third  quarter.  Although  capacity utilization

edged  down  slightly,  industrial  production  expanded  briskly,  the

unemployment  rate  fell  sharply  as  employment  rose,  and business

sentiment  firmed  further.  However,  activity  in  the  fourth  quarter

looks  weaker.  Consumer  confidence  dipped  in  October  and  November

due  to  uncertainty  over  pension  reform,  and  a forecast  released by

ISCO,  a respected  research  institute,  calls  for  a 2.4  percent  (SAAR)

decline  in  GDP  in  the  fourth  quarter  after  a projected  3.6  percent

increase  in  the  third  quarter  because  of widespread  strikes  by  labor

unions  and  last  month's  devastating  flood.

Although consumer  price  inflation  has  remained  steady  near  4

percent,  wholesale  and  producer  prices  recently have  accelerated

IV-20

somewhat.

Industrial

ITALIAN  ECONOMIC  INDICATORS
(non-seasonally adjusted  except  where  noted)

1993 
Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Aug.  Sep.  Oct.  Nov.

1994

Production* 

0.2 

0.1 

4.6 

3.6 

4.7  -4.1 

n.a.  n.a.

Capacity

Utilization  (%) 

74.4  74.5  76.0  75.8 

-- 

-

Unemployment
Rate  (%) 

Business

11.3  11.3  11.6  11.0

Sentiment**  (%) 

17 
Consumer  Confidence  96.3  100.6  112.8  117.1  117.1  117.4  112.0  112.9

19 

16 

21 

19 

21 

4 

n.a.

*  Percent  change  from previous  period  (seasonally adjusted).
**  Percent  of  manufacturing firms  having  a  favorable view of  business

conditions  minus  those  with an  unfavorable  outlook.

On  December  1,  the  Berlusconi  government  signed  an  agreement

with  the  labor  unions  that  will  postpone  most  elements  of  pension

reform  until  June  1995  when  legislation  will  be  drafted.  In  return,

the  unions  agreed  to  call  off  a  general  strike  planned  for  December

2  and  to  continue  to  abide  by  the  July  1993  labor  agreement  that

limits  wage  growth  to  the  government's  projected  inflation  rate.

In  Canada,  real  GDP  continued  to  expand  at  a  vigorous  pace  in

the  third  quarter.  Most  of  the  strength came  from merchandise

exports;  final  domestic  demand  increased  only  1.1  percent  (SAAR),

its  slowest  advance  in  a  year and  a  half.  After  surging  in  the

second  quarter,  fixed  investment  fell  as  a  drop  in  residential

construction  offset moderate  increases  in  machinery  and  equipment

investment  and  nonresidential  construction.

Early  indicators  for  the  fourth  quarter  suggest  that  economic

activity  is  continuing  at  a  robust  pace.  Full-time  employment  in

both  goods-producing  and  service  industries  grew  strongly  in

November.  Slack  still  remains  in  labor  markets,  however,  and

IV-21

CANADIAN REAL  GDP
(percent change  from  previous  period,  SAAR)

GDP 

1992 
Q4/Q4 
0.5 

1993 
04/Q4 
3.2 

1993
Q3 
1.3 

Q4
3.6  4

1 
.3 

1994
Q2 
6.7 

Q3
4.7

Total  Domestic  Demand 
-1.2 
Consumption 
0.6 
Fixed  Investment 
-5.8 
0.8 
Government  Consumption 
Inventories  (contribution) -0.5 

9.4 
Exports 
3.3 
Imports 
Net  Exports  (contribution)  1.7 

3.4 
2.2 
4.5 
-0.1 
1.3 

10.9 
11.1 
-0.3 

0.7 
4.9  2
1.7 
2.4  5
3.6  11.3  0
0.2  -3
1.1  -0

-0.8 
-0.9 

4.7  -0.1
.3 
.0 
2.6
3.0 
.8  12.9  -0.6
-1.5
-3.9 
.3 
-1.3
1.1 
.1 

6.8  14.3  4
4.4  15.6  1
0.7  -0.7  0

.1  22.2  21.4
8.3
.7  14.5 
4.3
2.2 
.8 

productivity  gains  and  low  wage  increases  have  led  to  continued

declines  in  unit  labor  costs.  Consumer  price  inflation  remains

subdued.  Excluding  the  effects  of  recent  excise  tax  cuts,  12-month

inflation was  1.3  percent  in  October.

CANADIAN  ECONOMIC  INDICATORS
(percent change  from  previous  period  except  where noted,  SA)

1993 
4 

21 

Q2 

Q3 

1994

Aug.  Sept.  Oct. 

Nov.

1.2  -0.4 
Industrial  Production 
0.5 
0.2 
Employment 
Unemployment Rate  (%)  11.1  11.0  10.7  10.2  10.3  10.1 
Unit  Labor  Costs** 
Consumer  Prices'* 

-0.8  -1.2  -0.6  -1.3 
1.8  0.6  0.0  0.2 

1.0  0.8  3.2  2.2 
0.3  0.4  0.8  1.0 

-- 
0.2 

-- 
0.2 

n.a. 
-0.2 
10.0 
-- 
-0.2 

n.a.
0.7
9.6
--
n.a.

NSA.

* 
**  Percent  change  from year  earlier.

The  Bank  of  Canada  raised  its  target  for  the  overnight  (call)

rate  by  25  basis  points  on  November  28  and  an  additional  25  basis

points  on  December  8  to  a  range  of  5-1/4  - 5-3/4  percent.  These

moves  came  after  three  consecutive  25  basis  point  reductions  in  the

call  rate  target  since  July.

IV-22

EXTERNAL  BALANCES
(Billions of  U.S.  dollars,  seasonally  adjusted)

Japan:  trade

current  account

31.3
33.8

30.9
34.2

1994

-"'

Q3
28.4
32.0

Germany:  trade

current  account*

8.6 
-6.6 

12.8 
10.5
-3.1  -16.2

France:  trade

current  account

3.6 
3.5 

4.1 
n.a. 

4.3
n.a.

Aug.
8.3
9.5

4.6
-4.2

1.6

8.5
10.5

3.7
-3.4

1.7

Oct.
8.7
8.0

n.a.
n.a.

n.a.

U.K.:  trade

current  account

-4,4 
-1.9 

-3.7 
-1.1 

-2.5

n.a.

-0.8

-0.8

n.a.

Italy:  trade

current  account*

6.9 
1.3 

6.1 
3.3 

n.a. 
n.a. 

n.a.
2.1

Canada:  trade

current  account

1.5 
-5.5 

2.0 
-5.5 

3.7
-3.7

*  Not  seasonally  adjusted.
--  Data  not  available on  a  monthly basis.

n.a.
n.a.

1.2

n.a.
n.a.

n.a.

IV-23

12-14-94

Consumer Price  Inflation  for  Major Foreign  Countries
(12-month  percent change)

Japan

W  Germany

-- 

12

-I  6

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

1 

I  19 

I9

France

9

6

9

6

3

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

* Excluding  mortgage  interest payments.

Italy

1990 
1990 

1991 
1991 

1992 
1992 

1993 
1993 

1994
1994

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

IV-24

12-14-94

Industrial  Production for Major  Foreign  Countries
(Ratio  scale; seasonally adjusted;  monthly)

1987=100

1987=100

Japan

W  Germany

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

France

United  Kingdom

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

Italy

Canada

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

Economic  Situation  in  Other  Countries

IV-25

Economic  activity  appears  strong  in  major developing  countries

and  economies  in  transition with the  exceptions  of  Venezuela  and

Russia.  Inflation  performance  has  been mixed.

In  Mexico,  real  GDP  has  grown  strongly  in  recent  quarters  while

inflation  has  remained  restrained:  newly inaugurated  President

Ernesto  Zedillo  has  chosen  a  cabinet  that  promises  continued  free-

market  policies.  In  Brazil,  growth  has  picked  up  while  inflation

remains  low  following  the  stabilization  of  the  exchange  rate  last

July;  President-elect  Henrique  Cardoso's  prospective  choices  for

Central  Bank head  and  Economy  Minister  have  been closely  associated

with  the  disinflation program.  Argentina  and  Taiwan  continue  to

combine  steady  growth with  low  inflation.  In  Korea,  very  robust

economic  activity  has  taken  place  alongside  stable  inflation,  but  in

China,  rapid  growth has  fueled  strong  inflationary  pressures.  Both

Russia  and  Venezuela have  experienced  contractions  of  economic

activity  combined  with rising  inflation.  However,  there  are  signs

that  Russian  output  may  be  stabilizing.

Individual  country  notes.  In  Mexico,  real  GDP  was  2.9  percent

above  its  year-earlier level  in  the  January-September  period,  with

year-over-year  growth  in  the  third  quarter  alone  coming in  at  4.5

percent.  Industrial  production  has  been  particularly buoyant,

registering  6.1  percent  above  its  year-earlier  level  in  September.

While  these  high  rates  of  growth in  part  reflect  the  depressed  level

of  the  economy  in  the  third  quarter  of  1993,  they  also  signal  that

the  economic  recovery is  becoming  firmly  established.  Increases  in

public  spending are  believed  to  be  contributing to  the  recovery, but

Mexico's  general  government  budget  continued  to  show a  small  surplus

for  the  January-September  period,  although  it  was  much  reduced  from

its  year-earlier  level.

IV-26

Notwithstanding  the  stronger  pace  of  activity,  consumer  price

inflation has  remained  quiescent.  It  registered  6.9  percent  on  a

year-over-year basis  in November,  slightly above  the  third  quarter's

6.7  percent  rate,  but  equal  to  the  rate  averaged in  the  January-

October  period.  However,  the  trade  deficit  has  grown  to  $13.7

billion  in  the  January-September  period,  up  from  $10.4  billion  in

the  same  period  last  year.

President Ernesto  Zedillo,  inaugurated  on December  1, chose

former  Commerce Department  head  Jaime  Serra  Puche  as  Secretary  of

Finance.  While  previous  Finance  Secretary  Pedro  Aspe,  a key  figure

in  Mexico's  stabilization  program, was  not  included  in  Zedillo's

cabinet,  it  is  expected  that  the  new  economic  team will  continue  the

free-market  policies  of the  Salinas  Administration.  In  the  1995

budget  proposal  sent  to  Congress  on  December  9,  President  Zedillo

affirmed  the  goals  of higher  growth,  lower  inflation,  and  a balanced

budget  that  were  contained  in  the  annual  social  pact  signed  by  the

Salinas  Administration last  September.

In  spite  of  this  continuity  in  economic  policymaking,  financial

markets  have  remained  unsettled due  to  continued  political

uncertainty,  increased  foreign  interest  rates,  and  the  growing  trade

deficit.  The  peso/dollar  exchange  rate  has  remained within  one

percent  of  the  "lower"  limit  of  its  fluctuation band.  The  spread

between the  rate  on three-month  peso-denominated  Treasury bills  and

comparable  Eurodollar  rates  registered  858  basis  points  at  the

December  14  auction  compared with a  recent  low  of 791  basis  points

at  the  September  28  auction.  The  Mexico  City  stock market  is  well

below its  September  peak.

In  Brazil,  growth has  been  robust while  inflation appears  to  be

relatively  low.  Real  GDP  in  the  third  quarter was  up  6 percent  over

the  third  quarter  of  1993,  compared  with growth  of  4 percent  in

IV-27

1993.  Anecdotal  accounts  suggest  that  the  credit  controls  imposed

in  late  October have  dampened  demand  for  durable  goods,  while  growth

in  sales  of  non-durable  goods  remains  strong.  Analysts  expect  that

consumer prices  in  December will  rise  by  2.5  percent,  compared with

an  increase  of  3  percent  in November.  Monthly  inflation  is  far

below  the  nearly  50  percent  level  reached  before  the  new currency,

the  real,  was  adopted  last  July.

The  trade  surplus  was  $11.9  billion  in  the  January-October

period,  up  from  a  surplus  of  $11.4  billion  over  the  same  period  in

1993,  reflecting  import  growth  of  17  percent  and  export  growth  of  13

percent.  The  real/dollar  exchange  rate  has  remained  stable  at  about

0.85  since  September.  Under  Brazil's  current  anti-inflation  plan,

the  central  bank is  committed  to  maintaining  the  value  of  the

currency  at  no  lower  than  one  real  per  dollar.

It  is  widely  expected  that  Central  Bank  President  Pedro  Malan

will  be  President-elect  Henrique  Cardoso's  Economy  Minister,  and

Persio Arida,  currently head  of  Brazil's main  development bank,  will

be  the  new central  bank president 

Cardoso,  who  has  not  confirmed

the  appointments,  takes  office  January  1.  Malan  and  Arida have  been

closely  associated with Brazil's  anti-inflation  plan,  and  their

appointments have  been  regarded  as  a  reaffirmation  of  Cardoso's

commitment  to  economic  reform.

In  Argentina,  growth is  steady  while  inflation remains  low.

Industrial  production during  the  first  nine  months  of  1994  was  up

5.1  percent  from  a  year  earlier.  Consumer  prices  were 3.7  percent

higher  in  November  than  a  year  earlier.  The  cumulative  trade

deficit  for  the  year  through  October  widened  to  $4.9  billion

compared  with its  year-earlier  level  of  $2.4  billion.  However,  in

the  third  quarter,  year-over-year export  growth  registered  22.1

IV-28

percent,  exceeding  import  growth  of  20.7  percent  for  the  first  time

since  the  start  of the  Convertibility Plan  in  April  1991.

After  ceasing  auctions  in  October because  it  considered  the

interest  rates  that  were bid  to  be  too  high, Argentina  resumed  its

local  auctions  of  91-  and  182-day  Treasury bills,  which are  offered

both  on  a peso-  and  dollar-denominated basis,  on  November  22.  For

91-day bills,  the  only offering  for  which  data  are  available,  the

government  accepted bids  for  200  million  pesos  and  $200  million  at

rates  of  9.5  percent  and  7.58  percent  respectively.  These  rates

represent  an  increase  from  the  last  tender  on  September  26,  when

peso-denominated bills  were  auctioned  at  7.5  percent  and  dollar-

denominated  bills  at  6.2  percent.  The  increase  in  the  spread

reflects  growing  fears  that  Argentina's  budget may  have moved  into

deficit,  raising  concerns  about  the  sustainability  of  the

Convertibility Plan.

In  Venezuela,  the highly  expansionary monetary  policy

implemented  by  the  central  bank in  recent months  has  not  stopped  the

decline  in  economic  activity.  Consumer  price  inflation was  4.3

percent  in  November,  down  from  5 percent  in  October  but  up  from

monthly  rates  of  about  3 percent  last  year,  despite  the  imposition

of  price  controls  in  late  June.

The  cumulative  trade  deficit  for  the  year  through October  was

$3.3  billion,  down  from  the  deficit  of  $6.8  billion  recorded  over

the  same  period  in  1993,  reflecting  a 32  percent  decline  in  imports

and  a  16  percent  increase  in  exports.  The  fall  in  imports  reflects

continued  weak aggregate  demand and  strict  foreign  exchange  controls

imposed  in  June  1994.  The  central  bank's  official  reserves,

excluding  gold,  stood  at  an  estimated  $8 billion at  the  end  of

October.

IV-29

In  China,  economic  activity  and  inflationary  pressures  continue

to  be  strong.  Industrial  value  added  rose  24  percent  above  its

year-earlier  level  in  both  October  and  November.  Consumer  prices  in

October  were  28  percent  above  their  year-earlier level;  for  the

three  months  ending  in  October,  consumer  prices  rose  at  an  annual

rate  of  42  percent.

In  the  first  ten  months  of  1994,  China  ran  a  trade  surplus  of

$2.4  billion,  reflecting  export  growth  of  30  percent  and  import

growth  of  15  percent  over  the  year-earlier  period.  In  the  first  ten

months  of  1994,  foreign  direct  investment  was  $25  billion.  Some

financial  market  participants  appear  to  be  reassessing  the

creditworthiness  of  Chinese  companies,  however,  in  the  wake  of  a

recent  lawsuit  filed  by  Lehman  Brothers  against  two  Chinese

companies  for  nonpayment  of  debts,  as  well  as  other  reports  of

nonpayment  by  Chinese  firms.

In  Taiwan,  growth  continues  to  be  relatively  steady, while

inflation has  been  moderate.  Real  GDP  rose  6.1  percent  in  the  third

quarter  of  1994  from  a  year  earlier,  after  rising  6.4  percent  in  the

second  quarter.  Industrial  production  in  October  was  9.4  percent

higher  than  a  year  earlier.  Consumer  prices  in  November were  3.9

percent higher  than  a  year  earlier.  The  trade  surplus  for  the

January-November  period  was  $7  billion,  down  slightly from  its  year-

earlier  level,  reflecting  a  9  percent  growth  in  exports  and  11

percent  growth in  imports

Real GDP  in Korea  increased  by  7.7  in  the  third  quarter  from

the  same  period  a  year  earlier.  Fixed  investment  continued  to

expand  rapidly,  increasing by  11.2  percent  during the  third  quarter.

Despite  strong  growth  in  economic  activity,  inflation has  remained

stable  at  roughly  a  6  percent  annual  rate  since  the  beginning  of

IV-30

this  year.  Consumer  prices  rose  by  6.1  percent  in  November  from  a

year  earlier.

Merchandise  exports  increased  by  13  percent  in  the  first  10

months  of  1994,  in  part  because  a substantial  real  depreciation  of

the  Korean  won  against  the  yen  has  enhanced Korean  competitiveness.

However,  imports  rose  19  percent  over  the  same  period.  This

contributed  to  a widening  of  the  current  account  deficit  for  the

first  ten  months  of  this  year  to  $4.6  billion,  from  $170  million

during  the  same  period  a year  earlier.

Russian  inflation has  surged  in  recent  months.  Consumer

prices,  after  rising  only  5 percent  during  August  1994--a  30-month

low--increased  15  percent  in  October  and  14  percent  in November.

The  government  has  attributed  the  jump  in  inflation to  seasonal

increases  in  food  prices  and  to  rising  import  prices  triggered  by

the  ruble's  sharp  depreciation  during  September  and  October.  It

seems  unlikely  that  inflation  will  fall  to  7 percent  in  December,

the  target  specified  in  Russia's  IMF  Systemic  Transformation

Facility.

The  ruble  was  relatively  stable during  November and  early

December,  depreciating against  the  dollar  at  a steady  rate  of  about

1-1/2  percent  a week.  On  December  14,  the MICEX  ruble-dollar

exchange  rate  closed at  3368.

According  to  Russian  official  statistics,  real  GDP  during  the

first  ten months  of  1994  contracted  by  15  percent,  compared  with the

same  period  last  year,  and  industrial  production  was  22  percent

below  its  year-earlier  level.  During  the  fourth  quarter, however,

economic  activity may have  begun  to  stabilize.  In  October,  for

example,  real  GDP  grew by  4 percent  (year/year).  The  government

recently  estimated  that  the  "shadow" economy, which  is  not  included

IV-31

in  official  statistics,  accounts  for  at  least  20  percent  of  economic

activity  and  is  still  growing.

Discussions  between  the  Russian  government  and  the  IMF  on  a

stand-by  arrangement  reportedly  are  making  progress,  but  the  Fund

has  rejected  the  government's  proposed  1995  budget.  The  IMF

estimates  that  the  budget,  as  written,  would  generate  a  deficit

equal  to  10  percent  of  GDP,  and  has  urged  the  government  to  take

steps  to  increase budget  revenues  by  3-4  percent  of  GDP.




==== GREENBOOK | 1994-12-20_fomc19941220gbsup19941216.txt ====

Prefatory Note 

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 

available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain. 

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 

gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.    

1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
CONFIDENTIAL  (FR)
CLASS  III 

FOMC

December  16,  1994

SUPPLEMENT

CURRENT  ECONOMIC AND  FINANCIAL  CONDITIONS

Prepared  for  the
Federal  Open Market  Committee

By  the  Staff
Board  of  Governors
of the  Federal  Reserve  System

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS

THE  DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL ECONOMY

Housing  starts  .
.
Retail  inventories  .

.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

..
.

.

.

1
2

Tables

Page

.
Private housing activity  .
Changes  in  manufacturing and  trade  inventories
Inventories  relative  to  sales  .
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

Charts

Private  housing  starts  .
Ratio  of inventories  to  sales. .

.

.

.

.

THE  FINANCIAL ECONOMY

Municipal  markets  .

.

.

.

.

.

.

Tables

.
.

.

.
.

.

.
.

.

.
.

.
.

. . .

Selected  financial market  quotations  .

.

.

.
.

.

.

Chart

Ratio  of tax-exempt  yield to  Treasury yield.

THE  INTERNATIONAL  ECONOMY

U.S.  international  transactions  in  1994-Q3  .

Tables

U.S.  current  account  .
.
Summary of  U.S.  international transactions  .

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.
.

.

.

.
.

.

. 4
5
5

.

.

4
6

S 

7

.

.

10

S 

9

.

.

11

.

. 11
13

SUPPLEMENTAL  NOTES

THE  DOMESTIC  NONFINANCIAL ECONOMY

Housing  Starts

Total housing  starts  increased 6.9  percent  in November  to

1.54  million units  at  an  annual  rate.  The  starts  estimate  for

October  was  revised up  slightly to  1 44  million  units.

The  regional  pattern of  changes  in total  starts  suggests  that

construction in  November might  have  been boosted  in part  by

favorable weather 

Temperatures  in  both the  Northeast  and  the

Midwest  were unseasonably  warm, on  average,  and  starts  in those

regions  rose  by  25  percent  or more.  However,  temperatures  also  were

unusually warm in the  South,  where  starts  edged  up  only  2 percent

In  the  West,  where  average  temperatures were  unusually  cold  starts

fell  only  6 percent,  well  within the  normal  range  of variation.

Typically,  greater  severity  of cold  weather in  the  Northeast  and  the

Midwest  causes  construction in these  areas to  be  more  responsive to

deviations  from  normal  weather  patterns,  as  compared with the  more

temperate  South  and  West.  Despite  some  extreme  conditions  in

particular  areas  and  periods,  average  precipitation  for  the  major

Census  regions  was  fairly  close to  seasonal norms.

Single-family starts  rose  to  1.20  million units  in November,

reversing more than half  of the October  decline.  In  contrast,

single-family permits  edged  down  in both October  and  November

Analysis  of  the  relationship  of  starts  to  permits  (which are

measured  with considerably less  statistical  error  than  are  starts)

suggests  that  single-family  construction  in  November may have  been

lower  than was  indicated by  the  starts  estimate.

Single-family  starts  have been  surprisingly  resilient  in  recent

months.  Averaging  through the monthly variations,  starts  have

remained  essentially unchanged  since  about  midyear.  This  pattern  is

-2-

broadly  consistent  with the  behavior  of  permit  issuance  for  single

family  homes,  which has  varied  within  a narrow  range  since  June.

Another sign  of continued  strength  in the  single-family sector

is  that  a pickup  in  new home  sales  in  recent  months  has  brought

sales  in  line  with  starts.  However  other  indicators  of housing

demand,  including  consumer  attitudes toward  homebuying and  builders

assessments  of new  home  sales,  continued  to  decline  in  December  and

applications  for  mortgage  financing  to  purchase new  and  existing

homes  edged  down  again  in  early December  after  rising  a bit  in

November

Multifamily housing  starts  rose  from 287,000  units  at  an  annual

rate  in  October  to  344,000  in  November, the  highest  level  in four

years.  In  1994:Q3,  the  multifamily  rental  vacancy  rate  declined

relative  to  its  year-earlier level  for  the  fifth consecutive

quarter

Retail  Inventories

Retail  inventories  rose  at  a  $12  billion annual  rate  in

October,  substantially  below the  pace  observed  in August  and

September 

The  October  slowing  was  largely  attributable  to  a sharp

downswing  in  auto  dealers'  stocks,  which declined at  an  $8.3  billion

annual  rate  in  October  following  increases  of  $44  billion  and

$20.5  billion in  the two  preceding months.  Excluding  auto  dealers,

inventories  in  retail  trade  expanded  at  a $20.3  billion  annual  rate

in  October  similar  to  the  September pace  and  faster than the  pace

over  the  third  quarter.  With  a  1.3  percent  increase  in  sales,  the

retailers'  inventory-sales  ratio  fell  from 1.54  to  1.52  months;

excluding auto  dealers,  the  ratio was  unchanged  at  1.49  months.

The  bulk  of the  non-auto  inventory  accumulation in  October was

in  stocks held  at  stores  in the  GAF  grouping  (general merchandise,

apparel  and furniture  and  appliance);  these  stocks  have  expanded  at

-3-

a  rate  of  nearly  $20  billion  in each  of  the  past  three  months.

However  GAF  sales  have been  quite  robust  since  June,  and  the

inventory-sales  ratio  for  stores  in  this  broad  category; at

2.36  months  in  October  remained within  the  range  observed  over the

past  year 

Among  the  GAF  stores,  furniture  and  appliance  outlets

reported  another  sizable  inventory  accumulation  in  October  but

sales  of these  items  also  have  been  strong  in  recent  months.  (The

advance  retail  sales  report  for  November  showed  a 2.3  percent  rise

in  furniture  and  appliance  sales  last  month,  after  increases  of

1.1  percent  in  October  and  2.1  percent  in  September  )  On  balance,

the  accumulation  of nondurable  retail  inventories  in  October was

fairly  widespread;  of the  major  categories,  only  food  stores

reported  any notable  inventory  declines.

For  all manufacturing  and trade  excluding  retail  auto  dealers,

inventories  rose  at  a $54  billion annual  rate  in  October  about  the

same  pace  as  the  third-quarter  average. 

With  a 0.3  percent

increase  in non-auto  shipments  and  sales  in  October  the  inventory

sales  ratio  for  manufacturing  and  trade,  excluding  auto  dealers,

edged up  to  1 38 months,  only  a little  above  the  low end  of the

range  of the  past  year

1  For  all manufacturing and  trade  excluding auto  dealers,

inventory  investment in  September was  revised up  only  slightly,  as
upward  revisions  to manufacturing and  wholesale  stock buildups  were
nearly offset  by  downward  revisions  to  the  accumulation  of retail
inventories.  The  net  revision to  the  September  inventory change  is
not  expected  to  have much effect  on BEA's  estimate  of  third-quarter
GDP  growth.

PRIVATE  HOUSING  ACTIVITY
(Millions of  units;  seasonally  adjusted  annual  rates)

1993

Annual 

Q4

Q1 

Q2 

1994

Q3 r

Sant  r

nrt 

r

Nov  .

All  units
Starts
Permits

Single-family  units
Starts
Permits

1.29 
1 20 

1  48 
1 38 

1 37 
1 29 

1.44 
1 35 

1 .47 
1 37 

1.51 
1.43 

1  44 
1 40 

1.54
1 38

1  13 
.99 

1  29 
1  13 

1  17 
1.06 

1  19 
1.07 

1  21 
1.04 

1.23 
1.05 

1  15 
1.05 

1  20
1.04

New-home  sales
Existing-home  sales

.67
3.80

77
4,17

.69 
4.05 

.66 
4.06 

.68
3.93

72
3.89

73
3  91

n.a.
n.a.

Multifamily  units
Starts
Permits

16
21

19
.25

.28
37

29
35

34
35

Note:  p  Preliminary

r  Revised

n.a  Not  available.

Private Housing  Starts
(Seasonally  adjusted  annual  rate)

Millions of units

1980 

1982 

1984 

1986 

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994

CHANGES  IN MANUFACTURING AND TRADE  INVENTORIES
(Billions of  dollars  at  book value and annual  rates;
based on  seasonally adjusted data)

Total 

Excluding wholesale and

retail motor vehicles 

Manufacturing 

Defense  aircraft 
Nondefense  aircraft 
Excluding aircraft 

Wholesale 

Excluding motor vehicles 

Retail 

Automotive 
Excluding auto dealers 

Constant-dollar basis

Total 

Excluding motor vehicles 
Manufacturing 
Wholesale 

Excluding motor vehicles 

Retail 

Automotive 
Excluding auto  dealers 

1994 

1994

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Aug. 

Sept 

Oct.

18.4 

75.6 

70.6 

93.9 

50.8 

45.6

21.1 
9.4 
-4.4 
-1.4 
15.2 
3.1 
8.3 
5.9 
2.6 
3.4 

9.9 
11.8 
9.9 
-2.0 
3.0 
2.0 
2.5 
-.5 

58.9 
13.3 
-4.7 
3.7 
14.4 
23.0 
16.6 
39.4 
10.4 
29.0 

39.0 
35.6 
.7 
16.0 
10.8 
22.3 
-1.9 
24.2 

53.4 
13.7 
-2.3 
-.8 
16.8 
22.7 
23.0 
34.2 
17.5 
16.7 

38.4 
31.2 
3.6 
14.0 
14.5 
20.7 
6.9 
13.8 

57.0 
4.4 
-4.9 
2.0 
7.3 
11.5 
18.7 
78.0 
44.0 
34.0 

34.5 
36.2 
-1.6 
5.8 
12.5 
30.2 
4.3 
25.9 

27.9 
-5.8 
-2.9 
-4.7 
1.8 
14.1 
11.7 
42.5 
20.5 
22.0 

8.2 
7.2 
-16.4 
4.2 
2.0 
20.4 
-2.3 
22.7 

49.6
17.5
.2
-2.5
19.7
16.2
11.9
12.0
-8.3
20.3

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

INVENTORIES RELATIVE  TO SALES 1
(Months supply;  based on seasonally adjusted data at book  value)

1994 

1994

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Aug. 

Sept. 

Oct.

Total 

1.41 

1.41 

1.41 

1.39 

1.40 

1.40

Excluding wholesale  and

retail motor vehicles 

Manufacturing 

Defense  aircraft 
Nondefense  aircraft 
Excluding aircraft 

Wholesale 

Excluding motor vehicles 

Retail 

Automotive 
Excluding auto dealers 

Constant-dollar basis

Total 

Excluding motor vehicles 
Manufacturing 
Wholesale 

Excluding motor vehicles 

Retail 

Automotive 
Excluding auto  dealers 

1.39 
1.40 
4.80 
5.00 
1.28 
1.31 
1.30 
1.50 
1.61 
1.47 

1.46 
1.52 
1.44 
1.39 
1.39 
1.53 
1.56 
1.52 

1.39 
1.39 
4.85 
5.84 
1.26 
1.33 
1.30 
1.54 
1.67 
1.50 

1.46 
1.51 
1.43 
1.41 
1.39 
1.56 
1.57 
1.55 

1.38 
1.36 
4.69 
5.54 
1.25 
1.32 
1.30 
1.55 
1.75 
1.50 

1.46 
1.51 
1.41 
1.40 
1.39 
1.57 
1.62 
1.56 

1.36 
1.34 
4.49 
5.62 
1.23 
1.30 
1.29 
1.53 
1.70 
1.48 

1.44 
1.49 
1.40 
1.39 
1.38 
1.56 
1.62 
1.54 

1.37 
1.35 
4.95 
5.38 
1.23 
1.31 
1.29 
1.54 
1.71 
1.49 

1.44 
1.50 
1.40 
1.39 
1.38 
1.56 
1.61 
1.55 

1.38
1.37
4.79
5.76
1.25
1.32
1.29
1.52
1.63
1.49

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

1. Ratio of  end-of-period  inventories  to average monthly sales  for the  period.

-6-

Ratio of  Inventories to Sales
(Book value)

Manufacturing

1980 

1982 

1984 

1986 

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994

Wholesale  excluding  motor vehicles

1980 

1982 

1984 

1986 

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994

Retail
Ratio

Ratio

Ratio

Ratio

GAF group

.

--%

4 

Oct.

Total excluding  auto

1980 

1982

1984 

1986 

1988 

1990

1992

1994

THE  FINANCIAL ECONOMY

Municipal  Markets

The  municipal  market  continued to  rally  for  a time  after  the

close  of the  Greenbook on  Wednesday,  as  concern  about  the  Orange

County  developments  receded  further.  The  ratio  of municipal  bond

yields  to  Treasuries  dropped  from  0.91  last  week to  0.89,  measured

about  Thursday  noon,  its  lowest  level  since  early November.

Issuance  of tax-exempt  debt  increased  to  almost  $3  billion  over the

week,  the  highest  weekly volume  in  about  a month.

However, the  rally stalled  on  Thursday, and  the  municipal

market  again  showed  signs  of  stress,  especially  in  short-term

maturities.  Tax-exempt bond  and money  funds  circulated large  bid

lists  indicating  sizable  net  redemptions  over  the  week.  The  yields

on  Orange  County  notes  backed  by  letters  of  credit  are  about

225  basis  points  above  comparable  paper  issued  elsewhere  in

California.  Dealers  also  report  being unable  to  place  the  tax-

exempt  paper  of Riverside  County,  California, and  Texas

municipalities,  even though these  entities have no  exposure  to  the

loss-plagued  investment pools  in  Orange  County  and  Texas.

Orange  County's  estimate  of the  losses  on  its  investment  pool

remains  at  about  $2 billion.  The  county's  new financial  advisor,

Robert  Hayes,  has  vowed  to  completely restructure the  fund's

portfolio within ninety  days.  At  that  time,  the  average maturity  of

securities  in the  fund  should  resemble that  of a typical money

market  fund.  The  restructuring has  already  begun,  as  the  fund  sold

almost  $500 million  in medium-term fixed-income agency  issues  on

Thursday;  the  remaining  $1 billion in the  fund's  most  liquid

securities  are  slated to  be  sold today.  The  fund will  sell  its more

unusual  structured notes  at  later dates.  In  a related  development,

an Orange  County official  announced that  it  would  file  a lawsuit  as

-8-

early as  next  week  alleging  that  Merrill  Lynch  failed  to  disclose

the  risks  associated with  the  securities  it  sold  to  the  county

-9-

Ratio of  Tax-Exempt  Yield to Treasury  Yield

Weekly 

S- 

Ratio

Nov  10 

Weekly 

SI 
Nov 17 

-

I 

I 

Nov 24 

Dec  1 

Dec  8 

Dec  15

0.93

0.92

0.91

0.9

0.89

0.88

0.87

0.86

Ratio

0.96

0.94

0.92

0.9

0.88

0.86

J 

I I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I 
J 
S  O  N  D 

F  M  A  M 

A 

J 
1993 

J 

Ratio  of the Bond  Buyer  30-year revenue bond index to yield on 30-year Treasury bond.

J 
1994

I  1  I  I  I 
F  M  A  M 
J 

I  I  I  I  I 
S  O 
N  D

A 

0.84

-10-

SELECTED  FINANCIAL  MARKET 

QUOTATIONS
excect  as  noted)

(Percent 

1994

FOMC,* 

Feb 

3 Nov  15  Dec  15 

Change  to  Dec  15,  1994

From Oct  93 
lows 

From 
Feb  3 

From  FOMC,*
Nov  15

Oct 
lows 

3.07 

3.07 

4.75 

5.50

3.01 
3.09 
3.23 

3.13 
3.27 
3.52 

5.28 
5.69 
6.11 

5.54 
6.19 
6.64 

3.13 
3.23 

3.16 
3.25 

5.32 
5.76 

6.13 
6.30 

3.08 
3.22 
3.23 

3-11 
3.25 
3.41 

5.27 
5.71 
6.01 

6.08 
6.31 
6.82 

2.53
3-10
3.41

3.00
3.07

3.00
3.09
3.59

3.06 
3.25 

3.06 
3.25 

5.25 
5.75 

6.06
6.25

3.00 
3.00 

Instrument

SHORT-TERM  RATES

Federal  funds

Treasury  bills

3

3-month
6-month
1-year

Commercial  paper

1-month
3-month

Large  negotiable  CDs

1-month
3-month
6-month

Eurodollar  deposits

4

l-month
3-month

Bank  prime  rate

6.00 

6.00 

7.75 

8.50 

2.50

INTERMEDIATE-  AND  LONG-TERM RATES

U.S.  Treasury  (constant maturity)

3-year
10-year
30-year

Municipal  revenue

(Bond  Buyer)

5

Corporate--A utility,

recently offered

Home  mortgages

6

4.06 
5.19 
5.78 

4.60 
5.81 
6.31 

7.37 
7.94 
8.09 

7.66 
7.79 
7.86 

3.60
2.60
2.08

5.41 

5.49 

7.23 

7.02

1.61

6.79 

7-35 

8.89 

8.78

1 .99

2.41
2.42

1  43 

-0.11

-0.04
0.55

FHLMC  30-yr.  fixed  rate
FHLMC  1-yr.  adjustable  rate

6.74 
4.14 

6.97 
4.12 

9.19 
6.01 

9.15
6.56

Record  high

I 1989 

1994

Percentage  change  to  Dec  15:

Stock exchange  index

Level 

Date 

Low, 

FOMc,*
Jan.  3  Nov  15 

Dec

15 

From
record
high

Dow-Jones  Industrial
NYSE  Composite
NASDAQ  (OTC)
Wilshire

3978.36
267.71
803.93
4804.31

1/31/94
2/2/94
3/18/94
2/2/94

2144.64
154.00
378.56
2718.59

3829.73
254.84
768.14
4611.07

3765.47
248.96
730.68
4480.90

-5.35
-7.00
-9.11
-6.73

From
1989 
low 

75.58
61.66
93.02
64.82

From FOMC,.
Nov  15

-1.68
-2.31
-4.88
-2.82

1.  One-day quotes  except  as  noted.
2. Average  for  two-week  reserve  maintenance
period  closest to  date  shown.  Last  observation
is  average  to  date  for  maintenance  period  ending
Dec  21.  1994.

3.  Secondary  market.

* Figures  are as  of  the  close  on Nov.  14,  1994.

4.  Bid  rates  for  Eurodollar

deposits  at  11  a.m.  London time.

5.  Most  recent  observation  based  on

one-day  Thursday  quote  and  futures
market  index changes.

6.  Quotes  for  week  ending Friday

previous  to  date  shown.

0.75

0.26
0.50
0.53

0.81
0.54

0.81
0.60
0.81

0.81
0.50

0.75

0.29
-0.15
-0.23

-0.21

-11-

THE  INTERNATIONAL  ECONOMY

U.S.  International  Transactions  in  1994-Q3

The  U.S.  current  account  deficit  was  $167  billion  SAAR  in  the

third  quarter,  $15  billion  larger than  in  the  second  quarter.  Most

of the  change was  in  net  trade  in  goods  and  services  (imports  rose

more  than exports  grew) 

A  4.5  percent  increase  in  the  value  of

imports  was  spread  among all  major  trade  categories  and  reflected

the  strength  of  consumption  and  investment  spending  in  the  United

States.  The  3.5  percent  increase  in  exports  was  largely  in

machinery,  industrial  supplies  and  consumer  goods.

Both income  payments  and  receipts  rose  sharply  in  the  third

quarter  with income  payments  on  foreign  assets  in the  United  States

increasing more  than income  receipts  from U.S.  assets  abroad.  The

jump  in  income  payments  primarily  reflected higher  earnings  on

foreign  direct  investment  in the  United  States;  payments  to  foreign

residents  on their  portfolio  investments  in  the  United  States  also

rose,  reflecting both higher  interest  rates  and  greater  liabilities.

U.S.  CURRENT  ACCOUNT
(Billions of dollars,  seasonally adjusted  annual  rates)

Goods  & services 
balance 

Investment 
income,  net 

Transfers 
net 

Current  acct.

balance

Years

1992 
1993 

Quarters
1993-1 
2 
3 
4 

1994-1 

2-r 
3 

Memo:

$  Change

-40.4 
-75.7 

-57.7 
-76.3 
-89.0 
-79.9 

-97  3 
'106.6 
-118.0 

Q2-Q1 
Q3-Q2 

-9.3 
11.5 

4.5 
3.9 

7.4 
2.7 
8.1 
-2.4 

-3.2 
-11  2 
-15.8 

-32.0 
-32.1 

-29.1 
-28.8 
-30.5 
-40.1 

-28.7 
33.8 
33.1 

-67.9
103.9

-79.4
.102.4
111.4
122.3

-129.3
-151.6
-166.9

-8.0 
-4.6 

-5.1 
,8 

-22.4
15,3

Source:  U.S.  Department  of  Commerce,  Bureau  of Economic  Analysis.

-12-

Most  of  the  increase  in  income  receipts  on U.S.  assets  abroad

reflected  a sharp  rise  in  earnings  on direct  investments;  income  on

portfolio  investments  abroad  also  rose  largely  reflecting  higher

interest  rates.

Capital  flows.  Foreign  direct  investment  in the  United  States

rose  to  more  than  $13  billion  in the  third  quarter, up  from

$5 billion in  the  second  quarter 

(See  line  7  of the  Summary  of

U.S.  International  Transactions table.)  One  of the  factors  swelling

inflows  was  the  takeover  of Gerber  by  Sandoz.  A  revival  of  takeover

activity by  foreign  firms  in the  United  States  has  been  an  important

factor  in  swelling inflows  during much  of  1994.  Another  factor has

been  the  revival  of  affiliates'  profits  and  reinvested  earnings.

U.S.  direct  investment  abroad  also  has  been  affected  by

continued  takeover  activity abroad by U.S.  firms.  However,  direct

investment  capital  outflows  in the  third  quarter  ($9.5  billion)

remained  about  level with  the  second  quarter  far  below  the  fourth

quarter  of  1993  and  the  first  quarter  of  1994  (line 6) 

These wide

swings  largely  reflected short-term intercompany  debt transactions

between  finance  affiliates  in  the  United  Kingdom and  their U.S.

parents.

-13-

SUMMARY  OF  U.S. 

INTERNATIONAL  TRANSACTIONS

1

(Billions of  dollars, not  seasonally adjusted  except as  noted)

I

Month

1994

I___Q2A

Q3  1  Aug.  Sept. 

I

Ii 

Quarter 

Year 

1993 

1992 

I_ 

I 

I 
1993  I  Q4 
I 

| 

I 

Q 

1994 

Q2 
_ 

38.3

4.8
4.9

28.6

70.2
29.9

-5.1

45.4

23.3

4.8

-.9
19.4

8.7

15.7

-4.7

-2.4

Oct.

10.4

1.0

.5
8.9

3.9 

-.7 

-.7 

-.1 

3.5 

-.2 

-.1 

-.1 

-.2

35.6 

8.5 

4.7 

38.0  38.1 

10.0 

-8.1 

7.7 

1.3

68.1

37.4

34.3

-3.7

105.5

24.7

61.2

19.6

45.8
8.1

25.5
12.2

31.1

9.5

6.3
-7.3

13.7

14.8

8.0

-1.3

5.9
5.3

1.7

-1.2

-47.9

-132.8

-15.6

-32.3

-69.5

-63.3

-34.6
-13.9

-20.7

-25.1

-18.0

-6.6

-5.3

-18.5

-12.7

-9.2 
-2.3 

-7.0 

-3.7 
-.9 

-4.6 

-.2
-.9

.7

official  capital

1. Changes  in  foreign  official reserve

assets  in  U.S.  (+ - increase)

a. G-10 countries
b. OPEC countries
c. All  other countries

2. Changes  in  U.S.  official  reserve
assets  (+ = decrease)

Private  capital

Banks

3. Change in  net foreign positions of

banking offices  in  the U.S.

Securities

3

4. Foreign net purchases of
U.S.  securities  (+)
a. Treasury securities
b.  Corporate and  other  bonds
c. Corporate stocks

4

5

5. U.S.  net purchases  (-) of

foreign  securities

a. Bonds
b. Stocks

Other  flows  (quarterly data, s.a.)

6.  U.S.  direct  investment  (-}  abroad
7.  Foreign  direct investment  in U.S.
8.  Other  (+ = inflow)

-41.0
9.9

-57.9
21-4

-22.7
8.1

-24.8
12.0

18.1

68.6

2.7

5.4

-8.0
5.4

6.2

-9.5 
13.3 

-6.1 

n.a. 
n.a. 

n.a. 
n.a. 

n.a.
n.a.

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a.

U.S.  current  account  balance  (s.a.)

-67.9  -103.9

-30.6  -32.3  -37.9  -41.7

n.a.  n.a. 

n.a.

Statistical  discrepancy  (s.a.)

-17.1 

21.1

4.0  -14.5  -4.3

5.3 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a.

1. The  sum of  official  capital,  private  capital,  the  current  account balance, and  the statistical

discrepancy is  zero.  Details may not  sum to totals becuse of  rounding.

2. Changes  in dollar-denominated  positions of all  depository institutions  and bank holding  companies
plus  certain transactions between broker-dealers and unaffiliated foreigners  (particularly borrowing  and
lending under repurchase  agreements).  Includes changes  in  custody liabilities  other than U.S.  Treasury
bills.

3. Includes commissions  on securities transactions and  therefore  does not match exactly the data on

U.S.  international  transactions published by the Department of  Commerce.

4.  Includes  Treasury bills.
5. Includes  U.S.  government  agency bonds.
6-  Transactions  by nonbanking concerns and other banking and official  transactions not  shown  elsewhere

plus  amounts  resulting from adjustments  made by the Department of Commerce and revisions  in  lines  1
through  5 since publication of  the quarterly data in  the  Survey of  Current Business.

n.a. Not available. 

* Less  than $50  million.




