==== GREENBOOK | 1996-03-26_FOMC19960326meeting.txt ====

Meeting of  the Federal  Open Market  Committee
March 26,  1996

A meeting of  the  Federal  Open Market  Committee was  held in

the  offices  of  the  Board of  Governors  of  the Federal  Reserve System  in

Washington,  D.C.,  on  Tuesday, March 26,  1996  beginning at  8:00  a.m.

PRESENT:  Mr. Greenspan,  Chairman

Mr. McDonough, Vice  Chairman
Mr. Boehne
Mr. Jordan
Mr. Kelley
Mr.  Lindsey
Mr. McTeer
Ms.  Phillips
Mr.  Stern
Ms.  Yellen

Messrs.  Broaddus, Guynn,  Moskow, and Parry,

Alternate Members  of  the Federal  Open Market
Committee

Messrs. Hoenig  and Melzer, and Ms.  Minehan,

Presidents  of  the Federal  Reserve Banks  of
Kansas  City,  St.  Louis,  and Boston  respectively

Mr.  Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy  Secretary
Mr.  Coyne,  Assistant  Secretary
Mr.  Gillum, Assistant  Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General  Counsel
Mr.  Baxter,  Deputy General  Counsel
Mr.  Prell,  Economist
Mr.  Truman, Economist

Messrs.  Lang, Mishkin,  Promisel,  Rolnick,

Rosenblum, Siegman,  Simpson,  Sniderman,
and Stockton, Associate  Economists

Mr.  Fisher, Manager,  System Open Market Account

Mr.  Ettin,  Deputy Director, Division  of  Research

and  Statistics, Board  of Governors
Mr.  Reinhart,  Assistant  Director,  Division of
Monetary Affairs,  Board of Governors

Ms.  Low, Open Market  Secretariat Assistant,
Division  of  Monetary Affairs,  Board of
Governors

-2-

Mr.  Stone,  First Vice  President,  Federal  Reserve

Bank of  Philadelphia

Messrs.  Davis,  Dewald, Goodfriend, and Hunter,

Senior Vice Presidents,  Federal  Reserve  Banks
of  Kansas City,  St.  Louis,  Richmond, and
Chicago  respectively

Mr. Judd, Ms.  Rosenbaum, and Mr. Rosengren, Vice
Presidents,  Federal  Reserve  Banks of  San
Francisco, Atlanta, and Boston, respectively

Mr.  Bentley, Assistant Vice  President,  Federal

Reserve Bank of  New York

Transcript  of Federal  Open Market Committee Meeting
March  26,  1996

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Good morning,  everybody.  Some  of  us  are

slightly blurry-eyed, which is  understandable.  I appreciate  your
coming  somewhat  earlier.  Would somebody like  to move  the minutes  of
the January  30-31 meeting?

SPEAKER(?).  Move approval.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Without  objection.  Mr.  Fisher.

MR.  FISHER.  Thank you.  [Statement--see  Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Questions  for  Peter?  If  not,  would

somebody like  to move  to  ratify his  transactions  since  the  last
meeting?

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.  I move approval  of  the  domestic

operations.

MR. LINDSEY.  Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Without  objection, thank you.  Mr.

Prell.

MR. PRELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  [Statement--see

Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  With  respect  to your  last  remark, has

the  decline  in cattle prices  been,  as  best you  can  judge, essentially
a reaction to  the  increased feed  costs  that  have  crushed margins  or  is
there  a broader cattle  supply  cycle  involved here?  Do we  know the
answer  to  that?

MR. PRELL.  I take  it  you  are  not  referring  to  yesterday's--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  No,  I am  referring  to  the  fact  that

cattle prices  have been  falling  in  the  face  of  rapidly  rising  corn  and
soybean meal  costs,  for  example,  and ranch margins  have  been coming
down quite appreciably.  The question  I am  trying  to  get  at  is  whether
the weakness  in  cattle prices  is  the  result  of premature  unloading  of
herds,  which  in  the past  has  often been  the  determining  factor  in  such
price  declines.

MR.  PRELL.  I don't have  a good answer.  My sense  is  that  a

reduction in  herd size probably  has  not begun  in any significant way.
That  remains  one  of  the uncertainties.  It  could be  that  the markets
anticipate  that  such a development will  occur  in the  not  too distant
future.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  So  a pickup  in meat prices,  should it

occur,  is  still quite  some  time  away?

MR. PRELL.  Yes.  We  see  that  as  more  of  a risk as  we move

out  into  1997.

MR. HOENIG.  Mr.  Chairman,  I think that  is  accurate.  We

3/26/96

think  the  depletion of  herd inventories has  just  begun,  at most,  and
meat prices probably reflect  that  expectation  in  the  context of  rising
grain costs.  The  dominant factor  is  a strong  supply of  red meat  that
has not  been liquidated yet.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Do you have  any mad cows  in  your

District?

MR. HOENIG.  A lot  of  mad ranchers,  but no  mad cows!

[Laughter]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Parry.

MR. PARRY.  Mike, you talked a little about  PCs,  and the

Greenbook  indicated that  in  recent history we  have  all  underestimated
the  amount  of  investment  in  that area.  I also  saw The Wall  Street
Journal  article  on Monday.  Is  your reasoning  as  to  why such
investment  is  going  to  be  weaker in  the  future similar  to  that  in  the
article,  or are  there  different  reasons  that lead you to  that
conclusion?

MR. PRELL.  The article  did echo  a couple  of  the  reasons  that

we  stated in  the Greenbook.  Admittedly, we stated  those reasons  only
very briefly.

MR. PARRY.  Yes.

MR. PRELL.  One was  the  remark about  replacement  demand.  I

certainly have  heard this  from people  in  the  industry.  They feel  that
in many cases businesses  have acquired about  all  the  computers  they
need.  The question  is  how fast  they are going  to  replace  those
computers,  given  the  changes  in technology.  That  was  a central  theme
of  yesterday's  article.  It  also  is  clear that businesses  confront  an
ongoing decision  about whether  to  buy or  to wait  for  the  next  round of
technology.  This  is  not  something we  really went  into  in  the  Green-
book,  but  it  is  one  of  the  uncertainties  in  the  forecast.  We  have
gone  through a number of  product  cycles.  At  times  this has been a
significant  feature  in our  thinking--that perhaps people would hold
off buying  until  the  Pentium  chip became  available  or some  earlier
version.  In  this  case,  the  P6  chip  that  is  just  coming out might  lead
to  another  issue  of  timing.  Basically,  though,  the  industry  seems  to
be mature  enough at  this  stage--its  penetration of  the business
market,  in particular, seems  great enough--that  the  movements  in
investment more generally are going  to  show through in  computer
purchases.  If  we  are  in a phase when  the  accelerator  effects  are no
longer a big plus, we would expect  that  to  show through more  in  the
computer  sector than  it  might  have earlier when computers were  still
increasing dramatically their penetration  in the  business  sector.

MR.  PARRY.  Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN.  Mike,  when you first  gave  us  the  projections  for

1997  in  the  September Greenbook,  the nominal  GDP growth  in  that
initial  projection was  a very hopeful path  to me because  it  had
nominal GDP  growing  just under  4 percent  for  the  full year.  That
seemed about right  to  me.  But  in  this Greenbook, your upward revision

3/26/96

of nominal  GDP by a full  percentage point  for  1997  jumped  out  at  me.
You now have  it  rising  just  under 5 percent,  and I know your  real
output  numbers have  not  changed  that  much.  Even  the  CPI  is  only about
0.1  percent higher  than you  had  it  before.  As  I look at  this  puzzle
and ask where  the  change  is  coming  from, of  course,  it  is  all  in  the
deflator.  What  changed your  thinking  so  that you  now have  nominal  GDP
growing a percentage point  faster  in 1997  than you  were projecting  six
months,  or even  four months,  ago?

MR. PRELL.  President  Jordan,  that's  a good question.  I do

not  have  a ready answer  for you.  Obviously, the  deflator has  shifted
more  than the  other price  indexes.

MR. JORDAN.  By a  full  percentage point.

MR. PRELL.  That  suggests  an  element  of  mix change here.  It

is  conceivable that,  on  further  investigation, we shall  find  that
there  is  something we  are not  entirely comfortable with  in these
numbers.  So,  I shall  take  that  question as  something  for us  to
investigate before  the next  round.

MR. STOCKTON.  This  does  not  answer  the  question either, but
one  of  the  reasons why  the  deflator is  higher now than  it  was  back in
September  is  the  shift  to  the updated base year.  That  has  the  effect
of  tending  to  raise  the deflator and  to  lower GDP growth.  That  does
not  explain why nominal  GDP  is  a percentage point  higher than  it  was
before, but  it  does  explain why the  deflator might be  a bit higher.

MR.  PRELL.  I should have noted  that.  Because  the nominal

GDP  is  higher,  there  is  a bit  of  a mystery here  for us.

MR. LINDSEY.  I'm glad Jerry pointed that  out.  When you

construct  the  forecast,  do you  start with  the  nominal GDP  forecast  and
work back?

MR. PRELL.  No,  but  in  the course  of  a forecast  where one

needs  to  align both the  income  and the product  sides  of  the  accounts,
the  nominal  totals are  relevant.  We should  not  end up with numbers
that  don't make  sense.

MR. LINDSEY.  Right.  I am  fairly  startled at  your answer.

That  is  why I am asking  the  question as  to  how the  nominal  falls  out.
I would  think that you would  start with  a monetary policy forecast
that  would determine a nominal GDP--Don  is  shaking his  head, so  I have
it wrong.  Tell  me exactly.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  It  is  a  simultaneously determined

system.

MR. LINDSEY.  But  you have  a  full  percentage point  change  in

nominal GDP--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  It means  that  somebody's  "add factor"

changed very substantially.

MR. LINDSEY.  Well,  all  right,  this  burst  of  nominal  GDP was

the way of  reconciling things  that  did not  add up  in  the model.

3/26/96

MR. PRELL.  Let  me  remind you that  the  observation was  about

a  forecast made  last  September.  That  September  forecast was put
together prior to  a total  revision of  the national  income  accounts.
Some  of  those  revisions  did affect  nominal  GDP going back
historically.  I don't want to  go  too  far here.  I am not  certain.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  But  they did.  There were  significant

changes  in  nominal  GDP.

MR.  PRELL.  Right.  But  the  fact  is  that  the  largest  change

in these  nominal GDP  forecasts  for  1997  was  between  September and
November.  There has been a  further  upward creep that  accumulates  to  a
significant difference  from September  to  now.  But  if  one  looked  at
the  changes  just  over  the past  couple  of  months,  one  would  see  a
pretty  small  creep and  it would not  be quite  so  shocking.  We have  to
go back and  look  at  this  in  light  of  the  fact  that,  as  Dave Stockton
pointed out,  we really did have a  total  change  in  the  accounts  in  this
period, both  in terms  of  data whose history was  revised and concepts
that  have  changed.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Any  further questions?

MR. JORDAN.  Can  I just  follow up  on  that  as  regards  further
work?  Mike,  had you said  in response  to my initial question  that  you
had been assuming a monetary policy indexed by a  6 percent  funds  rate
--or,  I guess,  it  was  5-3/4  percent at  that  time--and that  the  1/2
percentage point  drop since  then  is  what did  it,  then we  could have
talked about  that,  or a  change  in  fiscal  thrust,  or  something.  Or,
coming at  it  from a different  framework,  if  you had  said that monetary
growth  is  now producing much more  total  spending,  then we  could have
talked about  that  change.  So,  the  underlying question  that has  to be
embodied in your answer  once you come back to  this  is  that  at  the  end
of  the day we  are  still  trying  to  decide whether  a  5-1/4 percent  funds
rate  is  too high,  too  low, or  just  right.

MR. PRELL.  You  are  getting  into a  fundamental  question  about

the whole  forecast,  and  I am  focusing more  on  the  fact  that,  in
particular,  our consumer  price  forecast  looking  out  into  1997  did not
change a  great deal.  Our  real  GDP  forecast has  not  changed much
either,  but  we have  switched from  1987  dollars  to  chain-indexed 1992
dollars.  Allowing for  that,  our  real  GDP  forecast  for  1997  is
stronger  than  it  was  back in  September.  You have  just pointed  to  a
couple  of  factors  that  would be relevant  to  thinking  about  that:  one,
we have a  lower  funds  rate path than we  anticipated at  that  time;
two,  we have  removed  some  of  the  fiscal  restraint  that  was  in  the
forecast looking  out  through 1997.  So,  there  is  a consistency  in that
respect.  I was  focusing more on  this  narrower  technical question  and
this  relative movement  in our  price measures.  That  raises  an
interesting question.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Any further  questions?  If  not,  would

somebody  like to  start  the  roundtable?  President  Parry.

MR. PARRY.  Mr. Chairman,  economic  growth  in the  Twelfth

District has picked up after  a brief  lull  at  the  end of  last  year.
Over  the  past  12  months,  growth  in the  District  has  been substantially
more  rapid than  in  the  nation according  to  recently revised employment
figures.  The  increased pace of  activity  largely reflects  a pickup  in

3/26/96

California, where  job growth also  has  exceeded the  national  figure
over  the past year.  It  is  encouraging  that  as  the  economy in
California has  improved, job growth has become more broadly based.
During the  early  stages of  the  state's  recovery, job growth was
concentrated in  several  sectors  that were  growing even more  rapidly
nationwide,  such as  business  services.  During  1995,  these  sectors
continued  to  grow rapidly but accounted  for a smaller  share  of  state
job growth.  Several  key durable  manufacturing sectors,  primarily
electronics,  outstripped  the  rest  of  the  country.

In the  rest  of  the  District,  employment has been very robust

in Nevada, Utah,  Oregon, and Arizona, which continue  to  be  among  the
five  fastest growing  states.  Washington's  economy slowed over  the
past year, but  the  state's  outlook  for  the  rest  of  1996  appears
stronger  in part  because  of  increased orders  at  Boeing.  District
employment has been particularly  strong in  the  services,  trade,  and
construction sectors.  Manufacturing employment in  the  District has
expanded by  just  over  1 percent over  the past  12  months.  This
compares  favorably, of  course, with declining manufacturing employment
at  the national  level.  However, declining  semiconductor demand may
slow District  manufacturing growth  in the  near term.

Turning  to  the  national economy, as  Mike  Prell  stated,  the
substantial amount  of  economic  news  released since  our  last meeting
has  taken us  on a bit  of  a roller  coaster ride.  Nonetheless,  it
probably has  had little net  effect  on  the  outlook  for  this  year.
Assuming a constant  funds  rate  at  the  current  level,  I would  expect  to
see  real GDP  growth perhaps  slightly above  its  2 percent potential
rate  in  1996.  Of  course,  the  GM strike will  have  some near-term
effect  on  GDP volatility.  What  I find most  striking about  the  current
situation  is  the  consistency  of  many inflation  indicators.  They all
seem  to be  pointing  toward core  CPI  inflation remaining  around 3
percent,  roughly the  same  rate  as  in  the  past 3 years.  For example,
both  the  unemployment  and the  capacity utilization  rates  are near
common estimates  of  their natural  rates.  Also,  the  employment  cost
index rose  by nearly  3 percent  in  1995;  this  would be  consistent with
about  the  same  increase  in  the  CPI  if  experience  over  the past  15
years  is  a guide.  Finally, inflation expectations  as  measured by  Ed
Boehne's  survey are around 3 percent.  This  isn't  surprising given the
inflation indicators  I have mentioned as well  as  experience with
inflation in  recent years.  So,  if  we maintain  the  current  stance  of
policy, it  appears  that  conditions  in  the  economy are  likely to
maintain  roughly  the  status quo when  it  comes  to  inflation over  the
next  two years.  Moreover, if  we do  end up  seeing a change in
inflation,  it  is  more  likely to  be  on  the up  side  since measures  of
unemployment  and unused  capacity appear to  be slightly  on the  low side
of  their natural rates.  Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Thank  you.  President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS.  Mr. Chairman,  the  information we  are getting

from  our regional  contacts  has been decidedly more upbeat  in  recent
weeks.  Both  our latest District manufacturing survey and our  retail
service  sector survey showed broad-based increases  in activity  for  the
first  time  in about  five months.  Some  of  this  news  obviously reflects
the  rebound that occurred  in  February  from  the weather-related
weakness  in January, but not  all  of  it was  a rebound.  We  have made
some  inquiries beyond our normal  survey questions,  and  it  seems  likely

3/26/96

that  at  least  some  of  the  increase  in the  activity  that  we saw in
February  reflects  a more fundamental  strengthening of  aggregate  demand
in our  area.  This  apparent  firming also  is  evident  in what  I would
describe  as  the noticeably more  optimistic  tone of  the  comments  at  our
board meeting  a couple weeks  ago and  at  our Small  Business  and
Agricultural Advisory  Council  meeting  last week.  For  example,

retail  chains  including one  national  retail  chain,  has been generally
pessimistic about  the  outlook  for  this  sector ever  since

who  is  on the boards  of  a couple of  large

the beginning  of  last year. 

a

couple weeks  ago,  though,  she  said she was  guardedly optimistic  about
the  prospects  for  the retail  sector.  That  really got our  attention
since  it  was at  variance with what  she  had been  saying until now.

who  runs  a multi-state  building materials  chain

supported her  assessment.  In  fact, most 
one exception  reported greater optimism  in the  retail  sector  at that
meeting.  Elsewhere,  real estate  activity has been rising noticeably
in most  of  the major urban  areas  of  our District.  The housing market
in Richmond  is  said to  be  the  strongest  in  five  years.

with  only

Turning  to  the  national picture, we would agree with  the

Greenbook's  increased emphasis  on  the  upside  risk in  the  current
outlook.  Obviously, we would not want  to put  too much store  in one  or
two monthly economic  reports.  The  February employment  report,  in
particular, could  easily be revised downward  somewhat.  But  even if  it
is,  I think the  current  situation  is  striking  in  that  that  report and
most of  the  other  recent monthly reports  on  industrial production, car
sales,  and  other retail  sales  are  stronger  than we had anticipated.
That  is,  they are  all  speaking  with one voice.  Although I would  agree
that we  don't yet have  unambiguous  evidence that  aggregate  demand  is
now growing more  rapidly  than potential  output,  I think  it  is  clear
that we  don't have a lot  of  upside headroom.  By all  accounts,  the
economy has  been operating  for  a while now somewhere  in  the
neighborhood of nonaccelerating  inflation  capacity or whatever you
want  to  call  it.

With respect  to  inflation,  I am not  unduly  concerned yet

about  the  uptick  in the  core  CPI  that  we have seen  so  far  this  year,
since  it may  reflect  continuing seasonal  adjustment problems  that we
have had with  that  series  in  the  early months  of  several  recent years.
Nor would  I want  to  give  too much weight  to  the  recent  increases  in
some measures  of  labor compensation, which were mentioned in  the
Greenbook.  But as  Bob Parry  just pointed  out,  these  indicators are
generally moving  in the  same  direction.  That  makes me nervous,
especially against  the background of  the  recent  acceleration in money
growth and even more  especially against  the background of  the  really
spectacular  rise  in  both intermediate-  and long-term  interest rates
since  the beginning of  the year  including,  of  course, the
extraordinary  25  basis point  jump  in  the  30-year bond rate  on the  day
that  the  February  employment  report was  released.  Of course,  until we
have  an  inflation-indexed bond, we  are never  going  to  know for  sure,
when we  get a runup  in rates  like  this,  what part  of  it  is  real  and
what part  is  an  increase  in  the  inflation  premium.  But with the
economy currently operating near  full  capacity, that may well be  a
distinction without a practical  difference because  even if  all  or most
of  the  increase were  in real  rates,  if  the  economy is  strong enough to
push  real  long-term  interest rates  up  this  sharply  in  this brief
period of  time,  it  may not  be long  before  that  strength presses  on

3/26/96

capacity with  longer-term  inflation consequences.  Indeed,  if  one were
a pessimist on  this,  one  could actually read the  recent data as
suggesting  that  something  like this  scenario may already be playing
itself  out.  Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.  Thank you, Mr.  Chairman.  What  is  remarkable

about the  economy  in recent months  is  its  resiliency.  Despite
government  shutdowns,  severe weather, and  strikes,  the national
economy is  still  on  track for moderate  growth and low  inflation.  The
economy is  also  experiencing what could  turn out  to  be  its  greatest
restructuring since  the  Industrial Revolution,  with all  the  attendant
insecurity  that  comes  at  the personal  level  from change  of  this
magnitude.  That,  I think, makes  this  resiliency all  the more
remarkable.  My sense  is  that  the upside and downside  risks  are about
evenly balanced  for  the  period  immediately ahead.  The  inventory
correction  appears  to  be  well  along.  The  consumer, while  somewhat
stretched  in terms  of  debt, still  appears  to  have ample  purchasing
power  for sustainable  spending  growth.  And the  strengthening  in
residential construction  reflects positive  consumer sentiment.  One
major builder  told me,  for  example,  that some  of  his  strongest  sales
are  in areas  heavily  impacted by the  layoffs  at  AT&T.

On  the wage/price  front,  I think we need to  be watchful,  but

we also need  to  keep  in  context where  we are.  We are more  than  five
years  into  an  economic  expansion.  We have  seen  little  if  any
acceleration in  inflation.  I must  say as  I look back through  the
pipeline,  there  really are  few signs  of  an  acceleration of  inflation
at  this point.  The positive  aspect  of  this  expansion is  that after
more than  five years we have not had any acceleration of  inflation.
My sense  is  that  we  are not  at  the point where  that  is  likely;  I think
inflation will  continue  to  be  subdued  for  the period ahead.

Turning  to  the  region, the  Philadelphia District  economy

continues  to  lag  the nation.  Pennsylvania in  particular  is  a major
laggard.  New Jersey growth  rates  are more promising, and  I think  the
outlook  there  is  brighter.  Delaware  continues  to  be  the  little jewel
that it  is  in  the  regional  economy.  What  has  impressed me most  in
recent  weeks  is  the  surge  in  new housing sales  in  the District.  For
the better builders,  this  surge has been  apparent  for  a couple of
months.  Even  in  the dead  of  winter,  the  traffic  into  showrooms  was
very high, and people were more  than  looking;  they were  signing
contracts.  Now, if you  talk to  the builders who  are  not  the most
competitive or  the  leading builders,  they also  are  feeling  the upturn
in activity.  It  is  difficult  to  find a builder in  the  District who  is
not  feeling that.  I think low mortgage  rates  and  the perception that
mortgage  rates  have bottomed  out  have been  a stimulus.  But  at  least
for  the Philadelphia District,  with existing home  sales much  slower
than new home  sales  and population growth  slow in  the mid-Atlantic
region,  I think one has  to be  skeptical  about  the  sustainability of
the  rapid  increase  in  new home  sales.  Nonetheless,  for  a District
that has been  rather sluggish  for  a long  time,  a spur  in  residential
construction is  welcome at  this  point.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Hoenig.

3/26/96

MR. HOENIG.  Mr. Chairman,  the  economy in  the Kansas  City

District  continues to  grow at  a fairly strong pace, with recent
developments pointing  to  greater  strength now  than  I reported at  the
last meeting.  Recent  revisions to  our state  employment statistics
showed stronger  job gains  in  the Tenth  District  in  1995  than
previously  thought,  running  at  a year-over-year rate  of  about  2.7
percent.  Moreover,  all  seven  states  in  the  District added  jobs  at  a
fairly robust pace  in  January.  Principal  sources  of  our  strength are
in  the manufacturing  and construction sectors.  District manufacturing
continues  to  operate  at high levels  of  capacity, and our general
aviation industry  is  doing very well  right  now.  Our survey of
factories  throughout  the  region also  indicates considerable  optimism
about  the next  six months.  In  addition,  our directors  are  reporting
continued  strength  in  commercial  construction and some  expansion  in
housing activity.  As  reported to  us,  loans  are readily available  at
our banks  to  both commercial  and other borrowers.

Although District  activity  is  generally  strong, there  are a

couple of  weak  spots.  The region's  energy  industry remains  lackluster
despite  some higher oil  and natural  gas prices  in  recent months.
Another weak area  is  agriculture, where a continued slump  in  cattle
prices  and continued  dry weather are hurting  the  income  prospects  for
many in  that  sector.  However,  those  farmers  who do  harvest  a crop
should do well  in  light  of  the  high grain prices  right now.

Wage  and price pressures  still  remain modest  in  the  District,
although labor  markets  appear to  continue  to  get tighter.  More  of  our
directors  are  reporting  tight  labor markets  for  entry-level  and  some
skilled jobs  as  well.  Prices  of  raw materials  are  showing  some
increases.

On  the national  front,  I think  that  the  fundamentals  remain

strong,  and we  expect,  as  the Greenbook does,  growth at  about  the
potential  rate  of  2 percent.  With  the  capacity  in the  economy being
used at  its  current  level,  the  rise  in  core  inflation  from  1994
through 1995  probably will  continue, and  I think that  is  a risk we
have to  keep  in mind as  I have  said before.  That  concludes my
comments.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER.  For  the most part,  the  Eleventh District's

economy is  showing  reasonably healthy overall  growth, but  as  always
there are  a few pockets of  weakness.  In  the  last  ten days,  we have
met  with our board of  directors,  our Financial  Institutions  Advisory
Council,  and  our Small Business  and Agriculture Advisory Council.  The
messages we  got are pretty much  the  same.  Our urban areas--
particularly Dallas,  Houston,  and Austin--are  doing  quite well, but
the  rural  areas are hurting.  Cattle ranchers  and  cattle feeders  are
having a disastrous year  so  far.  Conditions  are expected  to  get
worse,  and  the  fallout  is  affecting  our  smaller  communities.

Once  we get  to  the  rest  of  the  economy, conditions  look  a lot

brighter.  The  stabilization of  the  Mexican economy has given  an
additional  boost  to  our  export demand.  Retail  sales  along  the border
area have improved a little  lately.  Demand  for  computer chips  and
semiconductors  remains  strong,  and five  out  of  the  six large  chip
plants  under  construction in  the  Eleventh District will  produce

3/26/96

-9-

customized chips.  Whether we are  in  the early stages  of  an
overexpansion and excess  capacity remains  an open question, but  more
and more people  are  beginning  to  express  the view that  when  the next
big shoe  drops  and affects  the  economy,  it  will be  a boot  filled with
computer  chips.

Our  construction  sector  is  quite  strong  and some  markets  are

beginning  to  heat up,  particularly the  industrial  warehouse market
where  there  is  talk of  6 million  square  feet  of  speculative warehouse
space  coming on  line  in Dallas  alone.  We also  are  hearing discussions
indicating that  the  office market  is  back  to where money is  chasing
office buildings.  While  this  may be  a  little  exaggeration, we  have
been hearing  for  nearly a year that  the  office market  has  changed  from
a tenants'  market  to  a  landlords' market.

The picture for  the  energy industry has  been mixed.  Oil  and
gas  extraction  continues  its downward  trend in  spite of  the  high-tech
drilling  activity that  I referred  to  at  the  last  meeting.  But  the  oil
field machinery  industry is  expanding  thanks  to  drilling demand.  The
petrochemical  industry has  been adding  to  capacity  in  spite  of  recent
soft demand and low prices.  Labor  shortages  continue  to be  mentioned
as  a constraint  on  further growth in  a few  industries.  Wage  and price
pressures  seem to  be  contained.  Overall,  the  District  shows moderate
growth that  probably  is well  above national  growth  rates.

On the national  economy, it  seems  that  we are  getting  the

soft  landing we  have been striving  for,  though perhaps  the runway  may
be  a  little  shorter  than we  like.  The  risks  seem reasonably well
balanced, but  that would not have been  the  case  in my opinion  had we
not  reduced  the  fed  funds  rate  at  our  last  meeting.  With respect  to
the  Greenbook, I remain  somewhat more  optimistic  than  the  staff  with
regard  to  the outlook  for both  real  growth and  inflation.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Minehan.

MS.  MINEHAN.  Mr. Chairman,  the New England economy  is

looking more  and more  like  the  national  economy, even better  in  a
couple  of  respects.  The  small  revision in how we are  looking at
things comes  about  as  a result  of  changes  in  the benchmarks  for
payroll  data, which other people  have commented on.  The changes  have
shown New England's  rate  of  growth  over  the past year  to have  been
about  the  same  as  that  for  the  nation.  Before  that, we  thought our
regional  economy was  lagging.  The  picture may change  a bit when the
national  figures are  revised this  summer,  and New England  still  has
not recovered  all  the  jobs  it  lost  during  the  recession.  Nonetheless,
the  latter episode  is  beginning  to  look more and more  like  a rather
severe,  one-time negative  shock rather  than  the beginning  of  a new,
slow-growth  regime.  New England's recent  growth, while  modest,
reflects  a continuation of  longer-term  trends  in  each of  the  states.
New Hampshire  is  enjoying  the  strongest  growth.  Connecticut  continues
to  lag  behind the  region while Rhode  Island--the basket  case  as  I have
referred  to  it  in  a couple  of  presentations  over  the  last  several
months--now appears  to have been holding  its  own  at  least with regard
to  job  formation over  the  past year.  Unemployment in  the region  is
low, only 5 percent  for  the  region  as  a whole, with New Hampshire now
down to  3 percent.

3/26/96

-10-

Surprisingly, in view of  the  low unemployment,  hourly

earnings  are  increasing at  an  annual  rate of  only about 2 percent
compared  to  3 percent  for  the  country as  a whole.  Anecdotally,
however, our  contacts  indicate  that  there  is  a little more  wage
pressure  than these  numbers would  suggest.  Most  of  them  are  planning
wage  increases  in  the  3  to  5 percent range, where  in  prior months  they
had been contemplating  2 to  4 percent.  One  contact  observed  that
people  are  no  longer  comfortable with wage  increases  covering
inflation, and several  others  have commented on  their difficulty  in
finding highly  skilled computer workers  and especially  software
engineers,  for which  there  is  a crying need.  Unfortunately,  laid-off
defense workers  are  not always  seen  as  suitable  for  seemingly
comparable civilian openings.

Defense cuts  continue  to be  a drag  on  the New England

economy, with the  region  experiencing larger cuts  in defense-related
employment  than  the  country as  a whole.  The pace of  these  cuts  is
slowing, however,  and over  the  next several  years  we believe the
fallout  in  defense  employment  should be  mild in  the  region.  Despite
defense  cutbacks,  total manufacturing  employment has  fallen  less  in
New England in  the past year  than  in  the nation.  No  areas  of  strength
stand out.  Rather,  employment seems  to  be  increasing  slightly in  a
variety of  traditional industries  such  as  lumber, metals,  food,  and
paper  and to  be  stabilizing  in nondefense high-tech  industries.
Moreover,  conversations with  a variety of  manufacturers  suggest  that
1996  is  likely  to be similar  to  1995.  Business  is  not  great,  but  a
number of  contacts  describe new orders  as  pretty good or  decent.
Indeed, some companies  that pared employment  in  1995  are  now planning
modest  increases  in  staff, and  several  contacts  report  efforts  to
increase prices  of  final  goods.

Retailers  continue to  worry about  competitive pressures  and

consumer  anxieties.  However,  several  contacts with  stores  in other
regions  observed  that  their 1996  results have  been better  in  New
England.  Moreover, some  of  those  who  complained most bitterly in  the
past now report  that  their  1995  profits were up  rather  substantially
rather  than down as  they had suspected.

Turning  to  the  national  scene,  we  agree with the  Greenbook's

assessment  that  the  likely outcome  for  the next year  or  so  is  GDP
growth  at a  rate near potential,  with unemployment  relatively
unchanged,  and some  rather  modest upward pressure  on wages  and prices.
While  I agree  that  the  risks  to  this  forecast  seem balanced right now,
there may be  some  reasons  to  believe  that  it  is  marginally  subject  to
surprise  on  the  down side.  That  is  especially because  it  includes
very optimistic  projections  for both  residential  investment  and
consumer durables,  at  least when compared with several  other
forecasts,  and because of  the  upward trend in  interest  rates,
particularly  since the  employment  report  released  in early March.  I
would view the possibility that  the  interest-sensitive  sectors may be
weaker  as  a potentially moderating  influence on  the upward  tick,
albeit  small,  in  inflation  that  is  incorporated  in  the  forecast.  If
in  fact  we do  see  a March employment  report  that  is  anywhere  close  to
being as  strong  as  the numbers  we  saw for  February, I  think we would
have  to  take  rather  decisive steps  at  that  point  to  keep  the  expected
uptick  in  inflation  from becoming  a  surge.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Moskow.

3/26/96

-11-

MR. MOSKOW.  Mr. Chairman,  economic  activity  in the  Midwest

remains  at  high levels,  with  some  sectors  relatively strong  and others
showing  signs  of  moderate weakening.  In general,  housing and retail
sales  continue  to  perform well;  manufacturing  is  growing  slowly;  and
labor markets  remain  tight.  A  major  concern  has  been  the Dayton  brake
plant  strike  against General Motors.  The  strike has  had a
disproportionately large  impact  on  the  Seventh District  where half  of
GM's  laid-off assembly workers  in  the United  States  are  located.
Moreover, reports  have  been  increasing of  related  layoffs  at  District
suppliers  of  auto parts  such  as  engines,  transmissions, brake  systems,
exhaust  systems,  and electrical  systems.  Steel workers  in  Wisconsin
and  Indiana  also have  been affected.  First-quarter  production has,  of
course, been depressed by the  strike  and the  layoffs.  While  some  of
the  lost  production will  be made up  now  that  the  strike has  been
settled, GM will use  the  strike  to  reduce  inventories  of  1996 model
cars  and may wait  for  their new 1997  models  to  rebuild their  car
stocks.  For  light  trucks,  GM plants  were already running at  close  to
capacity, so  it  is  not  clear that  light  truck production in  the  second
quarter will  be much higher  than  it  otherwise would have  been.  The
strike  does not  appear  to  have affected sales  of  light vehicles
because  inventories  of most GM car models were  above what the  industry
considers desirable,  and we understand  that  light  truck dealers  in  the
District have  already  sold  out  their  first-quarter allotment.
Preliminary reports  indicate  that  sales  of  light vehicles  so  far  this
month are  running at  about  a  15  million unit  annual pace or  a bit
better, which  implies  a 14.9  or  15  million unit  rate  for the  first
quarter,  slightly above  the  latest  12-month moving  average.

District  retailers  indicate  that  sales  have  improved from  the

weak results  reported for  January.  Sales  in  February were somewhat
stronger  than in January but  the bounceback was  not as  noticeable as
it  appears  to  have been elsewhere  in  the nation.  I would note  that
the  Midwest was  hit by bad weather  in  February rather  than January and
that  was  a  factor.  Retailers  report  that  sales  so  far  in March show
about  the  same  increases  from  last  year  as  they had in  February.
Contacts  said  it  was  too  early  to  discern any noticeable  impact  on
sales  in  communities with a  large  GM presence and  actually none was
expected.  Reports  indicate  that  Midwest  consumers are  less  in debt
and delinquency rates  are  generally  lower  than  those  in other parts  of
the  country.  Therefore,  consumers  are better  able  to  take  on
additional  debt.

On  balance,  it  appears  that  the  level  of housing  activity is
still  fairly  strong  in most parts  of  the District.  Housing  starts  in
the Midwest  fell  in  February, but  that  appears  primarily to  reflect
colder-than-usual weather.  Permits  have held up  and homebuilders
remain optimistic.  The  District does not  seem  to  have  an
overabundance  of  either new or  existing homes  for  sale.

In  labor markets,  the  issue  of  job  security  continues  to  be  a

factor mentioned whenever we  try to  reconcile reports  of  tight  labor
markets with continued  subdued upward pressure  on wages.  Labor
markets  remain  tight  throughout  the District,  and  the  unemployment
rate  in our  states  is  still  averaging  about  1 full  percentage point
below the  national  average.  Both  total  and manufacturing payroll
employment  increased  in January,  in  contrast  to  what was posted
nationally for  that month.  Reports  indicate  that  the  use  of  temporary

3/26/96

-12-

workers  by manufacturing  firms  has  picked up  since  the  end  of  1995  as
well.

After taking weather differences  into  account,  it  appears
that  manufacturing  activity in  the  District  continues  to  do better
than  in  the  nation  as  a whole,  although  less  so  than  in  the past  as  we
observe Midwest manufacturing  activity  converging to  the  national
experience.  For many of  our  major durable  goods producers,  activity
has  been  flattening or  edging  down from  the  record or  near-record
levels  of  last  year.  Purchasing managers'  surveys  from Detroit  and
Milwaukee  indicated expanding  activity  in both January  and February.
However,  the  Chicago  survey moved  from  indicating expansion  in January
to  contraction  in  February.  Confidential  information we have  received
indicates  that  the  Chicago  Purchasing Managers'  report  to  be  released
this  Friday, March 29,  will  show  the  index increasing  from 44.9  in
February  to  47.3  in March, suggesting  that manufacturing activity  has
continued to  contract  in March but  at  a  somewhat reduced pace.  The
weakness  evident  in  the  Chicago report  for March does  not  appear
related to  the GM  strike because relatively  few workers were  laid  off
in  Illinois  and the  survey  was  taken before  the  strike  had gained much
momentum.

Farmers  in  the  Midwest are  gearing  for a  sizable  increase  in
spring plantings,  especially corn.  Analysts  expect  combined corn  and
soybean acreage  to be  the  largest  in over  a decade, up  7 to  8 percent
from  last  year.  Crop  input  prices  are up,  especially  for  fertilizers,
but  supplies  are  reported to  be  adequate to  accommodate  the  increased
acreage.  More  generally, however, most  reports  on prices  still  seem
to  point  to  little upward pressure  or declines  for  a broad range  of
items  such as  aluminum, copper, paper, steel  scrap,  and  steel  mill
products.  The price component  of  the  Chicago  Purchasing Managers'
survey  for March  continued on  a downward  trend and  actually  indicated
declining  rather  than moderating increases  in prices  for  the  second
straight month.

Turning to  the  national picture,  we  do  not have  any serious

disagreements  with the  Greenbook,  although we  still  are  slightly more
optimistic on  inflation.  One  reason  for  our marginally  greater
optimism is  that  real  GDP  is  estimated  to  have grown only 1.4  percent
last  year.  Obviously, there  is  a  lot  of uncertainty surrounding  that
estimate,  but  our  analysis  indicates  that  the  output  gap was  about nil
prior  to  1995  and if  our  estimate  of  potential  output  is  accurate,
some  slack has  built up  in the  aggregate  economy, which  should reduce
the  likelihood  that  inflation will  accelerate  this  year.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  President  Guynn.

MR. GUYNN.  Thank you, Mr.  Chairman.  Looking  through the

anomalies  of  the  last  several months,  it  appears  to us  that  the  Sixth
District  continues  to  grow at  a moderate pace.  The bad weather  is
likely  simply to  have  increased  the  amplitude  of  the  seasonal pattern
in activity rather  than  to  have exerted  some  lasting effect  on overall
performance.  When we  look beyond these distractions, we  think  that
the  Southeast will  continue  to  outperform  the  rest  of  the  nation,  but
probably by a  smaller margin  than has  been the  case  in past years.  As
before,  this  improved performance  is  based on  continued migration of
both  businesses  and people  into our  region.

3/26/96

-13-

Retail  sales  grew very unevenly  in  the  District  during  the

first  three months  of  the year, with  a notably slow start  early in  the
year,  especially  in  the  northern part  of  the  region where  weather was
clearly a factor.  More recently, sales  of many goods,  particularly
apparel  and autos,  appear to  be  much improved.

Home  sales  in our  area have been particularly brisk  in  early

1996  after a slow  fourth quarter.  Much of  the  acceleration  is
reported  to  be  in  starter homes  at  the  low end  of  the market.  Both
residential  and nonresidential  activity remained surprisingly
resilient  throughout  the bad weather period.  Commercial  real  estate
markets continue  strong throughout  our region.  Outside of  Atlanta,
the  industrial market  is  the most  active, with  lots  of  construction of
warehouse and distribution  facilities.  The  retail  construction
component  finally seems  to be  slowing  in  some areas  that have  reached
saturation, and  that  is  something we have been anticipating  for  some
time.  In Atlanta as  you might  expect,  Olympic  activity has  kept
construction at  a very high plateau,  starting last  year.  The  entire
town  is  a mess.  Bulldozers and paving equipment have  the  right-of-way
over cars  and people.  We promise  to  be  ready when  the time  for  the
Olympics  comes, but  if  you can avoid  it,  please don't  visit  us until
later  in  the  summer.

According to  our regional  survey of  manufacturers,
manufacturing activity actually eased  off  a bit  in February, but  at
the  same  time expectations  for  the next  six months  are  reportedly
improved.  In our  District,  the  strongest sector  is  durables,  while
nondurables,  especially paper,  are lagging,  and  the apparel  industry
continues  to  shrink.  In  fact,  the  apparel  industry  is  in  secular
decline  and has  lost  almost  35,000  jobs nationwide  over  the  last  year.
We  don't  expect  those  jobs  to  come back  any time  soon.

Payroll  employment  expanded moderately  in  January  following

three months of  only modest  growth.  But  for  the  last  12  months  ending
in January, payroll  growth  in  our region was  3.4  percent,  more  than
double  that  of  the nation.  There continue  to be  scattered reports  of
wage pressures  and labor  shortages,  and those  are  in  isolated pockets
in  our District.  At  the  same  time,  both our manufacturing survey and
business  contacts  report minimal  price  increases  in both raw materials
and  finished goods.

As  far  as  the  national  outlook is  concerned, the unusual

circumstances  of  late  1995  and  early 1996  certainly have muddied  the
waters considerably and left  us with more  uncertainty than would
usually be  the  case.  On balance,  however,  I believe  the  economy has
been relatively resilient  after  taking account  of  those  special
factors  early in  the year.  So,  our  forecast  of  continued moderate
growth and moderating inflation  is  essentially unchanged.  From where
I stand,  I see pretty solid underpinnings  for moderate  growth  in
household spending  and  investment,  a return to  inventory balance,  and
good export  demand.

Except  in the  details,  our  outlook is  very  similar  to  that  of
the  Greenbook.  After  a modest  first  quarter  followed by a bounceback,
I would expect a resumption of  moderate  growth in  the  2 percent  range.
I still  think  that  2 percent  is  probably a little  less  than potential,
so  it  may not  come  as  a surprise  that  I am more optimistic  than  some
with  regard to  inflation.  In  fact,  I think there  is  a reasonable

3/26/96

-14-

prospect  that  inflation  could moderate  over  the next  two years.  It  is
unlikely  that  the  moderation will  be particularly dramatic  or  smooth,
but  I  think there  is  a reasonable  chance  that  the CPI  could move
closer  to  the  2-1/2  percent  level  rather  than  the  3 percent  level  that
some  seem  to  expect.  I continue  to  believe  that  our policies  and
other  factors have  combined  to  create  a more  favorable price-setting
environment  that  is  both  genuine and persistent.  Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Stern.

MR. STERN.  Thank you, Mr.  Chairman.  Our District  economy

has  outperformed the  national  economy  for a number  of  years,  but  I do
not  have  the  impression  that  that  is  continuing.  If  anything,
District growth  certainly  has been  less  than  that  of  the national
economy  in  recent  months.  The  principal  areas  of  concern are  the
manufacturing  and cattle  industries.  All  the  cattle producers  with
whom I have  talked  describe  their  industry as  an  unmitigated disaster.
Having  said  that,  I think the  District economy in  general  is  still
fundamentally  sound.  Part  of  the  reason  for  the  slowing growth  is  a
factor  that  I have mentioned before,  namely, labor  supply  constraints.
Labor markets  remain very tight.  There  are  a  few more,  but  still
scattered, indications  of  increasing wage pressures  and  a somewhat
more  aggressive attitude on  the part  of  labor.  In  addition,  I would
say  that  consumer spending  on both  goods and houses  has  been healthy
in  the  last  couple  of  months.

With  regard to  the national  economy, as  has  been the  case  for

some  time,  I remain  generally  comfortable with  the  contours  of  the
Greenbook  forecast.  I do  think that  the  risks  to  the  outlook may have
shifted a bit  recently, and  I say  this  because  as  I look  at  the  real
side of  the  economy today,  it  strikes  me as  being  in better shape  than
I had earlier  expected it  to be  at  this point.  Therefore,  I think
there  is  probably less  risk  of  prolonged weakness  or even  prolonged
stagnation on  the  real  side.  By  the  same  token,  as  I look  at  some  of
the potential  indicators  of  rising  inflation  and in  particular think
about  conditions  in  labor markets  and  labor attitudes,  I sense  that
the  risk of  somewhat more  inflation than  at  least  I had  earlier
anticipated may also have  increased.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President Melzer.

MR. MELZER.  Thanks,  Alan.  The Eighth District  economy
continues  to  expand.  A  few  contacts  noted some  softening at  the
beginning  of  the year,  but many expect  a pickup as  we move  into  the
second quarter.  Unemployment  rates  in District  states  tended  to  jump
early in  the  year  for weather-related reasons,  but Missouri was  a
notable exception;  the  state enjoyed a very low unemployment rate  of
3.4  percent  in January.  About  3,400  District workers  were  laid off
because of  recent  strike  activity against  General Motors,  and
unofficially about  800  workers  in  related  industries  were  affected.
But  looking forward,  District  auto production  at  Ford and Chrysler
plants  is  expected  to  rise  4.7  percent  in  the  second  quarter.  Loan
demand,  especially  for  commercial  loans,  is  still  strong  in most parts
of  the District.  Unseasonably cold weather produced significant
damage  to  winter wheat  in southern  Illinois  and catfish  in  the
Mississippi  portion of  the District  in  February.  [Laughter]  It's  a
big  industry!

3/26/96

-15-

Nationally, the  economy  is  displaying some  underlying

strength.  The  February employment report  was more  than  a simple
rebound  from  a weak January.  The  pace of  net  job  creation was
averaging  somewhat better than  100,000  per  month over  the  last  nine
months  of  1995.  It  seems plausible  that  the January data were
depressed by about  300,000.  Even  if we  count  300,000  of  the  February
total  as  a rebound and add 100,000  for  trend growth,  the  705,000
February number  still  looks  like  a significant upside  surprise  of
about 300,000  jobs.  Maybe  some  of  that  increase will be  revised away.
Retail  sales,  factory  orders,  and housing  starts  also  indicate
underlying  strength.

For  those who  look at  the  latest  developments  in  the  real

economy as  a  trigger  for monetary policy actions,  I  think  it  is  clear
that  we  moved  last  time without  much new data;  and when  the data  came
in,  they were  contrary to  what  was  expected.  Some here  referred to
our  lowering the  federal  funds  target as  buying  insurance,  but  this
was  not  a hedge  in any usual  sense.  In  fact,  we were making  a
speculative bet  on  the nature  of  the  incoming data.  It  is  a bet  that
we  likely lost  now that  the  economy  looks  a  lot more resilient  and
also a  lot  more inflation prone.

The  press release  accompanying the  last move  compounded the

problem in  my view by suggesting  that  the  FOMC  is  complacent  about
longer-term inflation objectives.  It  read a bit  like  a victory
statement  saying in part,  "with price  and cost  trends already subdued"
when in  fact we are  still  a long way  from price  stability  and Q4/Q4
CPI  is  projected to  rise  in  1996.  Furthermore,  as  others have
mentioned, some  recent  data are  worrisome,  including the  employment
cost  index  for  total  compensation  of  private  industry workers  as  well
as  benefits  costs,  which were discussed at  some  length  in  the
Greenbook.  The  long-bond yield,  as  others  have mentioned,  also has
increased more  than  50  basis points  since  the  last meeting.  An
important  component  of  that  yield, namely, longer-term inflation
expectations,  is  a matter  of concern  for  this  Committee.  As  I have
stressed before,  despite FOMC pronouncements  of  a commitment  to  stable
prices, market  participants  and professional  economic  forecasters do
not  expect  lower  inflation  in the  foreseeable  future.  These
expectations  are  a large part  of what  is  standing  in  the way  of
further progress  toward price  stability.  The  way to  influence  those
expectations  is  for this  Committee  to  announce  a  target path for
inflation over  the next  several years  that  contemplates  a reduction
from the  current  3 percent  level.  In  addition,  of course,  we must
take  actions consistent  with  that path.  An  opportunistic  approach
will  buy us no  credibility whatsoever nor market  behavior  that
reinforces  our  efforts  to  achieve  our  objectives.  Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Vice  Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.  Thank you, Mr.  Chairman.  The

economy of  the  Second District  continues  to  underperform the  nation as
it  lumbers  along on  its  slow growth path.  Recently, retail contacts
reported that  February sales  rebounded  to  plan  levels  following  the
very disappointing January and  the  record blizzard.  Senior  loan
officers  at  small-  and medium-sized banks reported  that  demand  for
nearly all  types  of  loans  has  strengthened over  the  last  two months,
with  the  largest  increase developing  in  the  consumer  loan  segment.  Of
course, we  all  know that  the  consumer  loan debt  level  is  a bit  higher

3/26/96

-16-

than we  might wish.  In  the  securities  industry, a major investment
bank  reported a three-fold  increase  in pretax profits  for  the  fiscal
quarter ending  in  February compared  to  the  same period a year  ago,  and
our market  soundings  indicate  that  its  competitors  also  seem to  be
having  a robust quarter.  The profits  in  that  industry are  an
important contributor  to  income  growth in  New York State.  Overall,
the  District's housing  industry has  remained weak  in February and
early March, but we have  a glimmer  of  hope  in  the  commercial  real
estate  market, with  continued improvement  in  the  vacancy rates  in
midtown Manhattan.  We continue  to  be  concerned  about  the  District  and
why it  underperforms  the nation.  We  are  going to  be moving even more
of  our  research  capabilities  into  that  area and  look  forward  to  having
a couple  of  meetings  toward  the  end of  the year:  one  consisting of
economists  will  try  to  identify  the problems  and  the  other of
policymakers  will  discuss what might  be  done  to  get  the  area  growing  a
bit  faster.

At  the national  level,  our  forecast  is  very similar to  that

of  the Greenbook.  The  Greenbook, as  you  know, has  growth at  just
about 2 percent  in  1997,  and we  have  it  somewhat below that.  Not
surprisingly, therefore,  our  CPI  forecast  is  more attractive,  at  2.8
percent  this  year and  2.7  percent  in  1997.  We  have  the unemployment
rate moving up  some,  in  fact  to  about  6.2  percent  next year.  That  is
to some  degree  related to  our view that  the participation rate,
especially by adult  males,  has  been unusually low,  and there  might  be
some rebound  in  labor participation that  would raise  the  unemployment
rate.  So,  with  the  favorable data  recently on employment,  consumer
sentiment,  auto  sales,  retail  sales,  housing starts,  and net  exports,
the major shift  that  we have made  in  our  forecast  is  that  we  think
that  the  risks  to  the  forecast are  now  quite well balanced.  At  the
previous meeting, we were concerned  about  the  risks  on the  down  side
and therefore  thought  that  the  "insurance" easing,  as  the  Chairman
described  it  at  the  last  meeting, was  appropriate.  Now we  think that
the  forecast  looks  rather  good  and  that  the  risks are  quite well
balanced.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It  seems  to  me  that

economic  activity  is  tracking  along the  Greenbook path about  as  we had
expected and hoped.  I want  to  associate myself particularly with  Ed
Boehne's  comment  that  the remarkable  resilience of  this  economy has
been  the most  interesting development  recently.  This  certainly is  not
surprising, but  it  is  highly gratifying.  Perhaps  the  only surprise  is
the  very early  and rather  strong reemergence  of  strength  in  the
economy, and  along with that  a more credible upside  risk and  its
mirror  image,  a  little  alleviation of  the downside  risk going  forward.
This  seems  to  leave us  with a high  likelihood of  a quite  satisfactory
economic performance  in  the period  ahead.  I agree  with Vice Chairman
McDonough  that  the  risks  appear  to be  symmetric,  perhaps  not  terribly
strong at  this point,  but  it  seems  to  me  that  they are moving  in the
upside direction.  My main concern  at  the moment  is  that  all  of  this
looks  just  a little  too neat  and  too pat.  I can't  quite  trust  it.  We
know  that  challenges  are  going  to  emerge,  and  I suspect  they probably
will arise  somewhat  sooner rather  than  later.  We will  just  have  to  be
alert  to  what  those challenges  turn out  to  be  and when they  are going
to appear.

3/26/96

-17-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor  Yellen.

MS.  YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The progress  of  the

economy over  the  last  several  months  has  been reminiscent  of  "the
perils  of  Pauline,"  with blizzards,  government  shutdowns,  threats  of
default  on  the national  debt,  strikes,  and a  frightening albeit  brief
dive  in the  stock  market  threatening  the progress  of  our heroine.
Nevertheless,  the  single most probable outcome  at  this  stage  is  that
this  economy will  survive  its  treacherous  adventure and ultimately
attain  trend growth with  stable  inflation.  I agree with the  Greenbook
assessment  that  the  stage  appears  to  be  set  for  a rather  sharp  rebound
in  economic  growth  from  the  average pace  in  the  fourth and  first
quarters.  Considerable progress  appears  to  have  been made  in  reducing
inventory  overhangs,  so  there  is  a  reasonable prospect  that
inventories will  become  a neutral  factor  in  the  economy in  the  not  too
distant  future.  Meanwhile,  demand has  held up  surprisingly well  in
the  face  of  a rather  large  inventory adjustment  in  the  fourth quarter.

Over  the  longer  term, a projection  of  near-trend  growth

through  1997  with roughly stable  inflation strikes  me  as  a plausible
scenario,  although there  are  some risks.  On  the negative  side,  I am
particularly  concerned at  this  stage  about  the  possibility of  a
significant  stock market  correction.  The  current  level of  stock
prices  is  not  impossible, but  it  is  increasingly difficult  to  justify
in  terms  of  fundamentals.  Disappointing earnings  reports  could easily
set  off  a correction.  I am also  concerned about  the  likely negative,
albeit  lagged, impact  on  housing and consumer durable  spending of  the
very substantial  increases  in  interest  rates  since  our  last  meeting.
I find  the  longer-term Greenbook projection  of  housing starts
particularly optimistic  in  light  of  these  increases.  On  balance, with
intermediate-  and long-term  interest  rates  at  their  current  levels,  I
feel  less  certain than  the  staff  that  trend growth  is  possible as  we
go out  in  the  forecast  period.  But  there are  also  some risks  on  the
inflation  front.  While  recent  readings  on average hourly  earnings
provide reassurance  that  wages  are not  accelerating,  the  jump  in
health  insurance costs  evident  in the  fourth-quarter employment  cost
index creates  the worrisome  prospect  that  these benefit  cost  increases
may be poised to  rise  further.  I don't  think we  should overinterpret
one  single  report,  but  I do  agree with  the  Greenbook's  assessment  that
this  is  one  of  the risks  going  forward.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor Phillips.

MS.  PHILLIPS.  Thank you, Mr.  Chairman.  The  fog has  lifted

somewhat  since our  January FOMC meeting,  and perhaps we  are now
operating only  in patches  of  fog.  I continue  to  believe  that  it  will
be well  into  the  second quarter  before we  have a  clear picture  of  what
happened even  in  the  fourth  quarter,  let  alone  the  first  quarter  of
this  year.  We  will  continue  to  hear arguments  about  whether  the
government  shutdown obscured  the  sampling periods  and  so on.  There
will be  arguments about  the  effects  of  the  weather--whether or  not
firms  will make up  their  losses  and whether  or not needed  inventory
adjustments have  occurred.  I also  think that  the  new data  calculation
methods will  continue to  challenge  us  to become  comfortable with the
notion that  2 percent  real  GDP  growth  is  in  fact  what we should  be
striving  for.

3/26/96

Obviously,  the past  is  behind us,  but  a clear picture  of  the

near past or  even what  is  in  the  proverbial  "rear view mirror" can
help  us  understand whether or not  the  economy  is  going up,  down, or
has  just rounded a corner.  This  uncertainty about  the  near past
certainly  has  been reflected  in  the markets.  There  is  sensitivity  to
almost  every piece  of  economic  news  that  is  released, and we  seem  to
be  having  a considerable reaction, perhaps  even  overreaction,  to
unanticipated  economic  news.

I was  struck  by the  sizable  swings  in  the  GDP  estimates  in

the  Greenbook since  the  last meeting.  There  is  quite  a change  in  the
fourth-quarter,  the  first-quarter, and  the  second-quarter  estimates
for  GDP.  Most of  it  is  explained by the  inventory correction, which
has  shifted  some  of  the  growth  from  the  fourth quarter  to  the  first
quarter.  That  improves  the  outlook  so  that  the second-quarter
estimate  is  considerably higher.  The net  effect  is  a  forecast  that  is
a bit  brighter.  Going  forward,  I quite agree  that  the  best  estimate
is  for  continued moderate  growth.  The  employment  report  that  we got
for February probably was  on  the  high side  and may well  be  revised.
Even  so,  it  is  a relatively strong  report.  Industrial production has
been stronger.  Housing may slow a bit  due  to  the backup  in  interest
rates, but  the  recent data  have been  surprisingly strong,  and  the
fundamentals  for  continued activity  in housing  remain pretty good.  In
addition, my brother just  sold his  house.  [Laughter]  This  is  a sign
of  considerable  strength  in  the  housing sector--in  the  Fifth District,
I might  add.  [Laughter]

With respect  to  business  fixed investment,  I think  it  is

pretty unlikely  that we will  see  growth continue  at  the  same pace  as
in  1994  and  1995.  By  the  same  token,  I don't  think there  is  any major
reason  for  a big pullback.  The  cost  of  capital  is  still  fairly  low,
and  if  we are  correct  in  forecasting  that  aggregate  spending will hold
up  and that  businesses have a  continuing commitment  to  holding costs
down, profits  and  cash  flows  should be  reasonably  strong.
Nevertheless,  business  firms  already have  added a good deal  of
capacity,  so  we  probably will  see  less  growth  in  spending  on
industrial  production facilities.  As  has  already been mentioned, the
outlook  for  spending  on  computers  is  not as  strong  as  it  has  been, and
such spending has  explained a  lot  of  the  growth  in business  fixed
investment.  So,  I think we probably will  not  experience  quite  as much
strength  in business  fixed investment  as  we have  seen  recently.

Again  going  forward,  I don't  think that  the  usual  bottlenecks
that  one might  see  in  a mature  expansion  are  present.  We  seem to  have
plenty of  credit  availability.  The banks  and  the markets  are  still
reasonably well  positioned to  support expansion.  We are  not  seeing  as
much  in  the way of balance  sheet adjustments.  There  are  some  but not
enough  for  us  to find  ourselves  in a windshear  situation.  I think
household spending  is  likely to  keep pace with income.  This  is  a
little  less  optimistic  than  the  Greenbook, but  I think  that  some  of
the  hypotheses  relating  to household spending  suggested in  the
Greenbook are  very interesting.  These  include  job anxiety  and
perceptions  of  the  shakiness  of Medicare/Medicaid.  Perhaps  people are
being attracted  to  high stock prices.  I hope  this  is  going  to mean
some  improvement  in  saving, and maybe people  are  hitting  their
borrowing  limits.  So,  while moderate growth  is  a probable  forecast  on
balance,  I think there  are  risks  to  the  outlook.

3/26/96

-19-

One  of  the big risks  that  several people  around the  table

have mentioned is  on  the  inflation  side.  While  I believe  it  is
possible to make  some progress on  the  inflation  front  given reduced
capacity pressures,  labor market  uncertainty, and cautious  consumers,
I do  think that  some  of  the  inflation risks  have  increased  since the
last  FOMC meeting.  The  increase  in  oil prices  is  an  example.  Another
year of  bad crops  could cause  prices  to  ratchet  up.  Wage  increases
could  finally be  heading up.  Also, prospects  for major gains  in  terms
of deficit  reduction have  diminished considerably even  since  the  last
FOMC meeting.

In sum,  I think  the  economy  is  in  a more balanced  situation

than  it  was  in  late  January and we  can look  forward to  moderate
economic growth  with a bit  less  uncertainty than  we were  feeling  in
January.  But  I do  think that  the  inflation  outlook is  less  favorable.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN.  The  Fourth  District  is  in between  Ed Boehne's

and Mike Moskow's Districts,  but  so  much for geography.  It  is  hard to
get  a reading not  only on what  is  actually happening but  on what  is
expected in our  area  for  this  year and  the year ahead--the  time
horizon  that  is  relevant  for policy discussions--especially when  the
national  statistics  are  so  troublesome.  An optimistic note  for  the
longer  term  from one  of  our  directors--he  called  it  an  optimistic note
anyway--was  his  report  that  applications  for admission  to  law school
this  fall  are  down 20  percent.  In  trying  to  filter all  the  anecdotal
information,  the Beigebook  report  for our  District was definitely more
upbeat  than  the previous  couple  of  Beigebooks.  One  director who  has
lived in  the  area  all  his  life  noted that  this  change  in mood happens
every  spring.  Sometimes  it  is  a reflection  of  how bad the winter was.
Since this  was  the  second worst winter  of  the century,  a rebound may
not  be  too  surprising.  That  also may explain  some of  the  resiliency
of  the national  economy  that both Governor Kelley and  Ed Boehne noted,
and I will  come back  to  that  in  a moment.

You  may have  seen  the  other  front page article  in yesterday's

Wall  Street  Journal  that  covered the  export  industries,  including
those  in Ohio,  and  indicated how that  sector  of  the  economy has  served
as  an underpinning to  overall  economic  activity  to  an  extent  that  may
not  have received  the  attention  it  deserves.  Another  issue  that  we
have  been  looking  into  is  retail  sales.  Our  region  of  the  country  is
incredibly strong  in  retailing  companies,  companies  that  operate not
only nationally but  even globally.  There  are  consistent reports  of
much  stronger  catalog sales;  their mail  order  sales are  continuing  to
rise very sharply as  a percent  of  their totals,  often at  double-digit
rates.  This  raises questions  about how much  of  that  is  domestic and
how much  of  it  is  what we would call  exports,  whether it  gets  reported
that  way or not.  A new phenomenon  that people  are  citing,  though  it
is  hard to  quantify,  is  Internet  sales,  ordering from  these companies
through the  Internet  for  shipments abroad and bypassing the  usual
retail  distribution problems  that  exist  in Japan  in particular but
also  in  other places  around the  world.  The Commerce Department  says
that at  this  point  they  don't have a good handle  on  either  the
magnitude  of  this  or what  it  is  contributing  to  total  sales.  They are
pretty certain  that  they are  underestimating  total  sales,  but  they
can't  quantify it.

3/26/96

-20-

Because of  the  difficulty of  interpreting  the  numbers,  I made

a special  effort yesterday  to  get  the  first-quarter report  of  the
National  Federation of  Independent Businesses  that  will  be released  in
a  few days.  Not unlike  the  comments  around  the  table  this  morning,
the  report will  be  fairly mixed.  Employment plans  are  down somewhat
from  the  earlier report  while capital  spending plans  are  up, which  is
contrary  to  the commentary  in  the  Wall  Street Journal  column  and  the
general  concerns  about  capital  spending.  Small  businesses  indicate
that  they will  increase  such  spending this  year  to  what would be  a
record  level  in  the  index.

The  inflation news  is  fairly  good.  Fewer  firms  are  now

planning  to  increase  their prices  this  year  than in  previous  reports.
This  still  raises  in my mind some  very fundamental questions  about  the
process  by which  an  inflationary phenomenon  is  created.  I don't  think
of  inflation as  being  rising prices.  In one  sense,  I am very
encouraged as  regards  the national  economy.  It  is  one  of  those
stories  about  the water glass  being half  full  or half  empty.  Compared
to  a year ago,  inflation psychology seems  to  have  improved by about
1/2  percentage  point.  A year ago  at  this  time,  the  general  forecast
was  that  inflation would rise  to  about  3-1/2  percent.  The current
expansion has  now lasted  several  years  and every year  the  forecast  has
been  that  inflation would go up.  Finally, we  are  at a point  where  the
forecast  is  that  inflation is  going  to  remain  the  same  this  year.  It
may be  too much  for us  to  expect people  to  say  that  inflation will  go
down next year.  So,  we have  to go  through a transition period of  at
least no  longer  forecasting rising  inflation to  get  comfortable  with
the  idea that,  even as  we  head into  the  sixth year of  the  expansion,
inflation is  going  to  remain  the  same.  The  next  step  is  for people  to
adjust psychologically  to  that,  and  in  the  future  inflation actually
will  go down.

I am  trying to  interpret  what has  been going  on  in  asset

markets  and  separate  the  real  from  the  inflation components.  We have
to  be  very careful  in  what we  think we know about  that.  What has  been
encouraging  about all  the  commentary this  morning and  the  reports we
have  seen  about  the  resiliency  of  the  economy  is  that  no  one  is  saying
that  this  is  a  result  of  good old-fashioned, pump-priming monetary and
fiscal  stimulus,  but  rather  it  is  what markets  do.  When depressants
are  absent,  markets  tend to  create  a process by which an  economy
expands.  If  that  is  a valid interpretation of  the  dynamics at  work
out  there, then  I don't  think we have  to  be  nearly as  concerned about
an  increase  in  inflation as  we  would if  we  were concluding  that  either
monetary or  fiscal  policy was  pumping up  aggregate demand.  That
relates  to  my earlier  concern when  I asked Mike  Prell  about  the
Greenbook, but we will  have  to  discuss  that  another  time.  I am still
not  comfortable  with the  Greenbook projection  of  inflation  for  1997;  I
would  like  to  see  it  lower.  If  I  firmly believed  that  the  Greenbook
was  correct  and we would have yet  another year of  about  3 percent
inflation, I would find  that  unacceptable.  So,  I have  to  conclude by
simply hoping  that  they are wrong.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY.  I think  the  change  in  the data,  the  closing  of

the  government,  and  the  snow have allowed us  to  forget  there are  still
three  unresolved issues  in the  economy.  The  first  I would  call  the
labor market/household sector  issue.  I think the  story is  that we

3/26/96

-21-

can't  go  on  like  this,  but  I do  not  know how  it will  change.  The
anecdotal  comments  around the  table universally have  referred to  tight
labor markets.  That  is  what  I hear  anecdotally  as  well.  I was  in
Indianapolis  two weeks  ago  and,  as  they phrased it  there,  "you can't
hire people  at  any wage."  I won't  comment on  their  economic  logic,
but  no  one was  raising wages  at  the  time  they were saying  they  could
not  hire people  at  any wage!  We have had very  low increases  in
nominal  and real  wages.  That  is  inconsistent  with reported labor
market  conditions.  In  addition,  household spending has  been growing
substantially  faster  than wage income,  and the  gap  has  been  financed
by higher debt  levels.  This  situation is  going to  be  resolved either
through greater wage claims  in  a more  militant  labor market, which
could be  financed  incidentally by  foregoing any further  increases  in
the  share  of  profits but  would require  at  least  a stabilization  in  the
profit  share,  or  through  curtailed  spending at  some point.

The  second unresolved  issue  is  fiscal policy.  We  thought  we

were going  to begin  to  see  it  get  resolved, but  the  fact  is  that  we
still  have  unsustainable  entitlement policies  in place.  The
entitlements  will have  to  be  cut  at  some point.  The market  has
decided that  that decision will  probably be  delayed until  after
November.  Of  course,  the  election results  in November may well  serve
to  defer  the  decision still  further.

If  that  is  the  case,  I think  it will  lead  to what  I see  as  a
third unresolved issue,  the  level  of  prices  in  capital  markets.  That
level  is  one  of  the reasons  why we  have  been enjoying an  investment
boom;  in  fact,  the  investment  boom and  rising prices  in  the  equity
markets have  been feeding  on one  another.  A booming capital  market
has  made equity  capital  very cheap and has  allowed the double-digit
rate  of  growth  that  has  occurred in  gross private  domestic  investment.
Focusing  on  the  computer  issue,  when we  have  a deflator that  is
actually deflating, the  effective hurdle  rate  of  return needed  to
justify a purchase becomes  quite high.  That's because  the nominal
price  of  the  good  is  going  down, and  in  addition we need  a positive
nominal  return  on  the  capital.  To  justify buying a computer now, we
have  to  add  the  12  percent decline  in  the  deflator to  a 6 or  7 percent
rate  of  return  on  the  cost  of  capital,  a total  return  of  18  or  19
percent.  There  just are  not  many investments  in  that  sector  that  can
be  justified on  that  basis,  and at  some  point  such  investment  is  going
to  end.  It  will  end more  quickly if  in  fact  the  cost  of  capital  rises
at  the  same  time.  That  in  turn will  depend on how the  labor market
and  fiscal policy issues are  resolved.  If we  end up with  greater wage
claims  or if  we  end up with a decision  to  defer  the entitlements
reform,  we will  see  a  substantial  further  increase  in  intermediate  and
long rates,  and  that will precipitate  a market  adjustment.  On  the
other hand, if  we  see  curtailed spending  by both  the  household  sector
and  the public  sector, we probably will  see  a decline  in  the  share  of
profits  and a decline  in  investment  as  a result.

I think that  the weather hiatus  has  allowed us  to  forget  that

we still  have  some  fundamental unresolved  issues.  The  Greenbook  is
forecasting a  sustained middle  course  on how the  economy will  resolve
those  issues.  The  risks  around that  middle  course  are probably
balanced  at  this  point,  but  I think  those  risks  are  growing.  In  fact,
especially  in the  sixth and seventh year of  an  economic  expansion,
there  is  an  increasing probability that  the  expansion will  not be  able
to  stay on  the middle  course  but will  fall  to  one  side  or  the  other.

3/26/96

-22-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Thank you.  Coffee  should  be  out  there.

Would  someone  take  a quick  look and  see whether  it  is  there?

MR.  LINDSEY.  We  really just  finished breakfast!

MR. KELLEY.  We  must be  in  great  shape  if we  are  having a

break at  9:30  a.m.!

MR.  PARRY.  They are  setting up, but  it will  take  a few more

minutes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Corporate  planning  is  less  than

adequate.  [Laughter]  Don Kohn.

MR. KOHN.  We will  have  a race  between my briefing  and  the

setup  for  the  coffee.  I'll  talk fast  and maybe  I can  win!  As
background  for your policy discussion,  I thought  it  might  be useful  to
take  a closer  look  at  a key  development  in  financial  markets  over  the
intermeeting period,  the  rise  in  long-term  interest  rates  that  a
number  of you have mentioned.  [Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Thank you.  Why don't we break for

coffee?

[Coffee  break]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Let me  get  started.  In  a period like

this,  it  may be  a good  idea  to  review history to  see  how we got  to
where we  are.  At  the moment,  the  economy might  be  described by an
electrocardiogram  that  does  not  say  the  economy is  dead but  indicates
it  is  functioning  in a way that  suggests  something  is  going  to move--
as  a number  of you,  including Governors  Kelley  and Lindsey, have
stated.  The  one  thing  that  is  reasonably  certain  is  that  the  outlook
depicted by the  electrocardiogram  in  the  Greenbook is  very unlikely  to
prevail.  The  key questions  are:  In which direction is  the  economy
going and how is  it  going  to  get  there?  A  critical  element  in  this
outlook  is  the  interplay  of  asset  values,  specifically bond and  stock
values,  and inventory  changes.  What  is  really quite  extraordinary
about  this  period is  that  despite what we continue  to  envisage  as  an
increasingly  service-related economy and  one  where business  firms  are
increasingly getting control  over  their  inventories,  inventory
investment  has been  the most  volatile  element  and  the greatest
determinant  of  economic  change  in  the  last  two  or  three years.

In  the  early part  of  the  1990s,  as  firms  finally were

technologically capable  of  moving  toward just-in-time  inventory
management,  inventory-sales  ratios  moved down precipitously.  You may
recall  that  in  the  latter part  of  1993  one  of  the  reasons we began  to
get  a  little concerned about  the  upturn  and potential  strength of  the
economic  recovery was  that  inventory-sales  ratios  were getting to  a
point  that  seemed  to be  close  to bottom.  Obviously,  the  arithmetic  of
a change  from a declining  inventory-sales  ratio  to a  flat ratio  is  a
"pop" in  inventory  investment.  Indeed,  it  "popped" more  than  I
believe we  had expected, creating a significant  surge in  economic
activity throughout  1994.  Presumably  through the  normal multiplier
mechanisms,  the pickup  in  inventory investment  induced  enough income
and  PCE  to  create  fairly strong  economic  growth.  A big pickup  in
profit margins  was  superimposed on  that,  which in  turn  fostered growth

3/26/96

-23-

in  the capital  goods markets  until we  ran  into  the wall  in early  1995
when voluntary inventory accumulation  temporarily  turned involuntary.
Final  demand slowed appreciably,  and you may recall  that  in June,  or
maybe  slightly  earlier, we  were terribly  concerned about whether  the
economy was  on  the  edge  of  a recession.  The economy worked its  way
through  that,  but  inventory investment  continued  to  fall  throughout
1995  as  business  firms  endeavored to  restore  some  degree of  normality.

In  the  early months  of  1996,  were  it  not  for  the weather

problems  that  dominated  a  substantial part  of  our  economy,  estimated
at  as  much as  one-third, plus  the government  shutdowns,  we  probably
would have begun  to  see  some  economic  strength after  the retardation
in  economic growth  that  the  inventory adjustment  engendered all
through  1995.  The  experience  of  California, where weather  was not
much of  a problem, suggests  that  quite possibly  the  turn occurred at
the beginning  of  the  year rather  than  in February as  shows  up  in  a lot
of  our  data.  At  the moment,  we can  look back and ask  ourselves why
the  economy held up,  or as  Ed Boehne put  it,  was  so  resilient  through
all  of  this period.  I think  the  answer  is  largely that  we had a very
substantial increase  in  stock and bond market  prices.  There has
clearly been a wealth effect  here.  As  in previous periods,  it was
quite  likely  that  the  turn in  inventory  investment  could have  tilted
the  economy into  a recession,  considering that  the  expansion is  more
than five  years  "long  in  the  tooth"  so  to  speak.  I think the  equity
and bond markets  were especially helpful  in  creating a degree  of
resilience  that  has  carried  the  expansion  into  1996.

The  economy  is  likely  to  be stronger rather  than weaker  in

the period  immediately ahead  if  for no  other  reason  than that  it  will
be getting  some  stimulus  from the  GM strike.  The  strike  in retrospect
may turn  out  to  be somewhat  fortuitous  in  that  the bulk  of  excess
motor vehicle  inventories was  held by General  Motors.  While  I don't
know the  configuration of  the  inventory decline  in  terms  of  particular
models, because  invariably such declines  are not  uniform nor  are  they
the  same  as  a voluntary decline,  clearly  there has  been  some  signifi-
cant pressure  on  the  economy  that  will  be reversed as  we move  into
April  and May.  The  comments  around  this  table  suggest  that  the
members  regard the  risks  to  the  economy  as  being  as  close  to  balance
as  one  has  seen  for quite  a while.  In  looking back at  the performance
of  the  economy  in  this  period, I must  say  it  was  the most probable
result  that we  could have  anticipated, but  attaining  that  outcome  was
fraught with potential  uncertainties.

I disagree with Tom Melzer's  characterization of  what  taking

out monetary policy  insurance means.  As  I see  it,  taking  out  insur-
ance means  that we  are  adjusting policy on  the basis  of  a risk  to  the
forecast  that  has  a  low probability of  occurring.  In  fact,  that  is
the basis  for  all  insurance.  We take  out  fire  insurance  because we
forecast  that  there  is  some  small  probability of  fire.  I don't  think
we  take  out  monetary policy  insurance when we  think that  the  economic
trend has  changed  fundamentally.  A  fundamental  change  in  our  forecast
calls  for  a policy response  in  the  appropriate  direction, whereas  I
think an  insurance  takeout  is  done  largely on  the basis  of  a forecast
of  something  that  we  do  not expect  to  occur.  The  fact  that  it  did not
happen  in  this case,  or at  least  it has  not  happened yet,  is  a
desirable  outcome.  I would be  very much  disturbed  if  it  were  the
other way around.  You  can  look  at  insurance any way you want.  I like
to  take  out  insurance.  I have  a  lot  of  personal  insurance.  I have

3/26/96

-24

never  collected on  any of  it,  and  I must  say that  I am delighted.
[Laughter]  And I hope that  that  is  exactly what  we will  say later
with respect  to  what we have been doing.

MR. MELZER.  The  premium isn't  fixed  in  this  case;  that  is

the  difference.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Let's  not get  into  insurance policies!

[Laughter]  More  generally,  to  confront  the problems  that  we  face,  we
have  to  ask ourselves what  can  change.  Two  issues  have  surfaced  in
the  discussion  around this  table  that,  I think,  are  quite  to  the
point.  One  is  whether we are  going  to be  looking at  increased  labor
militancy.  The  answer  is  that  increased militancy is  more  likely  than
not,  if  for no  other  reason  than that  we  cannot  expect  the  current
situation  to  continue.  As  I indicated maybe  6 or  9 months  ago  when
I hypothesized that  job  insecurity was  an explanation  for why wage
inflation has  been  subdued, there  is  a  limit  to  this  process  at which
point  it  begins  to  go back  to  normal.  It  may well  be  that  political
issues  that  have been raised during  the presidential primary campaign
plus  the  General  Motors'  strike  are  the  first  signs  that  the  limit has
been reached.  It  is  too  early  to  say,  and  I don't  think we  have any
definitive data to  suggest,  that  the wage-job  security  tradeoff has
changed, but  I believe we are  getting  the  first  indications  that  it
may.

The  second and more  disturbing  issue  is  the  question of  the

stock market.  The market  is  probably high by any objective measure
that we  can  find.  We  need a lot  of  different  assumptions  to  argue
that it  will  stay  there.  It  is  being driven largely by  long-term
interest  rates,  but  there  is  more  to  it  than that.  Earnings  are  still
coming  in  above expectations.  This  is  the Wall  Street  evaluation.
It's what  a series  of  analysts  expect  earnings  to  be company-by-
company.  Those  numbers have  been  coming  in better  than expected  for
quite a while,  although the margin  is  now changing very materially.
There  is  increasing  evidence  that  profit margins,  after  showing some
significant  strength,  are  finally  beginning to  soften  somewhat,  as
Mike  Prell  indicated with  his  markup ratio  analysis.  This  obviously
has  significant  implications  for  the  capital  goods markets  at  some
point  and  far more  impact with  respect  to  the question  of  what  stock
prices  are  going  to  do.

What  I find particularly bothersome  is  that  history  suggests

more  often than not  that  stock prices  remain high  for  a protracted
period of  time  when they  should not;  stock prices may just  be waiting
for  us  to  move rates  up before  they go  down.  We probably are  going  to
find ourselves  in  that  position one  way or  another  at  some  point.  But
I do  think we have  to  be  aware  of  the  fact  that  this  may be unlike
1987  when the  stock market decline  essentially took out virtually all
of the  overheat,  if  I may put  it  that  way, in  the  economy,  increased
the  saving  rate  about  a full  percentage point,  and barely affected
economic  growth.  In a sense,  it went  through  fat  and never quite hit
muscle.  There  is  very little  fat  left  in  the  economic system at  this
stage.  If  we get  a very  significant contraction  in  stock prices,  I
think it  will have  a quite measurable wealth effect.  Therefore,  it  is
very difficult  to  look  into  the  future  and merely presume  that  1996
and  1997  will  produce  a flat  electrocardiogram.  It  is  probably the
best  forecast and  the most  likely outlook  simply because  it  is
difficult  to  figure  out where  the  extremes  are.  But  one  thing that  we

3/26/96

-25-

can  forecast  is  that  we probably  are  going  to  be  surprised by more
rather  than less  volatility in  the  economy.  I do  not  know  in which
direction the  economy will  be  going,  though ultimately  it  will  go
down.  It will  go  down basically because  if  we  seriously believe, as  I
think  every one  of  us  has  said  around  this  table,  that  the  business
cycle  is  not  dead,  recession  is  going  to  look us  in  the eye at  some
point.  We  do not  know when,  but  I think one  of  the most
extraordinarily difficult  periods  for monetary policy lies  somewhere
ahead.

For  the moment,  listening to  the  consensus  on  the  economic
outlook and the  balance of  risks,  I would subscribe,  and  I hope  the
rest  of you will  also,  to  doing nothing today.  This  is  what  the
market  largely expects  because  they are  looking at  the same  data  that
we are.  Thank you.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.  Symmetry?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  An obvious  symmetry.  Vice  Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.  Mr. Chairman,  I support  the  "B"

symmetric proposal.  I agree that  the most  likely  forecast  is  the  one
that we all  agreed on,  and  I think it  also  is  highly unlikely  that  it
will materialize.  We will  have  to  adjust  one  way or  the other  and
stay extremely wary and  ready to move  in  the  interim.  But  certainly
for now,  the  "B" symmetric proposal  is  the  right  one.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Parry.

MR. PARRY.  Mr.  Chairman, much of  the  evidence  that  we have

received since  the  last  meeting suggests  that  economic  activity has
strengthened,  as  the  gains  in  February have  more  than made up  for  the
weakness  in  January.  Even with  the  GM strike  this  month,  it  now
appears  that  there will be a marked pickup  in  real growth  in  the
current quarter  as  a whole.  At  the present  time,  there appears  to  be
little upward  or downward pressure  on inflation, although  I do  think
that  the  inflation risks  are  on  the  up side.  Accordingly,  I would
agree with your recommendation  that we make no  change  in policy at
this  time.  It  seems  to  me that  further  easing  would be  inappropriate,
given the  increasing  strength of  the  economy  and  the risks  that  this
could lead  to  higher  inflation in  the  future.  It  would also  seem
prudent  to  me  to wait  for  more information before we decide  on our
next  action.  If  economic  activity continues  to  pick up,  it  might  soon
be  appropriate to  increase  the  funds rate.  Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President Melzer.

MR. MELZER.  Alan,  I agree with your recommendation.  I have

some  concerns,  obviously, based on what  I have  said before.  It  is
difficult  to  evaluate  the  stance  of policy, but  I am concerned that  it
may not even  be neutral  at  this  stage--just based on what  is
happening, for  example, with monetary growth  rates  and some  of  the
factors  that  Don mentioned.  I think  the  current policy stance  is
inappropriate given  the  3 percent  inflation  expectations.  In my view,
we ought  to  be in  a somewhat  restrictive policy stance  and be working
the  rate  of  inflation down  in  some orderly  fashion.  But  having said
that,  I don't  think it  is  appropriate  for  policy to  go  in one
direction at  one  meeting and in  the  other direction at  the  next,

3/26/96

-26-

certainly under  the  circumstances  we have  described today.  We are
where we are, and we  should stay there  for a while and watch.  But we
need to  be  vigilant  so  that--I  am going  to  stick with  this  insurance
analogy a little  longer--the premium  on  last  meeting's  insurance
policy in  terms  of  higher  inflation expectations  does  not become
onerous.  That  is  what  I meant  before when  I said  that,  in  effect,  the
premium  is  not  fixed.  There  is  a cost  to  it.

One  other point  I wanted to make quickly refers  to Don's

briefing.  Don, you made a statement,  if  I heard it  correctly, about
the  Committee's opportunistic  inflation  strategy, which  implied  that
the Committee  had actually adopted  that.  By default,  that may be
where we  are, but  I don't  think we ever  consciously made a decision
about what  our inflation strategy  ought  to be, whether  it  is
deliberate,  opportunistic,  or  whatever.  I just wanted to  make  that
comment.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS.  Mr. Chairman,  as  others have  said, we  often
evaluate  the economy  and the  outlook in  terms  of  risks  and how they
are balanced.  It would certainly  seem that  there has  been some  change
in  the balance  of  risks  away  from  the downside  risks  toward upside
risks.  I don't  know whether we want  to  call  it  insurance or  whatever,
but  at  the  last meeting  I think there was  a perception  that  the  risks
were more heavily balanced  or  tilted toward the  down  side  than  they
are now.  That  balance  seems  to  have changed.  On  those grounds  I
think we have  to  contemplate  the  possibility that we may need  to
reverse  the move we made  last month at  some point  in  the not  too
distant  future.  I certainly would not  recommend  doing that now.  I
would agree with your proposal.  But  if  the  data for  the month  of
March that  we will  get at  the  beginning of  next month--for example,
retail  sales  or unemployment--show continuing strength,  I think we
will need to  consider  seriously  the  possibility of  reversing our
policy course at  a fairly early  date.  In  that regard,  I would point
out  that we have a long  interval before  the  next  FOMC meeting, which
is  on May 21.  If  we begin  to  get  these numbers  for March early  in
April  and it  appears  that they  are  signaling  continued strength, I
would hope  that  we might  have  a conference call  to  consider how we
might want  to  react  to  them.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.  I agree with your  recommendation, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN.  I also  agree with your recommendation, Mr.

Chairman.  I would  like  to  reflect  a little on your  comments  about
reaching  the  end of  the  business  cycle  expansion  sooner or  later.
Obviously, that will happen.  The concern  I would have  is  that we
might  experience a pattern somewhat  like  the  late  1980s  when prior  to
the  end of  the  expansion phase  of  the business  cycle, we had a surge
in  inflation  that we had to  tamp  down,  thus  feeding  into  the end of
the  business expansion  and adding  to  the depth  of  the  recession.  I am
a little nervous  about that possibility at  this point  and concerned
that we  should, on  assessing  the  data as  we go  forward, be  vigilant on
the  side  of  keeping interest rates  and monetary policy restrictive

3/26/96

-27-

enough  to  prevent  a surge  in  inflation  that ultimately would  tend to
shorten rather  than extend  the  growth phase  of  the business  cycle.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  McTeer.

MR. MCTEER.  I agree with your  recommendation.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Stern.

MR.  STERN.  I,  too,  support  your recommendation.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor Lindsey.

MR.  LINDSEY.  I agree with your recommendation.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW.  I agree with your  recommendation.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President  Jordan.

MR. JORDAN.  I agree with  leaving  the  federal  funds rate  at

5-1/4 percent  at  the present  time.  But  in  the  context  of  Al
Broaddus's  suggestion about  monitoring  the  incoming  information and
deciding what  to  do  in  the  future,  I think we need to  think more about
what  the  yield curve  is  telling us  and  try  to  reach some  consensus
about  it.  In his  remarks,  Don traced what was  happening  in  the
forward and  futures  markets.  I was  on  the Morning Call  during  this
period  and paid more  than  usual  attention  to  daily movements  in
interest  rates.  The  yield curve at  the  end of  January and  in  early
February was  priced off  a 4-1/2  to  4-3/4  percent  funds  rate.  The  only
thing  that was  at  5-1/4  percent was  the  overnight  federal  funds  rate.
The  rest  of  the yield curve--3-month bills  on  out  to  the  30-year bond
--was  priced  to  be  at  least  50  basis points  lower by Labor  Day.  I
don't  know what  people have  in  mind in the way of  a transmission
mechanism of  monetary policy  to  real  economic  activity, but  I thought
that  the  markets  simply were well  ahead  of us  for whatever  reason:
perceptions  of  a weak  economy,  inflation expectations,  or  whatever.
They simply  readjusted to  economic developments  and that  had  to
happen.  In  that  sense,  we  had a relative  movement  toward less
stimulus even  though  the  funds  rate  did not  change,  and it  should not
change  for  the  time  being.  But  as  we  interpret numbers  in  the  future
and decide how to  react  to  them,  I think we need  to be  very, very
careful  about whether  the market  is  ahead of  us,  behind us,  or
whatever.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor  Phillips.

MS.  PHILLIPS.  I agree with your  suggestion.  It  seems  to me

that  the need  for additional  insurance  is  less pronounced.  The  cost
is  now simply  too high relative  to  the  risk.  The  economy  is  moving
forward, and  it  does not  appear  to  need  our help  at  this  time.  I can
well  imagine  that  our  next move  could be either up  or down.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor Yellen.

MS. YELLEN.  Mr. Chairman,  I agree with your proposal  and  I

also  agree with your assessment  of  the  key risks.

3/26/96

-28-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY.  I concur with your recommendation, Mr.  Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President Guynn.

MR. GUYNN.  I concur with your recommendation as  well.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG.  I agree with your recommendation.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Would you read the  symmetric directive?

MR. BERNARD.  The  directive  wording is  on page  13  of  the

Bluebook:  "In the  implementation of  policy  for  the  immediate  future,
the  Committee  seeks  to maintain  the  existing degree  of pressure  on
reserve positions.  In the  context  of  the  Committee's  long-run
objectives  for  price stability and  sustainable  economic  growth,  and
giving careful  consideration  to  economic,  financial,  and monetary
developments,  slightly greater reserve  restraint  or  slightly lesser
reserve  restraint would be  acceptable  in the  intermeeting period.  The
contemplated reserve conditions  are  expected  to  be  consistent with
moderate  growth  in M2  and M3  over  coming months."

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Would you call  the  roll?

MR. BERNARD.

Chairman Greenspan 
Vice  Chairman McDonough 
President Boehne 
President Jordan 
Governor  Kelley 
Governor  Lindsey 
President McTeer 
Governor  Phillips 
President  Stern 
Governor Yellen 

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  The next meeting  is  on May 21.  We  took
out  an hour's  worth of  insurance  this  morning.  [Laughter]  It  turned
out  that  we did not  need it.  I don't know whether you consider  that
too high  or too  low a price.  [Laughter]

MR. BROADDUS.  The  risks were  definitely up.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Thank you all  for  trying  to  confine  your
remarks  to  a shorter  time  frame  than usual.  We probably will be  going
up to  the  Hill  in  about an  hour and we'll  see  what happens  there.  In
the  interim, we have  lunch scheduled  at  11:30.  Joe  Coyne  is  going  to
announce at  11:30,  11:45,  or something  like that  we have nothing  to
announce.  Obviously, until  then our  decision  is  not public
information.

END OF MEETING




==== GREENBOOK | 1996-03-26_fomc19960326gbpt119960321.txt ====

Prefatory Note 

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 

available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain. 

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 

gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.    

1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Strictly Confidential  (FR)  Class  II FOMC

March  21,  1996

SUMMARY  AND  OUTLOOK

Prepared  for the  Federal Open  Market  Committee
by  the staff of the  Board  of Governors of the Federal  Reserve  System

Domestic Nonfinancial  Developments

Overview

The  economy  appears  to  have  ended  1995  on  a  weaker  note  than  we

thought  at  the  time  of  the  January Greenbook, with  real  GDP  barely

rising in  the  fourth  quarter.  However,  the  shortfall  from our

expectation  reflected  a  much  slower  pace  of  inventory  accumulation,

and  the  greater  progress  in  correcting the  stock  overhang has  laid

the  groundwork for  stronger  output  growth  in  early  1996.  In  fact,

the  latest  indicators  of  activity  have  been  quite  upbeat  on  the

whole,  confirming  that  the  economy has  maintained  appreciable

momentum  in  the  face  of  a  series  of  adverse  natural  and  manmade

shocks.  We  now  feel  more  confident  that activity will  remain  on  a

moderate  uptrend  over  the  course  of  1996  and  1997.  We  expect  that

real  GDP  will  rise  somewhat  more than  2  percent  this  year  and  slow

only minimally  in  1997.

The  GM  strike has  created  some  short-run turbulence;  however,

we  see  no  existing imbalances  or  exogenous  forces  that  point

compellingly to  a persistent  deviation  from essentially  trend  growth

of  output  over  the  forecast  period.  To be  sure,  bond  yields  have

soared  in  the  past  few weeks,  but we still  believe  that  financial

conditions  overall  pose  no  serious  impediment  to  expansion.  The

fiscal  situation has  remained  static, with  the  probability  of  a

multiyear budget  compromise  seemingly still  small;  under  the

circumstances,  there  appears  little  prospect  of much  further  fiscal

restraint  beyond that  imposed by  the  notching  down  of  discretionary

spending that  has  already  occurred.  On  the  external  front,  domestic

firms  are  in  a healthy competitive  position at  prevailing  exchange

rates,  and  activity abroad  appears  to  be  moving  in  a direction

conducive  to  a continuation  of  substantial  growth  in U.S.  exports.

I-2

The  projected  path  of  output implies  that  resource  utilization

is  likely  to  remain  in the  range  observed  for  a while  now--a

circumstance  that  we  think  implies  a  gradual  deterioration in

underlying  wage and  price  trends.  The  risk  of noticeable

acceleration  in  the  near term  appears  greatest  on  the  labor  cost

side,  where  scattered  "shortages"  of  qualified  labor may  result  in

some  bidding up  of  compensation.  On  the  price  side,  any  pressures

from  increased  labor  costs  are  likely to  be  damped  by  flatness  in

prices  of imported  merchandise.  We  thus  expect  core  consumer  price

inflation  to  rise  only marginally  over  the  next  two  years  from  the

2.9  percent  pace  of the  past  twelve  months.  We  are  not  anticipating

any  sustained  impulses  to  inflation  from the  food  or  energy  sectors,

but  the  risks  are  not  negligible,  given  the  uncertainties  attending

supply  conditions  in  those markets.

Key Assumptions

In  the  last  Greenbook, we  assumed  that  the  FOMC would  hold  the

federal  funds  rate  target  at  5-1/2  percent  at  least  well  into  1997.

Instead,  the  Committee  cut  the  rate  another  25  basis  points.  This

came  as  no  shock to  the  markets,  and  the  action  had  little  immediate

effect  on  bond  prices.  Then,  mainly  in  response  to the  incoming

news  on  the  economy,  long-term  interest  rates  moved  up  sharply.

These  developments have  led  to  only  relatively modest

adjustments to  the  financial  elements  of  our  forecast.  We  had

expected  that bond yields  would  rise  as  markets  came  to  realize  that

the  economy was  not  as  weak as  data  early  in  the  year  were read  as

indicating.  In  the  event,  bond  rates  increased  more  rapidly  and  to

a slightly  higher  level  than  projected;  although  tamer economic  data

may  have a  constructive effect  on  bond market  psychology  in the  near

term, we are  not  anticipating  that bond  yields will  deviate  greatly

from the  current  level  over  the  forecast  period;  because we  are  now

I-3

also  assuming maintenance  of  federal  funds  at  or  near the  current

5-1/4  percent  level,  this  implies  a somewhat  steeper  yield  curve

than  before.  These  conditions  suggest,  if  anything,  a more

favorable  environment  for  banks, and  we  expect  that  any tightening

of  lending terms  and  standards  will  be  quite  limited.  More

generally,  credit  should  remain  readily  available  to all  but  the

lowest-quality borrowers.

Meanwhile,  equity prices have  managed  to  rise  further,  on net,

in  the  face  of  the  bond  yield  backup  and  are  noticeably higher  than

we  had  anticipated  they would  be  at  this  point.  Indeed,  market

valuations  may be  somewhat  extended  relative  to  "fundamentals,"  and

we  have  allowed  for  a modest  near-term  "correction"--to be  followed

by  a comparatively  subdued  uptrend  through  next  year.  On  average,

though,  equity prices  are  higher  in this  forecast  than in  the  last--

a plus  for  aggregate  demand.

We  revised  our  fiscal  assumptions  in  January because  efforts  to

enact  a balanced  budget  plan had  foundered.  The  current  forecast  is

again  predicated  on the  view that the  Congress  and  the  President

will  remain stalemated  on  major  changes  in mandatory  spending

programs  and  taxes.  (Although there  is  talk  of  possible  deals  on

welfare and  Medicaid,  any changes  enacted  are  unlikely to  have

significant  effects  on the  budget before  1998.)  We  continue  to

expect  that  discretionary  spending will  be  held  down  by  lower

appropriations  or  a series  of  continuing  resolutions.  However,

updated  estimates  of the  amount  of  restraint  in  legislated

appropriations  and the  current  continuing  resolution  suggest  that

discretionary  outlays  will  be  only  $16  billion  below the  OBRA-93

baseline  in  fiscal  1996  and  fiscal  1997;  our  previous  assumption was

a $20  billion  reduction each  year.  Broadly  speaking,  much  of  the

notch-down  in  spending has  already  been  felt  through the  actions

I-4

taken  since  last  fall  (including the  shutdowns),  and  little  further

fiscal  contraction  is  expected  in  the  coming  quarters.

A few  other  details  of  the  fiscal  outlook have been  revised.

The  enactment  of a  farm bill  is  likely  to  increase farm  subsidies

about  $2 billion  in  both  fiscal  1996  and  fiscal  1997.  Under  current

law, failure  to  pass  a farm  bill  would  result in  substantially

higher  subsidies--an alternative  that  is  undesirable  to  both the

Administration and  the  Congress.  Also,  the  budget  stalemate allowed

certain  excise taxes  to  expire  at  the  beginning  of  1996,  the  largest

being  the  10  percent  tax on  airline  tickets.  We  feel that  in  the

absence  of a broad  budget  bill,  actions  to  restore  these  taxes  are

unlikely  in  the  near  term.  This  development  is  expected  to  reduce

receipts  by a few billion  dollars  in  fiscal  1996  and by  $5 billion

in  fiscal  1997.  However,  technical  adjustments  to  our  outlays  and

receipts  forecasts  have offset  these  policy  developments  in  our

deficit  projection.  Under  our  policy  and  economic  assumptions, we

put  the  unified budget  deficit  at  $160  billion  in fiscal  1996  and

$192  billion in  fiscal  1997,  about  the  same  as  in the  previous

Greenbook.

With  respect  to  the  external  sector,  the  trade-weighted  dollar

in terms  of  other  G-10  currencies has  changed  little  on  net  since

January,  and  we  have  retained the  assumption that the  dollar will

remain  near  recent  levels.  The  outlook for  foreign economic

activity is  also  little  changed,  with foreign  real  GDP  (on a U.S.

export-weighted  basis)  projected to  increase  about  3-1/2  percent  in

each  of  the  next  two  years,  compared  with  2 percent  in  1995.  The

price  of  crude  oil  has  firmed  recently  as  a  result  of  the

unseasonably cold  winter;  it  has  been buffeted  as  well  by  shifting

views  on  the  likelihood  that  Iraq  will  resume  exporting  oil.  Last

Greenbook, we  had  expected  that  the  spot  price of  WTI  would  hold

I-5

steady  in the  first  half of  this  year  at  its  fourth-quarter average

of  about  $18  per  barrel.  In  the  interim,  the  spot  price has  moved

above  $19  per  barrel  on  average  this  quarter,  and  we  now  expect  it

to  rise  slightly  above  $20  per  barrel  early next  quarter.  The

longer-term  outlook  for  oil  prices  has  not  been  revised,  however:

We  still  expect  that  the  spot  price  will  settle  at  $18.50  by

midyear--with  a downside  risk associated with possible  resumption of

oil  exports  by  Iraq.

Recent  Developments

Our  forecast  of  real  GDP  growth  in the  first  quarter  now  stands

at  1-1/2  percent--about  3/4  percentage point  higher  than in  the

January  Greenbook.  All  of  the  upward  revision  is  in  final  sales,

which  are  now expected to  increase  at  a 2-1/4  percent  rate.  The

pickup  in  GDP  this  quarter  would  have  been  stronger  if  not  for  the

GM  strike,  which we  estimate  to  slice  almost  3/4  percentage  point

from real  growth,  assuming  that  production returns  to  normal  in  the

next  few  days. 1

SUMMARY OF  THE  NEAR-TERM OUTLOOK
(Percent change,  at  annual  rates,  unless  otherwise noted)

1995:04 
BEA 
adv 

Jan 
GB 

Mar 
GB 

1996:Q1

Jan 
GB 

Mar
GB

Real  GDP 

1.9 

0.9 

0.3 

0.8 

1.5

Final  sales 

1.5 

1.8 

1.9 

1.4 

2.2

Change in  billions  of chained  (1992) dollars

Nonfarm inventory  inv. 

4.6  -14.7  -25.6 

-11.7  -13.8

Of  course,  a  great  deal  of  uncertainty attaches  to  these

estimates--probably  even more  than  is  usual  at  this  point in  a

1. If  the  tentative  strike  settlement were  not  ratified  or  there

were  other delays  in  resuming  production,  GDP  growth would  be
reduced  by about  1/3  percentage point  for  each  additional week of
lost  GM output.

I-6

quarter,  owing to  weather-related  distortions  of  the  data.

Importantly, the  weakness  in  employment  and  hours  reported  for  the

survey week in  January  almost  certainly  was  unrepresentative  of the

month  as  a whole.  However,  in  light  of  other  labor  market

indicators,  the  strength  in  employment  reported  for  February  is  hard

to  credit.  We  thus  anticipate  that  the  next  employment  report will

be  weak  and  are  interpreting  the  labor  input  picture  as  consistent

with moderate  output  growth  for  the  quarter.

We  project  that,  among  components  of  final  demand,  real

personal  consumption expenditures will  bounce back  to  a

2-1/2  percent  rate  of  growth  this  quarter  after  a very modest

increase  in  the  fourth  quarter.  Retail  sales  were  soft  in  January

but  advanced  strongly  in February,  paced by  brisk motor  vehicle

sales.

Outlays  for  producers'  durable  equipment  (PDE)  in  real  terms

are  expected  to  grow at  a 4  percent  annual  rate  in  the  first

quarter.  Nominal  shipments  and  orders  for  computing  equipment  rose

in January  and  point  to  a  solid  advance  in  real  outlays  this

quarter--albeit  one  likely  to  pale by  comparison with  the  almost

80  percent  annual  rate  recorded  in  the  fourth  quarter.  Aircraft

shipments  should be  up,  and  available  data  suggest  a bounce-back of

purchases  of  motor vehicles  by businesses  after  a  large  decline in

the  fourth quarter.  As  for  the  remainder  of PDE, we  expect  a  small

decline  in  spending.

Housing market  activity  has  strengthened further  this  quarter

in both  the  single-family  and multifamily  segments.  Real

residential  investment  should  advance  at  about  a 7 percent  rate,  in

light  of the  increase  in  housing starts  to  a 1.47  million unit

average  in  January  and  February from  a 1.41  million unit  average  in

the  fourth  quarter.

I-7

Although we  foresee--as  in  the  last  Greenbook--a  decline  in  the

rate  of  inventory  investment  this  quarter  that  reduces  GDP  growth

3/4  percentage  point,  the  picture  with  regard to  inventory-sales

ratios  is  much improved.  Firms  evidently made  surprising progress

late  last  year  in  correcting inventory  imbalances,  especially

outside  of  the  motor vehicle  sector.  This  quarter,  our  projected

slowdown  in  inventory  accumulation  is  confined  to  motor  vehicles.

Some  reduction in  auto  inventories was  in train  even before  the  GM

strike;  with the  strike,  dealer  stocks  will  be  drawn  down  sharply.

Setting  aside  vehicles,  data  for  January  show  substantial  jumps in

manufacturing  and  wholesale  stocks.  Viewing  these  increases  as

augmented  by  weather-induced  delays  in  shipments,  we  anticipate

little  or  no  accumulation,  on net,  of  non-auto  stocks  in  February

and March.  Overall,  nonfarm  inventory  stocks  are  expected  to

decline  slightly  in the  first  quarter.

One  sign  that  inventory  problems  are  limited  is  the  firmness  of

manufacturing production.  Although  the  net  gain  in  output  over  the

first two  months  of  the  year  was  disproportionately concentrated in

the  aircraft  and  computer  sectors,  the  pattern  of developments  in

other  industries  was  suggestive  of  only mild  and  localized  inventory

overhangs.  It  appears  that manufacturing  output will  post  a

1-1/4  percent  annual  rate  gain  this  quarter,  despite  being  reduced

by about  1-1/2  percentage  points by  the  GM strike.

The three  CPI  reports  received  since  the  January  Greenbook have

revealed  no  clear  change  in  inflation  trends.  The  first-quarter

increase  in  the  CPI  excluding food  and  energy  is  expected  to be

2-3/4  percent--close to  the  average  pace  over  1995.  The  rise  in

crude  oil  prices  has  boosted  the  energy component  of the  CPI,  and

some  further  pass-through is  likely  over  the  next  few months.  We

anticipate  that  energy price  increases  will  push  overall  CPI

I-8

inflation  above  3 percent  in  the  first  and  second  quarters.  As

noted  earlier,  though,  crude  oil  prices  are  expected  to  subside

somewhat by  midyear,  paving  the way  for  slightly  lower  retail  energy

prices.

Hourly  compensation in  the  employment  cost  index accelerated  to

a  3-1/2  percent  annual  rate  of  increase  in  the  final  three  months  of

1995,  as  health  insurance  costs  jumped.  Even  so,  the  increase  in

private  industry  compensation for  the  year  ended December was  just

2.8  percent--an  all-time  low for  this  series,  which  began  in  1980.

Average  hourly  earnings  for  production  or  nonsupervisory workers

bounced  around  in January  and  February but  recorded  a net  rise  of

only  0.3  percent--lowering  the  twelve-month change  to  a tad  under

3 percent.

The  Longer-Run  Outlook for  the  Economy

In  broad terms,  the  current  forecast  for  1996  and  1997  is

essentially  the  same  as  the  last.  Real  GDP  growth fluctuates  around

the  2 percent  trend  of  potential  output;  the  unemployment  rate  holds

in  its  recent  range;  and  CPI  inflation  runs  at  roughly  3 percent.

Compared with the  1-1/4  percent  increase  in  real  output  last  year,

the  projected  pickup  in  the  pace  of  activity  largely  reflects  a

cessation  of  restraint  from  inventories.  Indeed,  inventories  should

add  slightly to  growth  in  1996,  with  the  rebuilding of  agricultural

stocks  and  the  swing in  nonfarm  inventory  investment  each

contributing positively.

With  regard to  the  outlook  for  final  sales,  the  overall  thrust

of  fiscal  policy  is  expected  to  be  closer  to  neutral  in the  coming

quarters  than  was  the  case  in  the  past  several  years,  and  financial

conditions  appear  to  be  consistent  with output  growth  near  trend.

The  rise  in  longer-term  interest  rates  should bring  a halt  to  the

recent  surge  in  residential  construction,  but  the  high  level  of

I-9

equity  prices  should help  sustain  consumer  spending.  Real  final

sales  are  projected  to  advance  about  2 percent  in  1996  and  1997,

close  to  the  pace  seen  last  year.  However, the  predicted

composition  of  spending involves  a step-up  of  growth  in  consumer

outlays  that  offsets  a further  cyclical  moderation  of  growth  in

business  fixed  investment.

SUMMARY OF  STAFF  PROJECTIONS
(Percent change,  at  annual  rates,  unless  otherwise  noted)

Real  GDP 

Previous 

Final  sales 
Previous 

PCE 

BFI 

Civilian  unemployment  rate1  

Previous 

1995 

1996 

1997

1.2 
1.5 

1.9 
1.9 

2.0 

7.3 

5.5 
5.6 

2.2 
1.8 

2.1 
2.0 

2.5 

3.0 

5.6 
5.6 

2.0
2.0

2.0
2.1

2.4

3.8

5.6
5.6

1. Average  level  in  the  final  quarter  of  the  year  indicated.

Personal  consumption  expenditure.  We  are  projecting that  the

rate  of  growth  of  real  consumer  outlays  will  move up  from  2 percent

in  1995  to  2-1/2  percent  in  1996  and  1997--a  forecast  that  has

spending  advancing a bit  faster  than  disposable income.  In

contrast,  consumption  grew  considerably more  slowly  than  income  in

1995.

Given  the  rise  in household  net  worth  associated  with the

soaring  stock market,  it  might  have  been expected  that  the  personal

saving  rate  would  have  fallen, not  risen,  last year.  Although  there

is  a  danger  of  overanalyzing  noisy  data  that  have  yet  to  undergo  the

usual  sequence  of  annual  revisions,  some  interpretation of  this

surprise  is  necessary  in  thinking  about  the  outlook.  Several

possible  drags  on  consumer  demand  can be  readily  suggested;  (1) The

I-10

widely  reported  anxiety about  job  security may  have  prompted  greater

precautionary  saving,  although  such  anxiety was  not  reflected  in  any

obvious way  in the  conventional  indexes  of  consumer  sentiment.

(2) Increased focus  on  the  shaky  finances  of  social  security  and

Medicare/Medicaid  may have  raised  households'  targets  for  retirement

saving.  (3) High  returns  on  stocks  may  have  elevated  the  expected

future  yields  on  saving  and  encouraged the  deferral  of  consumption.

(4) An  increasing number  of  households may  have  encountered

limitations  on their  borrowing capacity.

We  do  not  have  a firm  scientific  basis  for  sorting  out  the

importance  of  the  aforementioned  hypotheses.  Still,  the  possibility

that  one  or  more  of  them  does  capture  a significant  force  currently

at  work has  led  us  to  project  that  consumption will  grow  only  a bit

more  quickly than disposable  income;  given the  positive  surprise  in

the  personal  saving  rate  in  the  fourth  quarter,  this  places  the  path

of  the  saving  rate  a few  tenths  of  a  percent  above  that  in  the

January  Greenbook  and  above  the  annual  average  for  1995.  Although

this  seems  to  us  a  reasonable  place  to be,  we  think there  may  be  an

upside  bias  to  the  risks  attending  the  consumption  forecast;  we have

assumed  only a  small  effect  of  stock market  wealth  on  consumption,

but  a response  more in  line  with some  econometric  estimates would

significantly  augment  the  predicted  growth  of  spending.  Moreover,

consumers  are  likely to  continue  enjoying ready  access  to  credit,

despite  some  signs  of  greater  concern on  the  part  of  lenders  in

light  of rising  delinquencies;  and  the  latest  readings  on consumer

sentiment have  had  a more bullish  tone  that  could  foretell  near-term

strength in  demand.

Residential  investment.  Housing  starts  are  projected  to  turn

down  in  coming  months  in  response to  the  backup  in mortgage  interest

rates.  In  light  of  the  forecast  that  income will  continue  growing

I-11

moderately and  the  expectation  that  mortgage  rates will  remain

relatively attractive  by the  standards  of  the  past  few  decades,  only

a modest  decline  of  starts  is  expected.  Single-family  starts  are

projected  to  fall  from  a  1.16  million unit  rate  this  quarter  to  a

bit  below 1.1  million  units  in  1997.  In  the multifamily  market,

activity  is  expected  to  continue  its  gradual  recovery from  the

extraordinarily  low levels  of building  earlier  this  decade.  Starts

should  edge  up  from  300,000  units  this  year  to  310,000  units  next

year.  Credit  for  construction and  permanent financing  of  income

properties  reportedly  is  readily  available.

Business  fixed  investment.  The  cyclical  rebound  in  business

capital  spending probably has  run  its  course.  Real  growth  of

business  fixed investment  is  projected  to  average  3 percent  this

year  and  4 percent  next,  a pace  just  a  little below that  in  recent

quarters;  growth  averaged  near  10  percent in  1993  and  1994.  The

most  important  cyclical  factor--the  output  "accelerator,"  which

posits  a relationship between  the  level  of  investment  spending  and

lags  of the  growth  of  output--is  expected  to  restrain investment

slightly over  the  projection  period.  Notably,  declines  in capacity

utilization over  the  past  year  indicate  less  need  for  additions  to

plant  and  equipment  in  the  industrial  sector.

Real  spending for  producers'  durable  equipment  is  expected  to

advance  3 percent  in  1996  and  5 percent  in  1997.  With  technology

advancing  rapidly  and  computer  prices  continuing to  fall  (encouraged

in  the  near  term by the  recent  sharp  declines  in  semiconductor

costs),  demand  for  computers  is  likely  to  remain robust;  we  are

projecting annual  percentage  increases  in the  teens  for  real

computer  outlays.  This  rate  of  growth would  be well below the  pace

of  the  past  few years,  reflecting our  belief that  computers  are

I-12

likely  to  share  in  the  general  deceleration  of  equipment  spending--

and  also  reflecting a sense  that  computer  penetration  in  the

business  market  has  reached  the  point  at  which  demand  is

increasingly  determined  by  decisions  to  replace  existing  machines.

(A caveat:  No  matter  how high  we  forecast  computer  sales  in  the

past  few years,  our  predictions  quite  consistently  turned  out to

have  been  too  low!)  Business  outlays  for  motor  vehicles  are

expected  to  decline  a bit  this  year,  though not  as  much  as  they  did

in  1995,  and  then  to  turn up  modestly  in  1997.  Outside  of  computers

and  motor  vehicles,  investment  in  producers'  durable  equipment  is

expected  to  be  lackluster,  with  growth  averaging  only about

1 percent  in  real  terms--despite  an upturn  in  purchases  of aircraft.

In the  nonresidential  construction area,  a cyclical  slowing  of

outlays  is  also  expected,  reducing  growth from  6 percent  in  1995  to

3 percent  in  1996  and  1 percent  in  1997.  The  recent  downturn  in

contracts  and  permits  might  be  signaling a more  pronounced

softening,  but  there are  a number  of  indicators  pointing

convincingly  toward  some buoyancy  in  building activity:  Vacancy

rates  have been  falling  and  rents  firming  in  a number  of  sectors;

financing  for  commercial  construction  reportedly is  in abundant

supply;  and  although the  general  view is  that  existing  retail  space

is  excessive,  many  of  the  expanding  chains  continue  to  prefer

building  new  "big boxes."

Business inventories.  A  slowing  pace  of  inventory  accumulation

restrained  real  GDP  growth  3/4  of  a percentage  point  over  1995,  as

firms  acted to  bring  stocks  into  better  alignment with  slower

growing  final  sales.  As  noted  earlier,  the  lower-than-expected  rate

of  inventory accumulation in the  fourth  quarter  appears  to  have

brought  stocks  considerably  closer  to  desired  levels,  especially

outside  of  the  motor  vehicle  sector,  while  the  drawdown  of auto

I-13

stocks  this  quarter  is  likely  to  result  in  a  lean  aggregate

inventory  level  in  that  sector.  After  an expected  resumption of

stockbuilding  in the  second  quarter--which adds  1-1/4  percentage

points  to  GDP  growth  that  quarter--we  are  projecting that

inventories  will  be  a neutral  factor  for  output  growth.  The  ratio

of  stocks  to  sales  is  projected  to  edge  down  gradually as  efforts  to

economize  on  inventory  costs  continue.

Government.  Assumptions  regarding  federal  purchases  are  little

changed  from the  previous  Greenbook:  Real  consumption  and

investment expenditures  are  expected  to  decline  2-1/2  percent  in

1996  and  1997.  The  defense  and  nondefense  components  are  projected

to  decline at  similar  rates.

The  fiscal  position of  state  and  local  governments  appears  to

be  relatively healthy  in  the  aggregate.  Although  pressure  to  cut

taxes  may cause  effective  tax rates  to  edge  down  over  the  next  two

years,  these  governmental  entities  should be  able  to  increase  real

purchases  2-1/2  percent  in  1996  and  1997--close  to  the  average  so

far  in  the  current  expansion--without  causing budgetary  strains.  Of

course,  reforms  in  welfare  or Medicaid,  which would  alter  patterns

of  grants  to  states  considerably,  could have  effects  on  finances

within  the  sector;  but  at  the moment,  it  is  hard  to  see  changes

being  enacted  that  would have  significant macro  consequences within

the  forecast  period.

Net  exports.  Although  real  exports  are  expected  to  grow fairly

rapidly,  the  high propensity  to  import  in  conjunction with the

projected  step-up  in  GDP  growth  suggests  that  import  growth will  be

fast  enough to  cause  some deterioration  of our  real  net  export

balance.  The  trade  sector  is  expected  to  directly  reduce  real  GDP

growth  about  1/4  percentage  point  in  1996  and  somewhat  less  in

I-14

1997.2  (See  the  International  Developments  section  for  a  more

complete  discussion.)

Labor  markets.  The  overall  contour  of  the  labor  projection  has

productivity advancing  close  to  its  trend  rate  of  1.0  percent  and

the  unemployment  rate  holding  at  around  5.6  percent.  After  March,

monthly gains  in  payroll  employment  should  average  about  100,000.

Last  year,  although real  GDP  growth  fell  short  of  potential,  the

unemployment  rate  was  little  changed  as  the  participation  rate fell.

We  expect  the  participation  rate  to  retrace  that  decline  this  year--

indeed,  in  January-February,  it  rose  close  to  our  estimate  of  its

"equilibrium" level--thus  enabling  real  GDP  growth  to  be  a bit  above

trend without  putting downward  pressure  on the  unemployment  rate.

Also,  the  expected  rebound  of  farm output  adds  a small  positive

wedge  this  year  between  growth  rates  of  GDP  and  labor  input.

Wages  and  prices.  Perhaps  the  biggest news  in  data  about  labor

costs  and  prices  received  since  the  January Greenbook  was  the  sharp

increase  in  health  insurance  expenses  contained  in the  employment

cost  index  (ECI) for  the  three months  ending  in  December.  Overall

benefit  costs  jumped  to  a  5-1/2  percent  annual  rate of  increase  from

an  average  annual  rate  of  growth of  1-1/2  percent  in  the  first  three

quarters  of  1995.  We  had  been expecting  that benefit  costs would

accelerate  from the  very  low  rates  of  growth that  prevailed  earlier

in  1995,  but  the  increment  was  well  above our  forecast.  Given the

variability  of  the  quarterly  numbers  (and the  possibility that  the

2.  The  outlook  for  real  exports  could be  a bit  weaker  than our
forecast  if BEA's  estimates  of  prices  of  exported  semiconductors  are
similar  to  figures  used  in  1995.  We  have  found  it  puzzling that  BEA
estimated that  prices  of  semiconductor  exports  rose  in  1995
following years  of  annual  declines  of at  least  20  percent  based  on
hedonic  indexes.  If  these  prices would  have  declined,  say,
15  percent  in  1995,  real  exports  would have  risen an  additional
$13  billion  (or nearly  2 percent)  over  the  year.  Prices  of  imported
semiconductors  declined in  1995,  as  they  had  in  prior  years.  Over
the  forecast  period,  we  have  approximately  neutralized  the  net
effect  of  diverging  prices  for  exported  and  imported  semiconductors
by  projecting  the  same  rate  of decline  for  both  series.

I-15

delay in  the  survey,  owing  to  the  government  shutdowns, might  have

distorted  the  results),  we  have  reacted  cautiously to  the  surprise

and  raised  our  projection of  the  growth  rate  of  ECI  benefits  less

than  1/2  percentage  point.  Overall,  we  expect that  the  tightness  of

the  labor markets--and  some  pickup  in  consumer  price  inflation  (see

below)--will  be  reflected in  a modest  elevation  of compensation

gains.  The ECI  index for  compensation  of  private  industry workers

is  expected  to  accelerate  from  growth  of  2.8  percent  in  1995  to

3.0  percent  in  1996  and  3.3  percent  in  1997.

SUMMARY  OF  STAFF  INFLATION  PROJECTIONS
(Percent change,  Q4  to  Q4,  except  as  noted)

Consumer  price  index 

Previous 

Excluding  food  and  energy 

Previous 

Employment  cost  index1  

Previous 

1995 

1996 

1997

2.7 
2.7 

3.1 
3.1 

2.8 
2.6 

3.1 
3.0 

2.9 
2.8 

3.0 
2.8 

3.0
2.9

3.1
3.0

3.3
3.1

1.  Compensation of  private  industry workers,  percent  change  from

final  month  of  previous  year  to  final  month  of  year  indicated.

On  the  view that  firms'  profit  margins  are  ample,  only  part  of

the  upward  revision  in  the  projection  for  labor  costs  has  been

passed  through to  prices.  The  core  CPI  is  expected  to  increase

2.9  percent  in  1996  and  3.1  percent  in  1997,  up  a tenth  of a point

each year  compared with  the  January  Greenbook.  Core  inflation  in

1996  is  expected to  be held  down  by more-favorable  import  prices  and

the  pass-through of  recent  declines  in  prices  of  raw materials  and

intermediate  goods.

The  overall  CPI  is  projected to  increase  about  3 percent  in

both  1996  and  1997,  up  somewhat  from  the  pace  of  the  past  couple  of

years.  Because  of the  increases  that have  occurred  in  grain and

oilseed  prices,  we  are  anticipating  that--even on  the  assumption  of

I-16

normal  crop  yields--retail  food  prices will move  up  a little  faster

than they have  in  recent  years,  at  a  pace  about  in  line  with  core

inflation.  Apart  from the  uncertainties  associated with the  crop

outlook,  a wild  card  in  the  food  price  projection is  the  potential

volatility  of meat  prices  that  could  be  set  off  by  producers'

decisions  about  herd  sizes  and  slaughter  rates.  Although  changes  in

agricultural  technology may have  altered  the  timing and  dimension  of

livestock  supply  adjustments  from what  has  been  observed  in  the

past,  we  suspect  that  the  squeeze  on margins  will  prompt  producers

to  trim  their herds  this  year  after  several  years  of buildup.

Indeed,  if  the  anticipated  selloff  of herds  turns  out  to  be  heavy,

increases  in meat  prices  this  year  could  be  smaller  than we  are

forecasting--but  with the  twist  that  price  increases  farther  down

the  road  might then  turn  out  to  be  larger  than we  currently  are

predicting.

As  noted  previously,  developments  in the  oil  market  have

already  left  their mark on  the  CPI  and will tend  to  boost  the  CPI

for  a few more months.  Although we  expect  retail  energy  prices  to

flatten  out  in  the  second  half  of  the year,  the  less-favorable  Q4/Q4

change  in these  prices  is  the biggest  factor  in  our  forecast  of  an

acceleration of  the  total  CPI  in  1996.  In  1997,  the  assumed

stability  of the  price  of  crude  oil  makes  retail  energy  prices  a

slight  favorable  factor  in the  overall  consumer  inflation  outlook.

Alternative  Simulations

We  have  run  two model  simulations in which  the  funds  rate is

symmetrically  raised  or  lowered  relative  to  the  assumption in  the

Greenbook.  Deviations from baseline  start  at  50  basis  points  in  the

second  quarter  of  this  year  and  increase  to  100  basis  points  in  the

third  quarter  and  beyond.  In the  lower-rate  scenario,  real  GDP

growth  is  1/4  percentage  point higher  this  year and  3/4  percentage

I-17

point  higher  in  1997.  The  unemployment  rate  is  reduced

0.3  percentage  point  by  the  end  of  1997,  and  core  CPI  inflation is

0.3  percentage  point  higher  than  in  the  baseline  forecast.  The

effects  of  the  tighter  policy  scenario  are  symmetric.

ALTERNATIVE  FEDERAL FUNDS  RATE ASSUMPTIONS
(Percent change,  Q4  to  Q4,  except as  noted)

1996 

1997

Real  GDP

Baseline 
Lower  funds  rate 
Higher  funds  rate 

Civilian  unemployment  rate

Baseline 
Lower  funds  rate 
Higher  funds  rate 

CPI  excluding  food  and  energy

Baseline 
Lower  funds  rate 
Higher  funds  rate 

1. Average for  the  fourth  quarter.

2.2 
2.4 
2.0 

5.6 
5.5 
5.7 

2.9 
2.9 
2.9 

2.0
2.7
1.3

5.6
5.3
5.9

3.1
3.4
2.8

STRICTLY  CONFIDENTIAL  <FR>
CLASS  II  FOMC

STAFF  PROJECTIONS  OF CHANGES IN GDP, PRICES.  AND  UNEMPLOYMENT

(Percent,  annual rate)

March 21  1996

Norinal GDP 

1 

Real GDP 

I 

Consumer price  index 

I 

Uneinployment rare  (level)

S 

01/26/96 

03/21/96  I 

01/26/96 

03/21/96 

01/26/96 

03/21/96 

01/26/96 

03121/96

4.9 
5. 
4.7 
4.5 
4.6 

4.9 
5.8 
4.5 
4.3 
4.8 

2.2 
3.5 
2.1 
1.8 
2.1 

2.2 
3.5 
2.0 
1.9 
2.1 

3.0 
2.6 
2.8 
2.8 
2.9 

3.0 
2.6 
2.8 
2.9 
30 

6.8 
6.1 
5.6 
5.6 
5 6 

6.8
6.1
56
5.6
A

0.0 
0.0 

0. [
0.0

I

I

I 

Interval 

ANNUAL 

1993 
1994 
1995 
1996 
1997 

1994 

QUARTERLY
----------------------  I
I
Q 
Q2  I
Q3  1
Q4

1995 

1996 

1997 

I

Q 
Q2
Q3
Q4

Q 
I
Q2  I
Q3
Q4I

QI
Q2  I
Q3
Q4

I

TWO-QUARTER

1994 

1995 

1996 

Q2
Q4  I
1

Q2
Q4

Q2  I
Q4

Q4

FOUR-QUARTEI

1993 
1994 
1995 
1996 
1997 

Q4  I
Q4  I
Q4
Q4
4
Q

I

STRICTLY  CONFIDENTIAL  <FR> 
CLASS  II FOMC 

REAL  GROSS  DOMESTIC  PRODUCT AND  RELATED  ITEMS, QUARTERLY  VALUES

(Seasonally adjusted,  annual  rate except as  noted)

March  21,  1996

Units

1993 
Ql 

1993 
Q2 

1993 
Q3 

1993 
Q4 

1994 
Q1 

1994 
Q2 

1994 
Q3 

1994 
Q4 

1995 
QI 

1995
Q2

EXPENDITURES

Nominal  GDP
Real GDP

Real  GDP
Gross  domestic  purchases
Final  sales
Private dom.  final purch.

Personal  cons.  expend.

Durables
Nondurables
Services

Business fixed invest.

Producers'  dur. equip.
Nonres.  structures

Res.  structures

Expons
Exports
Imports

Government  purchases

Federal
Defense
State and local

Change in  bus.  invent

Nonfarm
Net exports

I Bill. S
I Bill. Ch.  S

S% change

I

SBil  Ch. S

Nominal GDP

% change

EMPLOYMENT  AND  PRODUCTION

I Millions
I%

1%
191

I Millions
I

I Bill  $
1% change
I

1%

% change

ill
Bill.$

I% change

Nonfarm  payroll  employ.
Unemployment  rate

Industrial  prod.  index
Capacity  utiL rate-mfg

Housing  starts
Light  motor vehicle  sales

INCOME  AND  SAVING

Nominal  GNP
Nominal GNP
Nominal personal  income
Real disposable  income
Personal  saving  rate

Corp. profits,  IVA  &  CCAdj

Profit  share  of GNP

Federal govt. surpl/def.
State/local  surpl  def.
Ex-  social ins.  funds

PRICES  AND  COSTS

GDP implicit deflator 
CPI

Ex. food  and energy

ECI, hourly  compensation
Nonfarm  business  sector

Output  per  hour
Compensation  per  hour
Unit  labor cost

6442.8 
6327,0 

6503.2 
6353.7 

65713 
6390.4 

6683.7 
6463.9 

6772.8 
6504.6 

6885.0 
6581.5 

6987.6 
6639.5 

7080.0 
6691.3 

7147.8 
6701.6 

7196.5
6709.4

0.0 
0.9 
-0.8 
1.4 

0.7 
0.8 
-0.9 
1.6 

6.0 
7.1 
3.5 
2.1 

0.4 
9.6 

-4.7 
-13.1 
-15.6 
1.7 

19.4 
26.0 
-55.2 

3.8 

1.7 
2.4 
1.5 
2.8 

2.7 
11.2 
2.3 
1.3 

6-3 
11.4 
-5.3 
-5.1 

7.9 
14.5 

0. 
-4.9 
-5.2 
3.9 

21.6 
26.7 
-67.0 

3.8 

109-7 
7.2 

3.7 
80.6 

1 .16 
S  13.23 

110.4 
7.1 

0.5 
80.3 

1.25 
14.11 

2.3 
3.7 
2.3 
4.4 

3.8 
7.3 
2.9 
3.6 

4.7 
6.3 
0.8 
13.2 

-7.9 
4.9 

1.0 
-2.9 
-5.8 
3.8 

20.1 
30.9 
-89.1 

4.3 

111.0 
6.8 

3.2 
80.4 

1.31 
13.69 

4.7 
4.4 
4.8 
5.4 

2-8 
10.2 
17 
1.9 

17.5 
21.7 
7.5 
24.3 

21.5 
17.0 

1.5 
-0.7 
-0.5 
3.0 

18.0 
22.1 
-86.2 

7.0 

111.8 
6.6 

5.5 
81.1 

1.47 
14.53 

2.5 
3.4 
1.2 
3.7 

2.6 
5.8 
3.8 
1.4 

7.3 
15.6 
-11.8 
12.8 

-0.6 
7.5 

-4.2 
-11.1 
-17.0 
0.7 

4.8 
5.4 
2.8 
4.5 

3.6 
4.3 
3.3 
3.6 

7.1 
4.1 
15.7 
12.7 

14.8 
19.1 

-0.8 
-5.3 
0.7 
2.2 

3.6 
3.6 
4.2 
3.6 

2.5 
5.6 
4.0 
1.2 

13.7 
19.3 
0.2 
-1.8 

12.2 
11.0 

7.0 
11.5 
13.3 
4.2 

40.8 
29.8 
-101.3 

75.1 
54.1 
-112.2 

64.9 
50.1 
-113.3 

3.2 
2.7 
3.6 
4.1 

3.3 
12.6 
3.2 
1.4 

12.2 
11.9 
13.0 
-0.1 

15.3
9.3

-1.4 
-5.9 
-16.1 
1.6 

57.9 
53.3 
-105.8 

0.6 
1.4 
0.7 
2.1 

0.8 
-8.7 
2.4 
2.1 

153 
174 
9.9 
-63 

2.6 
8.7 

1  1 
-6.3 
-7.0 
2,3 

0.5
0.9
1.8
2,6

3.4
7.0
1.9
3.4

3.6
37
3.4

13.3

4.6
7.7

0.9
-1.
0.9
2.1

54.5 
58.1 
-119.0 

30.6
33.8
-126.8

5.4 

6.8 

6.1

5.4 

3.9 

2.8

112.7 
6.6 

8.4 
82.2 

1.36 
15.45 

113.6 
6.2 

7.0 
83.2 

1.44 
14.76 

114.5 
6.0 

4.6 
83.4 

1.47 
14.65 

115.3 
5.6 

6.4 
84.3 

1.51 
15.44 

116.1 
5.5 

3.9 
82.9 

1.31 
14.A0 

1164
5.7

-1.4
82.6

1.28
14.35

S6458.4 
4.3 
-5.7 
-8.1 
S  4.2 

S 

S 
-1.2 
S  6.6 

-283.7 
S  80.5 
S  13.3 

6512.3 
3.4 
8.8 
5.2 
4.8 

22-9 
6.9 

-249.2 
89.1 
22.0 

6584.8 
4.5 
2-9 
1.1 
4.2 

19.7 
7.1 

-253.5 
94.9 
28.1 

6684.5 
6.2 
8.3 
5.0 
4.7 

422 
7.7 

-232.4 
115.0 
48.5 

6773.6 
5.4 
-3.3 
-5.3 
2.8 

-37.5 
6.7 

-212.9 
94.8 
29.0 

6876.3 
6.2 
13.6 
10.1 
4.2 

84.7 
7,7 

-169.9 
105.2 
41.1 

6977.6 
6.0 
4.2 
2.1 
4.1 

14.5 
7.9 

-186.3 
99.6 
37.9 

7062.2 
4.9 
6.5 
4.0 
4.2 

14.6 
8.1 

-190.4 
99.3 
39.4 

7140.5 
4.5 
7.1 
3.6 
4.8 

7187.0
2.6
4.5
0.0
4.0

-6.4 
7.8 

1.1
7.8

-173.3 
99.0 
40.2 

-160.5
99.0
40.9

S  3.8 
S 
3.1 
S  3.5 

4.2 

-3.9 
1.0 
5.1 

2.1 
2.8 
3.5 

3.5 

-1.7 
2.7 
4.5 

1.9 
1.7 
2.4 

3.4 

2.1 
2.0 
-0.1 

2.2 
3.4 
2.9 

3.4 

1.6 
1.1 
-0.5 

2.8 
2.2 
2.9 

3.0 

-2.5 
3.3 
5.9 

1.9 
2.5 
2.9 

3.4 

1.9 
2.1 
0.2 

2.4 
3.6 
3.1 

3.3 

2.6 
1.2 
-1.4 

2.2 
2.2 
2.3 

2.6 

0.9 
3.3 
2.4 

3.2 
3.2 
3.3 

2.3 

-11 
3.7 
4.9 

2.3
3.2
3,6

2.9

3.0
5.4
2.3

STRICTLY  CONFIDENTIAL  <FR>
CLASS II FOMC

REAL GROSS  DOMESTIC  PRODUCT AND RELATED  ITEMS,  QUARTERLY  VALUES

(Seasonally adjusted,  annual rate  except as noted)

March  21.  1996

Units 

I  1995 
I 
Q3* 

1995 
Q4 

1996 
QI 

1996 
Q2 

1996 
Q3 

1996 
Q4 

1997 
QI 

1997 
Q2 

1997 
Q3 

1997
Q4

Projected

EXPENDITURES

Nominal  GDP
Real  GDP

Real  GDP
Gross  domestic purchases
Final  sales
Private  dom.  final  purch.

Personal  cons.  expend.

Durables
Nondurables
Services

Business  fixed  invest.

Producers'  dur. equip.
Nonres.  structures

Res.  structures

Exports
Imports

Government purchases

Federal

Defense

State  and  local

Change in  bus. invent.

Nonfarm
Net exports

Nominal  GDP

EMPLOYMENT  AND PRODUCTION

Nonfarm  payroll  employ.
Unemployment  rate

Industrial  prod. index
Capacity  util. rate-mfg

Housing  starts
Light  motor vehicle sales

INCOME  AND SAVING

Nominal  GNP
Nominal  GNP
Nominal  personal income
Real  disposable income
Personal  saving rate

Corp. profits. IVA  &  CCAdj

Profit share of GNP

Federal  govt. surpl./def.
State/local  surpl./def.
Ex. social ins. funds

PRICES AND COSTS

GDP implicit  deflator
CPI

Ex. food  and energy

ECI, hourly  compensation
Nonfarm business  sector

Output  per hour
Compensation  per hour
Unit  labor cost

*  Published

.ill. 
ill  Ch.  S 

Schange

ill, Ch.  S

7298.5 
6768.3 

7335.9 
6773.3 

7416.7 
6797.9 

7523.0 
6855.3 

7603.8 
6885.6 

7695.2 
6925.2 

7788.5 
6960.6 

7880.1 
6996,3 

7962.6 
7026.7 

8061  7
7066.7

3.6 
2.8 
3.4 
3.3 

2.8 
9.4 
0.5 
2.6 

5.2 
4.8 
6.2 
9.2 

8.0 
1.0 

-0.7 
-5.9 
-8.1 
2.7 

33.2 
38.3 
-114.3 

0.3 
-0.8 
1.9 
1.8 

1.1 
2-1 
-0.7 
1.8 

5.4 
6.2 
3.4 
4.4 

10.5 
0.6 

-3-7 
-11.9 
-11.6 
1,7 

95 
127 
-95,9 

1.5 
1.8 
2.2 
2.9 

2.5 
9,5 
-0.7 
2.7 

4.2 
3.9 
5.2 
6.6 

5.1 
7.4 

3.4 
3.5 
2.1 
2.5 

2.4 
3.4 
1.8 
2.5 

1.9 
2.2 
1.0 
6.7 

9.5 
9.8 

0.7 
-3.2 
0.5 
3.0 

0.7 
-1.9 
-5.2 
2.2 

1.8 
2.3 
1.6 
2.5 

2.7 
4.8 
2.2 
2.5 

2.9 
3.1 
2.3 
-2.8 

4.1 
7.6 

0.2 
-3.4 
-3.6 
2.2 

2.3 
20 
2.4 
2.3 

2.5 
3.4 
2.2 
2.5 

2.9 
3.2 
2.0 
-2.5 

11.6 
7.9 

1.1 
-0.9 
-1.3 
2.1 

2.1
2.0
2.1
2.5

2.5
2.9
2.2
2.5

4.0
4.8
1.7
-1.2

7.0 
6.2 

0.3 
-3.5 
-3.9 
2.5 

2.1 
2,2 
2.0 
2.4 

2.3 
2.4 
22 
2.4 

3.8 
4.7 
1.1 
0.0 

10.8 
10.7 

0.9 
-2.0 
-2.5 
2.5 

1.8 
2.3 
1.7 
2.5 

2.4 
3.3 
2,2 
2.4 

3.7 
4.6 
1.1 
0.8 

5.0 
8.3 

0.5 
-3.1 
-2.9 
2.5 

2.3
2.2
2.4
2.5

2.5
3.5
2.2
2.4

3.5
4.8
-0.2
0.4

11.3
9.2

1.0
2.3
-1.6
2.7

-2.7 
-1.1 
-102.0 

20.0 
19.1 
-104.9 

23.9 
21.5 
-113.6 

22.1 
19.6 
-108.6 

21.3 
18.7 
-108.8 

22.0 
19.4 
-111.4 

23.5 
20.8 
-120.6 

22.4
19.6
-118.8

i  change

5.8 

2.1 

4.5 

5.9 

4.4 

4.9 

4.9 

4.8 

4.3 

5.1

dillions 
,b 

Schange 
S 

I 
I 

lillions 

1 16.8 
5.6 

3.2 
826 

1.42 
15.04 

117.2 
5.5 

0.4 
82-0 

1.41 
14.91 

117.6 
5.6 

0.9 
81.4 

1.47 
15.00 

118.0 
5.6 

5.3 
81.7 

1.44 
14.60 

1183 
5.6 

2.7 
81.5 

1.40 
14.65 

118.7 
5,6 

3.1 
81.4 

1.39 
14.70 

119.0 
5.6 

2.7 
815 

1.39 
14.74 

119.3 
5.6 

27 
81.5 

1.39 
14.75 

119.7 
5.6 

2.2 
81.4 

138 
14.77 

120.0
5.6

3.2
81.6

1.38
14-80

lil.  $ 
o change 

& 

E change 
e 

3il  $ 

o change 

7283.0 
5.5 
S  5.0 
4.5 
4.4 

7334.9 
2.9 
5.3 
3.8 
4.9 

7414.7 
4.4 
6.3 
3.8 
52 

7514.3 
5-5 
4.8 
0.1 
4.7 

7596.1 
4.4 
4.9 
3.5 
4.9 

44.I 
8.4 

-12.6 
8.1 

-55 
7.9 

14.7 
8.1 

-0.2 
8.0 

7682.6 
4.6 
4.6 
1.6 
4.7 

7-7 
8.0 

7778.6 
5.1 
5.7 
3.2 
4.9 

7865.0 
4.5 
4.7 
1.7 
4.7 

7950.6 
4.4 
5-0 
2.3 
4.7 

8043  1
4.7
5.5
2.3
4.7

5.3 
8.0 

4.1 
8.0 

1-8 
8.0 

0.4
7.9

1  -161.6 
S  93.9 
S  35.8 

-159.7 
88.1 
30.5 

-187.8 
84.5 
27.2 

-147.5 
85.2 
28.3 

-162.2 
85.3 
28.7 

-171.7 
87.0 
30.7 

-176.8 
88.3 
32.3 

-175.9 
90.8 
35.0 

-174.4 
89.2 
33.6 

-184.8
92.0
36.6

2.2 
2.1 
2.5 

2.3 

1 7 
4.3 
2.5 

1.8 
2.1 
2.5 

3.5 

-1.0 
3.0 
3.5 

3.0 
3.2 
2.7 

2.9 

2.1 
6.4 
4.2 

2.4 
3.4 
2.8 

3.0 

-0.4 
0.8 
1.2 

2.5 
2.9 
3.0 

3.0 

0.6 
3.7 
3-1 

2.5 
2.9 
3.0 

3.1

1.4
3.6
2.1

2.8 
3.0 
3.1 

3.2 

1.1 
3.9 
2.8 

2.7 
3.0 
3.1 

3.2 

1.1 
3.8 
2.6 

2.5 
3.0 
3.1 

3.3 

0.6 
3.8 
3.1 

2.7
3.0
3.1

3.3

1.3
3.9
2.5

STRICTLY  CONFIDENTIAL <FR> 
CLASS II FOMC

CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  GROWTH  IN  REAL  GROSS DOMESTIC  PRODUCT AND RELATED  ITEMS 

March  21,  1996

Item 

Real GDP 
Gross  domestic purchases 

Final sales 
Private  dom. final  purch. 

Personal  cons.  expend, 

Durables 
Nondurables 
Services 

Business  fixed invest. 

Producers'  dur. equip. 
Nonres.  structures 

Res.  structures 

Change  in  bus,  invent. 

Nonfarm 
Farm 

Net exports 
Exports 
Imports 

Goverment  purchases 

Federal 
Defense 
Nondefense 
State and local 

GDP Residual 

1995 
Q3* 

1995 
Q4 

1996 
QI 

1996 
Q2 

1996 
Q3 

1996 
Q4 

1997 
Ql 

1997 
Q2 

1997 
Q3 

1997 
Q4 

I  95Q4/ 
94Q4 
1 

96Q4/ 
95Q4 

97Q4/
96Q4

Projected 

IProjected

3.6 
2.8 

3.4 
2.7 

1.9 
0.8 
0.1 
1.1 

0.5 
0.4 
0.2 
0.3 

0.2 
0.3 
-0.1 

0.7 
0.9 
0.1 

-0.1 
-0.4 
-0.4 
-0.0 
0.3 

-0.0 

0.3 
-0.8 

1.8 
1.4 

0.8 
0.2 
-0.1 
0.7 

0.6 
0.5 
0.1 
0.2 

-1.4 
-1,5 
0.1 

1.1 
1.2 
0.1 

-0.7 
-0.9 
-0.6 
-0.3 
0.2 

-0.2 

1.5 
1.8 

2.2 
2.4 

1.7 
0.8 
-0.1 
1.0 

0.5 
0.3 
0.1 
0.3 

-0.7 
-0.8 
0.1 

-0.4 
0.6 
1.0 

0.1 
-0.2 
0.0 
-0.2 
0.3 

-0.0 

3.4 
3.6 

2.1 
2.1 

1.6 
0.3 
0.4 
1.0 

0.2 
0.2 
0.0 
0.3 

1.4 
1.2 
0.1 

-0.2 
1.1 
1.3 

0.1 
-0.1 
-0.2 
0.1 
0.3 

0.0 

1.8 
2.3 

1.6 
2.0 

1.8 
0.4 
0.5 
1.0 

0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
-0.1 

0.2 
0.1 
0.1 

-0.5 
0.5 
1.0 

0.0 
-0.2 
-0.2 
-0.1 
0.3 

0.0 

2.3 
2.0 

2.4 
1.9 

1.7 
0.3 
0.5 
1.0 

0.3 
0.3 
0.1 
-0.1 

-0.1 
-0.1 
0.0 

0.3 
1.4 
1.1 

0.2 
-0.1 
-0.1 
-0.0 
0.3 

0.0 

2.1 
2.1 

2.1 
2.1 

1.7 
0.3 
0.5 
1.0 

0.4 
0.4 
0.0 
-0.0 

-0.0 
-0.1 
0.0 

-0.0 
0.8 
0.9 

0.1 
-0.2 
-0.2 
-0.1 
0.3 

0.0 

2.1 
2.2 

2.0 
2.0 

1.6 
0.2 
0.5 
0.9 

0.4 
0.4 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

-0.2 
1.3 
1.5 

0.2 
-0.1 
-0.1 
-0.0 
0.3 

0.0 

1.8 
2.3 

1.7 
2.1 

1.7 
0.3 
0.4 
0.9 

0.4 

0.0 
0.0 

0.1 
0.1 
0.0 

-0.5 
0.6 
1.2 

0.1 
-0.2 
-0.1 
-0.1 
0.3 

0.0 

2.3  1 
2.2  1 

2.4  1 
2.1  1 

1.7 
0.3  1 
0.5 
0.9  I 

1.2 
.1 

1.9 
2.0 

1 .4 
0.2 
0.2 
0.9 

0.4 
0.4  04 

-0.0  I 
0.0  I 

-0.1  I 
-0.1  1 
0.0 

0.1 
1.4 
1.3  1 

0.2  1 
-0.1 
-0.1 
-0.1 
0.3 

0.0  I 

0.7 
0.6 
0.1 
-0.1 

-0.7 
-0.6 
-0.1 

0.1 
0.7 
0.6 

-0.2 
-0.5 
-0.3 
-0.1 
0.3 

0.0 

2.2 
2.4 

2.1 
2.1 

1.7 
0.5 
0.3 
1.0 

0.3 
0.3 
0.1 
0.1 

0.2 
0.1 
0.1 

-0.2 
0.9 
1.1 

0.1 
-0.2 
-0.1 
-0.1 
0.3 

0,0 

2.0
2.2

2.0
2.1

1.7
0.3
0.5
0.9

0.4
0.4
0.0
-0.0

0.0
-0.0
0.0

-0.1 
1.1
1.2

0.1
-0.2
-0.1
-0.1
0.3

0.0

I 

1 
I 

I 

1 

1 

1 

1 

I 

I 

I 

M

*  Published
Components may  not  sum to total due to  rounding.

Strictly  Confidential  (FR)
Class  II  FOMC

STAFF  PROJECTIONS  OF FEDERAL  SECTOR ACCOUNTS  AND RELATED  ITEMS
(Billions of  dollars  except  as  noted)

March  21,  1996

Item 

1994 a  

1995& 

1996 

1997 

Q1 a  

Q2 a  

Q3 a  

Q4b 

Ql 

02 

Q3 

04 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4

Fiscal  year 

1995 

1996 

1997

UNIFIED  BUDGET 

Receipts 1  
Outlays i  
Surplus/deficit1  

On-budget 
Off-budget 

Surplus  excluding

deposit  insurance 2  

Means  of  financing
Borrowing 
cash  decrease 
3  
Other

Cash  operating balance,

end of  period 

NIPA FEDERAL  SECTOR 

Receipts 
Expenditures 

Consumption  expend. 

Defense 
Nondefense 

Other expenditures 
Current  account  surplus 
Gross  investment 
Current  and capital
account  surplus 

FISCAL  INDICATORS

4

High-employment  (HEB)
surplus/deficit 
Change  in  HEB, percent
of  potential  GDP 
Fiscal  impetus  (FI),

1257 
1461 
-203 
-259 
56 

-210 

185 
17 
1 

1351 
1514 
-164 
-226 
62 

-181 

171 
-2 
-5 

1417 
1577 
-160 
-228 
68 

-169 

162 
-22 
20 

1463 
1655 
-192 
-248 
56 

-195 

193 
0 
0 

Not  seasonally  adjusted

307 
380 
-73 
-85 
12 

-79 

404 
381 
23 
-11 
34 

333 
373 
-40 
-43 
2 

324 
380 
-56 
-69 
14 

18 

-42 

-59 

316 
397 
-81 
-92 
11 

-84 

423 
396 
27 
-13 
40 

354 
404 
-50 
-54 
3 

338 
415 
-77 
-81 
4 

317 
419 
-102 
-113 
11 

441 
407 
34 
-4 
38 

367 
414 
-47 
-50 
3 

25 

-52 

-78 

-103 

33 

-47 

66 
8 
0 

26 
-42 
-7 

20 
23 
-2 

33 
17 
5 

59 
6 
17 

-2 
-27 
3 

73 
-18 
-5 

55 
25 
-3 

74 
20 
9 

12 
-45 
-1 

52 
0 
-5 

36 

38 

60 

60 

18 

61 

38 

20 

15 

42 

60 

35 

15 

60 

60 

Seasonally  adjusted, annual  rate

348
433
-86
-87
2

-86

64
25
-3

35

1354 
1554 
450 
307 
143 
1104 
-200 
67 

1459 
1630 
455 
304 
151 
1175 
-171 
65 

1519 
1685 
447 
298 
149 
1238 
-165 
61 

1590 
1764 
446 
299 
148 
1317 
-174 
61 

1449 
1623 
455 
303 
152 
1168 
-173 
65 

1483 
1644 
456 
305 
151 
1188 
-161 
67 

1487 
1648 
453 
301 
152 
1195 
-162 
63 

1489 
1650 
451 
299 
152 
1198 
-160 
57 

1502 
1692 
449 
299 
150 
1242 
-190 
62 

1543 
1691 
444 
297 
147 
1247 
-148 
62 

1544 
1706 
443 
296 
147 
1264 
-163 
62 

1563 
1735 
445 
298 
147 
1290 
-172 
61 

1581 
1757 
447 
299 
148 
1310 
-176 
61 

1600 
1773 
447 
299 
148 
1326 
-174 
61 

1617 
1789 
446 
299 
147 
1343 
-172 
61 

1636
1817
447
300
146
1371
-181
61

-267 

-237 

-226 

-235 

-238 

-227 

-225 

-217 

-252 

-210 

-225 

-234 

-238 

-235 

-233 

-242

-263 

-262 

-252 

-269 

-265 

-248 

-253 

-243 

-274 

-238 

-253 

-265 

-272 

-271 

-270 

-282

-.6 

0 

-. 1 

.2 

-.3 

-.2 

.1 

-.1 

4 

-.5 

.2 

.2 

.1 

0 

0 

.2

percent,  cal,  year 

-6.4 

-5.6 

-7.7 

-2 7 

-1.9 

-.8 

-1.4 

-4 6 

-2  2 

-1.7 

-. 1 

- 1 

-1.1 

-.7 

- 9 

-.7

1. OMB's  March 1996  baseline deficit  estimates  (assuming discretionary  spending at OBRA93  caps,  and  an  extension  of  the  expired  trust  fund excise
taxes)  are  $161  billion  in  FY96  and  $144  billion  in  FY97.  CBO's  December  1995  baseline  deficit estimates  (including  the  fiscal  dividend from assumed
enactment  of  congressional  budget program) are  $172  billion  in  PY96  and $182  billion  in  FY97 
corresponding  Social  Security  (OASDI) categories.  The  OASDI surplus  is  excluded  from the  on-budget deficit  and  shown  separately  as  off-budget,  as
classified under  current  law.  The  Postal  Service deficit  is  included in  off-budget  outlays  beginning  in  FY90

Budget  receipts,  outlays,  and surplus/deficit  include

2  OMB's March  1996  baseline deficit  estimates  (assuming discretionary spending  at OBRA93  caps,  and an  extension of  the  expired trust  fund excise

taxes),  excluding deposit  insurance  spending,  are $169  billion in  FY96 and $148  billion  in  FY97.  CBO's  December  1995  baseline  deficit estimates
(including the  fiscal dividend from  assumed  enactment of  congressional  budget  program),  excluding deposit  insurance spending, are  $180  billion  in
FY96 and  $186  billion  in  FY97.

3. Other means  of  financing  are  checks  issued less  checks paid,  accrued  items,  and changes  in  other  financial  assets  and liabilities.

4. HEB  is  the NIPA current  and capital  account  surplus  in current  dollars, with  cyclically  sensitive receipts  and  outlays adjusted  to  the  level
of potential  output generated by  1.8  percent  real  growth and  an  associated unemployment  rate  of  6 percent.  Quarterly figures  for  change  in  HEB  and
FI  are not  at  annual  rates.  Change  in HEB,  as  a percent of  nominal  potential  GDP,  is  reversed  in  sign.  FI  is  the weighted difference of  discretionary
changes  in  federal  spending and  taxes  (in chained  1992  dollars),  scaled by  real  federal  consumption plus  investment.  For  change  in  HEB  and FI,
negative values  indicate  restraint.

a--Actual
b--Preliminary

DOMESTIC FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS

Summary

The  announcement  of  an  easing  in monetary  policy  after  the

January  FOMC meeting  led to  further  declines  in  short-term interest

rates,  and  market  participants  seemed  to  expect  additional

reductions  in the  funds  rate  by  early  summer.  In  recent  weeks,

however,  interest  rates  have  risen sharply  as  incoming  information

dashed  the  notion  that  the  economy was  lapsing  into  a period  of

seriously  subpar  performance  and the  prospects  for  a broad  fiscal

agreement  continued  to  fade.  Three-month bill  rates  are  up  2 basis

points  since  late  January,  and  the  short-term  rate  curve  indicates

that  no  policy  easing  is  expected.  In  the  coupon  sector,  interest

rates  on Treasury notes  and  bonds  have  climbed  55  to  65  basis

points,  on  net,  despite  some  decline  in  recent  days.  The  rise  in

rates  on  private  market  bonds  has  about  matched  that  on  Treasuries,

keeping  quality  spreads  historically low.

Equity prices  have  run  counter  to  bond  prices,  with most  major

stock indexes  advancing  3 percent  to  5-1/2  percent  over  the

intermeeting period  in  active  and  volatile trading.  On  Friday,

March  8, after  the  unexpectedly strong  employment  report  was

released,  the  broader  indexes  fell  an  extraordinary  3 percent;  there

were  no  signs  of  panic, however,  and  the  market  turned  up  nicely  in

the  following  week.

The  resilience  of  equity prices  in  the  face  of  rising  bond

yields  has  been all  the more  surprising  given that  over  the  past

several  weeks  securities  analysts  have,  if  anything,  revised  down

their  estimates  of  corporate earnings  for  1996.  Price-to-earnings

ratios,  whether measured with backward-looking  earnings  or  analysts'

expectations  of  future  profits,  now appear  somewhat  elevated

compared  with  readings  over  the  past  year  or two.  However, these

I-23

I-24

and  other  measures  of  relative  returns  on  equities  have  not  been

particularly helpful  in  the  past  in  foreshadowing significant

declines  in  stock prices--that  is,  apparent  "overvaluations" have

often  persisted  until  a major  shock,  often  a substantial  tightening

of monetary  policy,  triggered  a correction.

The  broad monetary  aggregates  have  grown  swiftly  of  late.  M2

expanded  at  a 5-1/4  percent  annual  rate  in  February following  a

4-3/4  percent  rise  in  January;  M3  advanced  at  a 10  percent  pace  last

month,  up  from  a 7-1/4  percent  pace  in January.  Both  aggregates

have  gotten  a lift  from money market mutual  funds,  which  became more

attractive  as  their  returns  lagged the  drop  in  short-term market

yields.  Data for  early March point  to  an  acceleration  of M2  and

continued  rapid  growth  of  M3,  pushing  both aggregates  further  above

their  respective  annual  ranges.

In  contrast,  bank  credit  expansion  slowed  to  a 3-1/2  percent

rate  in  February, as  weaker  loan  growth more  than  offset  a rise  in

securities  purchases.  Consumer  loans  were about  flat,  and  real

estate  lending  slowed.  Demand by  investors  for  paper backed  by

consumer  receivables,  home  equity loans,  and  fixed-rate mortgages

has  remained  strong,  inducing banks  to  securitize  these  types  of

credits.  However,  even  after  adjusting  for  securitizations,

consumer  loans  at  banks  expanded  at  just  over  half the  average  rate

recorded  in the  past  year.  Business  loans  at  banks  rose  at  a

6 percent  rate  last month, down from  January but  about  the  same  pace

registered  in  late  1995.  Moderate  growth  of business  loans  does  not

appear  to  reflect  supply constraints:  Banks  reportedly have

continued  to  compete  aggressively for  commercial  and  industrial

loans,  and  in  February  the average  spread  over  the  federal  funds

rate was  the narrowest  in  a decade.

I-25

Gross  public  offerings  of  corporate bonds  were  strong until

mid-February, when the  backup  in  interest  rates  prompted

postponements  or  outright  cancellations.  Even  so,  bond  issuance  for

nonfinancial  firms  last  month was  up  from January  and  about  matched

the  elevated pace  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  1995.  Financing  for

corporate  restructuring  has  been  an  important  factor boosting

issuance  of  bonds  and  adding  to  the  growth  of  nonfinancial

commercial  paper.

Gross  equity  issuance  also  increased  in  February  and  remained

high  in  early March.  The  strong  stock market  has  provided  a

particularly favorable  environment  for  initial  public  offerings  by

young  firms;  IPOs  have  accounted for  about  half  the  nonfinancial

equity  issued  since  late  1995.  Nonetheless,  share  retirements

resulting  from mergers  and  acquisitions  and  from share  repurchases

continued  to  exceed  new issues  by  a  substantial margin.

Available  data  for  the  household  sector  suggest that  borrowing

has  been  well maintained  in  recent  months.  Growth  of total  consumer

credit  in  January was  about  unchanged  from the  pace  in  the  second

half of  1995,  although lending at  banks  implies  there was  some

slowing  in  February.  Mortgage  borrowing  appears  to  have  risen

during  the  current  quarter;  however,  loan  applications--especially

those  for  refinancing  rather than home  purchase--declined  sharply  in

response  to  the  recent  backup  in  rates.  The  latest  readings  on

consumer  and mortgage  loan delinquencies,  covering  the  closing

months  of  1995,  show some  further  deterioration,  but  there  are  no

signs  that  this  worsening in  loan  quality  has  resulted in  major

shifts  in  overall  credit  demand  or  supply.

State  and  local  governments,  like  corporations,  had  been taking

advantage  of  lower  interest  rates  by  refinancing  higher-cost  debt,

and  gross  issuance  of  tax-exempt  bonds  dropped  sharply  in

I-26

mid-February when  potential  interest  savings  evaporated.  Overall,

state  and  local  debt  continues  to  contract  owing  to  the  large  volume

of pre-refunded  securities  now being  retired  as  call  dates  arrive.

The  enactment  of  legislation  temporarily  resolving  the

debt-ceiling impasse  allows  the  Treasury to  meet  its  financing  needs

through March  29,  and borrowing  is  expected  to  total  nearly

$60  billion in  the  first  quarter.

Outlook

The  staff's  economic  projection  assumes  no  change  in the

federal  funds  rate  over  the  forecast  period.  Bond  yields  are

expected  to  change  little,  possibly  retracing a touch more  of  their

recent  run-up  in  yields  in  coming weeks.  Although moderate  economic

growth  and  inflation  should be  compatible with  further  gains  in

corporate  profits,  current  share  valuations  seem optimistic,  and  we

expect that the  stock market  will  face  difficulty  in extending  its

uptrend.

The  recent  easings  of monetary  policy, which  have  narrowed the

spread  of  short-term market  interest  rates  over  the  deposit  interest

rates  offered  to  households,  are  likely  to  continue to  boost M2  for

a while  longer;  growth  in  1996  is  expected to  be  somewhat  above  its

annual  growth  range.  As  in  1995,  M2  velocity seems  likely  to  post  a

small  decline.  The  strong  expansion  of M3  in  1995  should be

sustained  this  year,  although bank credit  growth is  likely  to  remain

moderate.  Banks  are  anticipated  to  put  greater  emphasis  on  deposit

funding,  in part  owing to  the  absence  of  insurance  premiums.  With

market  interest  rates  assumed  stable  in  1997,  the  rates  of  expansion

of  the  broad monetary  aggregates  are  projected  to  ease  off  slightly

and  velocity  to  flatten  out.

Growth  of  domestic nonfinancial  debt,  which was  5-1/2  percent

in  1995,  is  projected  to  be  5 percent  in  1996  and  4-3/4 percent  in

I-27

1997.  The  reduction  reflects  a slowing  of  growth  in  credit  to

households and  businesses.  A  pickup  in  federal  debt  growth,  owing

to  a rise  in  the  deficit,  will  somewhat  offset  the  moderation  in

nonfederal  debt.

Growth  of business  debt  is  projected  to  slow  to 4-1/2  percent

next  year  and  4-1/4  percent  in  1997,  compared with  6-1/2  percent

last year.  We  are  not  anticipating  a significant  slackening  in the

pace  of  equity  share  retirements,  but borrowing  demands  are  likely

to  be  less  robust  as  a consequence  of  reduced  inventory  accumulation

and  slower  growth  of  business  fixed  investment.

Although  the  rise  in bond  yields  has  deterred  issuance  in

recent  weeks,  we  expect that  borrowers  will  return  as  market

conditions  stabilize.  Meanwhile, banks  most  likely  will  remain

eager  lenders  over  the  period  ahead  as  nothing  in  the  outlook

suggests  the  emergence  of  severe  credit  quality  problems  that  would

prompt  a  significant tightening  of  standards  or  terms  for  business

borrowers.  Banks  are likely  to  remain highly  profitable,  and  the

additional  capital  will tend  to  encourage  lending.

In  the  household  sector,  home  mortgage debt  growth is  expected

to  remain  close  to  its  current  levels,  in  line  with  our  expectations

of  a moderate  rise  in  nominal  outlays  for  residential  construction.

Growth  of consumer  credit  is  projected  to  slow. in  part  because

repayment  volumes  will  be  rising  in  reflection  of the  rapid  rise  of

borrowing in  the  past  few  years;  the  subdued  growth of  outlays  for

big  ticket  items  points  to  relatively modest  increases  in

extensions.  Already high  debt  levels  may  limit  the  potential  for

borrowers  to  qualify  for  additional  credit,  and  rising delinquency

rates  are  likely  to  make banks  and  other  lenders more  cautious;

however, we  think  this  will  prove  to  be  a limited  shift  in

availability,  affecting mainly  a small  segment  of  primarily  lower

I-28

income  households.  Total  household  debt  is  projected  to  rise  about

6-3/4  percent  in  1996  and  6 percent  in  1997  down  from the  8 percent

rate  of  1995  but  still  faster  than  the  projected  rise  in nominal

personal income.

State  and  local  debt  outstanding  is  expected to  continue  to

contract  in  1996  and  1997  but  at  a  slower pace  than in  1994  and

1995.  The  volume  of  scheduled  retirements  of  pre-refunded bonds  is

estimated  to  be  shrinking.  Nonetheless,  retirement  volume  remains

sizable  and  should  more than  offset  an  expected  increase  in issuance

of  tax-exempt  securities  to  fund  a  rise  in  governmental

construction.

Confidential  FR  Class II
March 21,  1996

CHANGE  IN DEBT OF THE  DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL  SECTORS  '
(Percent)

Nonfederal

Households

Total

Federal
govt.

Total

Total

Home
mtg.

Cons.
credit

Business

State and
local

govt.

MEMO

Nominal
GDP

1986
1987
1988
1989
1990

Quarter  (seasonally  adjusted  annual  rates)

1995:1 
2 
3 
4 

1996:1 
2 
3 
4 

1997:1 
2 
3 
4 

6.4 
6.6 
3.9 
4.5 

5.3 
5.0 
5.0 
4.2 

5.3 
4.3 
4.5 
4.4 

7.6
5.7
1.8
1.2

5.6
3.5
7.4
3.4

8.0
3.8
4.8
4.1

1. Data after 199 5 :q4 are staff projections. Changes are measured from end of the preceding period to

end of period indicated except annual nominal GDP growth, which  is Q4 to Q4. On a quarterly average
basis, total debt grows 5.5 percent in 1995, 4.9 percent in 1996, and 4.7 percent in 1997. Federal
debt rises 4.4 percent in 1995, 4.5 percent in  1996, and 5.3 percent in 1997. Nonfederal debt
increases 5.9 percent in 1995, 5.0 percent in 1996, and 4.5 percent in 1997.

2.6.3  FOF

-4.3
-1.5
-10.6
-2.4

-1.3
2.5
-7.5
-3.2

-2.9
-1.9
-3.3
-0.6

Confidential  FR Class II
March  21,  1996

Net funds raised  by domestic
nonfinancial  sectors

1 Total
2  Net equity  issuance
3  Net  debt issuance

Borrowing  sectors

Nonfinancial  business

4  Financing  gap 2
5  Net  equity issuance
6  Credit  market borrowing

Households

7  Net  borrowing,  of which:
8  Home  mortgages
9  Consumer credit
10  Debt/DPI  (percent)3

State and  local  governments

11  Net borrowing
12  Current surplus 4

FLOW OF FUNDS  PROJECTIONS: HIGHLIGHTS 1
(Billions of dollars)

1994 

Calendar  year 
1995 
1996 

-

1995  -

1996 

-

1997  -

1997 

Q3 

Q4

QI 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

HI 

H2

Seasonally  Adjusted  Annual  Rates

572.1 
-44.9 
617.0 

640.7 
-76.0 
716.7 

623.9 
-65.8 
689.7 

628.7 
-60.0 
688.7 

430.8 
-98.8 
529.6 

541.2 
-77.2 
618.4 

639.0 
-95.6 
734.6 

656.1 
-50.4 
706.5 

645.0 
-64.4 
709.4 

555.4 
-52.8 
608.2 

650.3 
-59.3 
709.6 

607.1
-60.8
667.8

4.1 
-44.9 
144.3 

360.3 
196.7 
121.2 
88.7 

58.9 
-76.0 
250,8 

9.7 
-65.8 
193.9 

15.0 
-60.0 
181.9 

373.1 
207.1 
130.8 
90.8 

336.9 
219.0 
100.5 
92.6 

327.7 
225.8 
78.0 
93.7 

66.5 
-98.8 
178.3 

401.8 
246.0 
109.6 
91.0 

6.5 
-77.2 
205.5 

396.5 
196.3 
161.8 
91.7 

1.9 
-95.6 
211.1 

335.2 
216.0 
108.7 
91.8 

10.3 
-50.4 
204.6 

346.0 
218.0 
102.7 
92.6 

15.5 
-64.4 
180.3 

333.8 
220.0 
97.7 
92.7 

11.0 
-52.8 
179.5 

332.6 
222.0 
92.7 
93.2 

9.1 
-59.3 
179.4 

329.2 
224.8 
80.5 
93.4 

20.8
-60.8
184.4

326.2
226.8
75.5
93.9

-43.4 
107,4 

-51.5 
104.7 

-25.2 
98.8 

-22.2 
105.9 

-116.2
106.9

-26.1 
89.0 

-13.7 
97.4 

26.3 
98.0 

-80.2 
98.5 

-33.2 
101.3 

-24.7 
104.7 

-19.7
107.1

U.S.  government
13  Net  borrowing
14  Net borrowing (quarterly,  nsa)
15  Unified  deficit  (quarterly, nsa)

16  Funds supplied  by  depository  institutions

MEMO:  (percent  of GDP)
17  Domestic nonfinancial debt3
18  Domestic nonfinancial  borrowing
19  U.S.  government 5
20 

Private

155.9 
155.9 
185.2 

198.3 

185.4 
8.9 
2.2 
6.7 

144.4 
144.4 
146.4 

184.1 
184.1 
181.5 

201.3 
201.3 
200.8 

65.8
19.9
40.2

42.4 
33.3 
55.9 

202.0 
58.8 
81.2 

129.7 
-2.4 
-26.9 

275.5 
72.6 
50.1 

129.3 
55.2 
77.0 

225.7 
85.7 
68.4 

176.9
115.6
132.4

284.0 

200.4 

205.7 

284.5 

155.2 

196.7 

194.7 

202.7 

207.7 

209.7 

201.7

186.6 
9.9 
2.0 
7.9 

188.1 
9.1 
2.4 
6.7 

188.2 
8.7 
2.5 
6.2 

187.1 
7.3 
0.9 
6.4 

188.1 
8.4 
0.6 
7.9 

188.3 
9.9 
2.7 
7.2 

188.1 
9.4 
1.7 
7.7 

188.4 
9.3 
3.6 
5.7 

188.3 
7.9 
1.7 
6.2 

188.2 
9.1 
2.9 
6.2 

188.3
8.3
2.2
6,1

1. Data after 1995:q4 are staff projections.
2.  For corporations: Excess of capital expenditures over  U.S. internalfunds.
3. Average debt levels in the period (computed as the average of period-end debt positions) divided by  nominal GDP.
4. NIPA surplus less retirementfunds plus consumption offixed capital.
5. Excludes government-insured mortgage pool securities.
2.6,4  FOF

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS

Recent Developments

The  weighted-average  foreign  exchange  value  of  the  dollar  in

terms  of  the  other  G-10  currencies  depreciated  1-1/4  percent,  on

balance,  since  the  January  FOMC.  The  dollar weakened  3/4  percent

against  the  German  mark  and  most  other  ERM  currencies,  1-3/4  percent

against  sterling,  and  about  1/4  percent  in  terms  of  the  yen.  The

Mexican  peso  declined  1-1/4  percent  against  the  dollar.

During  the  first  half  of  the  intermeeting  period,  the  dollar

moved  down  as  market  participants  came  to  believe  that  further

monetary  easing  in  Germany,  and  thus  in  most  other  European

countries,  was  unlikely  in  the  near  term.  Data  showing  rapid  growth

in  German M3  and  moves  by  Bundesbank  officials  to  hold  their  repo

rate  fixed  at  3.30  percent  contributed  to  expectations  of  no  further

cuts  in  official  rates  soon.  Evidence  that  Japanese  economic

activity  was  recovering  enhanced  prospects  for  monetary  tightening

sometime  soon  in Japan  and  contributed  to  the  downward  pressure  on

the  dollar.  In  late  February,  signs  that  the  U.S.  economy was

generally  stronger  than had  been  expected  and  that  economic

developments  abroad  were  less  positive  than  they  had  seemed  fed  a

rebound  in  the  dollar.  In  addition,  the  dollar may  have been

supported  by  very  heavy  intervention  purchases  by  the  Bank  of  Japan

in  February.

Long-term  interest  rates  rose  over  the  intermeeting  period  in

most  of  the  major  foreign  industrial  countries,  but  less  than  the

U.S.  ten-year  Treasury  rate  increased.  Exceptions  were  Japan  and

Switzerland,  where  long-term  rates  were  about  unchanged  on  balance.

The  rise  in  rates  in  continental  Europe  is  somewhat  surprising  in

light  of  indicators  suggesting  that  economic  activity  remains

sluggish.  On  average,  short-term  interest  rates  abroad  are  little

I-31

I-32

changed.  Rates  moved  down  in  France,  the  United  Kingdom,  Canada,

and  Sweden  in  response  to  reductions  in  official  lending  rates.

The  Desk  did  not  intervene  in  foreign  exchange  markets  over

the  intermeeting period.

Economic  growth  remained  subdued  in  most major  foreign

industrial  countries  toward  the  end  of  last  year  with the  exception

of  Japan;  recent  indicators  suggest  divergent performance  this

quarter.  Real  GDP  declined  during  the  fourth  quarter  in  Germany  and

France,  as  domestic  demand  fell  in  both countries.  In  Germany,

industrial  production  recovered  somewhat  in  January, but  orders

fell.  Unemployment  rose  further  through  February.  In  France,  a

bounceback  in  economic  activity  from  the  fourth-quarter  strikes  can

be  seen  in  the  rebound  in  January  of  consumption  of  manufactured

products.  In  the  United  Kingdom,  real  GDP  rose  moderately  in  the

final  quarter  of  last  year.  Although  overall  industrial  production

fell  in  January,  manufacturing  output  increased.  The  unemployment

rate  edged  down  through  February  from  its  end-1995  level.

In  contrast,  indicators  of  economic  activity  in  Japan  are

generally  positive.  Real  GDP  grew  briskly  in  the  fourth  quarter,

led  by  stronger  public  and  private  investment.  After  rising  in  the

fourth  quarter,  manufacturing  orders  and  housing  starts  increased

further  in  January.  The  Bank  of  Japan's  February  survey  (Tankan)

was  slightly  less  negative  than  the  previous  November  survey.  In

Canada,  real  GDP  rose  slightly  during  the  fourth  quarter.  More

recent  indicators  suggest  a pickup  in  growth  as  manufacturing  orders

and  shipments  and  retail  sales  rose  in  January;  employment  growth

was  buoyant  from  November  through  February.

Inflation  in  the  major  foreign  industrial  countries  remains

low.  Prices  have  declined  further  in  Japan.  In  Germany,  France,

I-33

and  Canada,  the  most  recent  increases  in  consumer  prices  from  a  year

earlier  have  been  2  percent  or  less  whereas  in  the  United  Kingdom

inflation has  been under  3  percent.  Italian  inflation  remains

considerably  higher  than  that  in  the  other  countries,  but  has

improved  recently.

The  U.S.  nominal  trade  balance  in  goods  and  services  was  about

the  same  in  December  as  in  November.  Both  exports  and  imports  rose

1  percent  from November  to  December.  For  the  fourth  quarter,  the

deficit  narrowed  substantially.  Exports  rose  2.2  percent  from  the

third  quarter  while  imports  declined  0.5  percent.  The  current

account  deficit  also  narrowed  sharply  in  the  fourth  quarter. 

In

addition  to  the  lower  trade  deficit,  a  reduced  deficit  on  net

investment  income  contributed  to  the  improvement  in  the  current

account.

After  remaining  unchanged  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  last  year,

the  average  price  of  U.S.  exports  rose  sharply  in  January,  as  prices

of  agricultural  exports  continued  an  upward  trend  that  began  early

last  year  and  prices  of  nonagricultural  exports  stopped  falling.

Prices  of  non-oil  imports  declined  somewhat  in  January,  as  they  had

in  the  fourth  quarter.  The  price  of  imported  oil  rose  sharply  in

December  and  January,  reflecting  the  colder-than-normal  weather  in

the  northern  hemisphere  and  political  uncertainties  in  Saudi  Arabia.

The  spot  price  of  WTI  fell  back  more  than  $2  per  barrel  during

January  on  news  that  Iraq  would  proceed  to  negotiate  with  the  United

Nations  for  a  limited  sale  of  oil.  Since  the  end  of  January,  spot

oil  prices  have  become more  volatile  as  markets  await  the  outcome  of

those  talks.  Unusually  low  inventories  have  contributed  to  the

volatility  in  prices  as  refiners  seek  to  avoid  restocking  ahead  of  a

possible  decline  in  prices.  The  price  of  spot  WTI  has  risen,  on

balance,  in  February  and  March  and  is  currently  $20.95  per  barrel,

I-34

with  the  July  futures  contract  for  WTI  trading  at  $18.80  per  barrel.

Outlook

The  staff  projects  that  total  foreign  real  GDP  growth

(weighted by  U.S.  bilateral  exports)  will  average  about  3-1/2

percent  this  year  and  next,  up  slightly  from  the  final  quarter  of

last  year  and  faster  than the  growth  projected  for  U.S.  real  output,

The  dollar  is  expected  to  remain  near  current  levels  over  the

forecast  period.  With  imports  more  responsive  to  U.S.  income  growth

than  are  exports  to  foreign  income  growth,  real  imports  are

projected  to  grow a  bit  faster  than  real  exports  this  year  and  at

about  the  same  rate  as  exports  next  year.  Because  the  level  of

imports  is  larger  than  that  of  exports,  this  outlook  results  in  a

decline  in  real  net  exports  (as measured  in  chained  1992  dollars).

After being  essentially  neutral  during  1995,  real  net  exports  are

expected  to  make  a  small  negative  contribution  to  real  GDP  growth

during  1996-1997.

The  dollar.  We  project  that  the  foreign  exchange  value  of  the

dollar  in  terms  of  the  other  G-10  currencies  will  remain  little

changed  from  its  recent  levels  throughout  the  forecast  period.  This

is  the  same  level  projected  in  the  previous  Greenbook.  We  expect

that  the  CPI-adjusted  value  of  the  dollar  in  terms  of  the  currencies

of  key  developing  countries  will  depreciate  at  a moderate  rate  both

this  year  and  next.  In  particular,  from  current  levels  the  Mexican

peso  is  expected  to  appreciate  in  real  terms  over  the  forecast

period,  as  its  nominal  value  against  the  dollar  depreciates  more

slowly  than  the  rate  by which Mexican  inflation  exceeds  U.S.

inflation.

Foreign  G-7  countries.  The  staff  projects  that  real  GDP

growth  in  the  foreign  G-7  countries  (weighted by  bilateral  U.S.

export  shares)  will  strengthen  from  an  annual  rate  of  1 percent

I-35

during  the  final  quarter  of  1995  to  about  2-1/2  percent  during  1996

and  1997.  The  rebound  in  activity  is  expected  to  be  widespread.

In  Japan,  recovery  is  already  under  way,  owing  to  past

monetary  easing  and  fiscal  stimulus,  and  is  expected  to  continue  at

about  a  2-1/2  percent  rate  this  year  and  next.

In  Germany,  activity  is  expected  to  remain  quite weak  during

the  first  half  of  this  year  but  then  to  grow at  an  annual  rate  of

about  2-1/4  percent  during  the  remainder  of  the  forecast  period.

Past  declines  in  short-term  interest  rates  and  a  small  projected

further  decline,  along  with  depreciation  of  the  mark  during  the

second  half  of  1995  and  early  1996,  should  strengthen  German

economic  activity.

In  France,  real  output  growth  is  forecast  to  rebound  to  a  2

percent  annual  rate  during  the  first  half  of  this  year  as  the

disruptive  effects  of  public  sector  strikes  in  November  and  December

are  reversed.  Output  growth  is  projected  to  strengthen  further,  to

2-1/2  percent  late  this  year  and  during  1997,  as  domestic  demand

responds  to  lower  interest  rates.

In  the  United  Kingdom,  real  output  growth  remained  moderate

during  1995  and  is  expected  to  continue  this  year  at  about  the  2

percent  annual  rate  observed  in  the  fourth  quarter  before

strengthening  slightly  next  year.

Canadian  real  GDP  growth  is  projected  to  rise  from  less  than  1

percent  during  the  fourth  quarter  of  last  year  to  about  2-1/2

percent  at  an  annual  rate  over  the  forecast  period.  Improved

economic  performance  in  the  United  States  and  the  monetary  easing

that  began  last  year  are  expected  to  contribute  to  the  stronger  pace

of  expansion.

The  staff  outlook  for  inflation  in  the  foreign  G-7  countries

has  been  lowered  slightly.  When  weighted  by  bilateral  U.S.  import

I-36

shares,  consumer  price  inflation  is  projected  to  rise  only  very

slightly,  from  1 percent  in  1995  to  1-1/4  percent  in  1996  and  1997.

The  staff  forecast  incorporates  the  assumption  that  short-term

interest  rates  abroad  will move  down  slightly  further,  on  average,

through  mid-1996  before  rising  over  the  subsequent  six  quarters.

German  short-term market  interest  rates  are  assumed  to  move  down

with  some  further  easing  of  official  rates  in  the  near  term before

rising  as  the  pace  of  economic  expansion  increases  later  in  the

forecast  period.  Japanese  short-term market  rates  are  assumed  to  be

near  their  trough  and  to  rise  next  year  as  the  economy  strengthens.

On  average,  long-term  interest  rates  abroad  are  expected  to  retrace

much of  their  intermeeting  rise  in  the  near  term,  with  the  assumed

easing  of  short-term  rates  in  Europe.  Long-term  rates  are  assumed

to  remain  fairly  stable  through  the  rest  of  1996  before  moving  back

up  a bit  by  the  end  of  1997.

Other  countries.  The  real  GDP  of major  developing-country

trading  partners  of  the  United  States  (weighted by  U.S.

nonagricultural  export  shares)  is  projected  to  increase  about  5-1/2

percent  per  year  during  1996-97,  compared  with  an  estimated  3-1/2

percent  growth  during  1995  (on  a Q4/Q4  basis).  The  pickup  in  growth

in  1996-97  largely  reflects  recovery  in  Mexico.

Real  GDP  in  Mexico  fell  6.6  percent  in  1995,  substantially

less  than was  expected.  The  marked  expansion  of  activity  in  the

fourth  quarter,  following  a  slight  expansion  in  the  third  quarter,

is  consistent  with  our  previous  forecast  that  Mexico  had  passed  its

recession  trough  and  has  begun to  recover.  We  project  that  real  GDP

in Mexico  will  grow  at  an  average  rate  of  about  5 percent  per  year

during  1996-97,  recovering  to  its  pre-recession  level  by mid-1997.

Our  major  trading  partners  in  Asia  are  expected  to  continue  to

experience  strong  growth  over  the  forecast  period,  although  growth

is  projected  to  decline  from  an  average  rate  of  about  7-1/2  percent

I-37

in  1995  to  7  percent  in  1996-97.  Recent  trade  data  seem  consistent

with  our  projection  that  the  yen's  depreciation  during  the  second

half  of  last  year  will  lead  to  a  considerable  deceleration  in  the

exports  of  these  countries.

U.S.  real  exports  and  imports  of  goods  and  services.  The

growth  of  total  real  exports  was  boosted  during  the  fourth  quarter

of  last  year  by  extremely  rapid  increases  in  the  quantities  of

computer  and  semiconductor  exports.1 

We  project  that  the  rates  of

growth  of  those  categories  of  exports  will  remain  robust  but  will

fall  back  from  those  recorded  last  year.  The  quantities  of  other

goods  exports  (excluding agricultural  products)  should  grow

moderately,  at  an  average  annual  rate  of  3  percent,  during  1996-97.

largely  reflecting  the  expected  recovery  in  total  foreign  real

output  growth.  Prices  of  U.S.  exports  relative  to  foreign  prices

are  projected  to  rise  slightly  over  the  forecast  period  and,  on

balance,  make  a  small  negative  contribution  to  export  growth  during

1997.

Total  real  imports  of  goods  and  services,  which were

essentially  flat  during  the  second  half  of  last  year,  are  projected

to  expand  a  bit  more  rapidly  than total  exports  over  the  forecast

period.  The  growth  in  the  quantities  of  imported  computers  and

semiconductors  is  expected  to  drop  back  toward  more-normal,  but

still  quite  elevated,  rates.  Growth  of  other  non-oil  goods  imports

is  projected  to  average  about  4-1/2  percent  this  year  and  next,

reflecting  the  expected  improvement  in  U.S.  real  output  growth  and  a

small  boost  beginning  late  this  year  as  domestic  prices  rise

relative  to  import  prices.  We  expect  the  quantity  of  oil  imports  to

rise  this  quarter  and  next,  and  to  continue  to  expand  on  balance

1 Note that the category "other" on the table excludes semiconductors

as well as computers and agricultural products.

during  the  remainder  of  the  forecast  period,  as  consumption  rises

and  U.S.  production  declines.

I-38

QUANTITIES OF GOODS AND SERVICES
(Percent change from end of previous period, SAAR)

--------------- Projection---------------

Exports  of  G&S 

Services 
Computers 
Semiconductors 
Other goods' 

1995 
Q4 

10.5 

4.5 
60.0 
48.1 
3.1 

Q1 

1996 
Q2 

H2

1997

5.1 

9.5 

7.8 

2.6 
28.9 
28.8 
-0.4 

2.6 
28.6 
28.6 
9.8 

3.8 
30.9 
28.4 
2.0 

Imports of G&S 

0.6 

7.4 

9.8 

7.7 

Services 
Oil 
Computers 
Semiconductors 
Other goods 2  

7.2 
-17.2 
52.9 
51.8 
-9.8 

4.2 
7.8 
24.8 
26.2 
3.3 

4.9 
31.8 
21.6 
31.0 
4.5 

2.3 
-5.0 
21.5 
30.9 
5.4 

8.5

3.5
31.1
28.7
2.7

8.6

3.0
5.8
21.6
31.0
4.5

Note:  NIPA basis, chained  (1992) dollars.
1.  Merchandise exports excluding agriculture, computers and

semiconductors.

2.  Merchandise imports excluding oil, computers, and semiconductors.

Oil  prices,  Given  recent  increases  in  spot  oil  prices,  the

projected  prices  of  imported  oil  for  the  first  and  second  quarters

have  been  revised  up  $0.89  and  $1.80  per  barrel,  to  $16.80  and

$17.33  per  barrel  respectively.  The  staff  forecast  continues  to

assume  that  Iraq  will  not  resume  selling  oil  on  world  markets  until

1997.  Our  projections  for  WTI  spot  price  and  the  oil  import  unit

value  in  1997  are  $18.50  and  $16.00  per  barrel  respectively,

unchanged  from  the  January  Greenbook.  If  Iraq  reaches  an  agreement

to  sell  a  limited  amount  of  oil  under  the  supervision  of  the  United

Nations  starting  this  year,  the  additional  700  thousand  to  800

thousand  barrels  of  oil  per  day  on  the  world  oil  market  would  likely

depress  prices  by  $3-$4  per  barrel.  (See below  for  a discussion  of

I-39

the  implications  of  such  a  change  in  the  oil  price  on  the  staff

forecast.)

Prices  of  non-oil  imports  and  exports.  Prices  of non-oil

imports  (including  computers  and  semiconductors)  are  expected  to

move  up  slightly  this  year  and  next  as  foreign  inflation  remains  low

and  the  dollar  is  stable.  Prices  of  nonagricultural  exports

(including  computers  and  semiconductors)  are  projected  to  decelerate

through  the  middle  of  this  year  and  then  to  rise  moderately  during

the  second  half  of  this  year  and  somewhat  faster  next  year.

SELECTED PRICE INDICATORS
(Percent change from end of previous period except as noted, AR)

Nonag.  exports 1  
Non-oil imports' 
Oil Imports

(Q4 level, $bl) 

-- ------------- Projection---------------

1995 
Q4 

-3.1 
-1.5 

Q1 

1.9 
-0.3 

1996 
Q2 

0.6 
0.6 

H2

1.3 
0.7 

1997

2.2
0.3

16.01 

16.80 

17.33 

16.05 

16.00

1.  NIPA chain-weighted basis, including computers and

semiconductors.

Nominal  trade  and  current  account  balances.  The  nominal  trade

deficit  on  goods  and  services  is  projected  to  widen  only  slightly

over  the  forecast  period  from  its  unusually  low  value  in  the  fourth

quarter  of  last  year  to  more  than  $90  billion  at  an  annual  rate  at

the  end  of  1997.  The  deficit  on  net  investment  income  is  projected

to  increase  somewhat  over  the  forecast  period.  The  current  account

deficit  is  projected  to  average  about  $145  billion in  both  1996  and

1997,  just  under  2  percent  of GDP.

Alternative  oil-price  scenario. 

We  estimate  that  if  Iraq

were  to  reach  agreement  with  the  United  Nations  to  sell  a  limited

amount  of  oil  this  year,  with  no  offset  in  production  by  other  OPEC

members,  spot  oil  prices  would  likely  fall  on  world  markets  by  $3  to

$4  per  barrel.  In  order  to  judge  the  impact  of  such  a change  on  the

U.S.  economy, we  used the  staff's  econometric  models  to  simulate  a

I-40

decline  in  the  price  of  oil  of  $3.50  starting  in  the  second  quarter

of  this  year;  the  price  remains  at  that  lower  level  through  the

second  quarter  of  next  year  and  then  gradually  returns  to  baseline.

The  baseline  forecast  incorporates  the  assumption  that  Iraq  resumes

exporting  oil  in  1997.  In  the  simulation,  it  is  assumed  that  the

U.S.  short-term  interest  rate  remains  on  its  baseline  path.  Under

this  monetary  policy  assumption,  lower  inflation  results  in  higher

real  short-term  interest  rates.  Consumers  benefit  from higher  real

disposable  income  with  the  lower  oil  price,  and  GDP  initially  rises

relative  to  baseline.  By  the  second  year,  the  impact  of  higher  real

short-term  interest  rates  offsets  the  stronger  consumption  and

depresses  real  GDP.

ALTERNATIVE  OIL  PRICE  ASSUMPTION
(Percent change,  Q4  to  Q4)

Real  GDP

Baseline 
Lower  oil  price 

CPI  excluding  food  and  energy

Baseline 
Lower  oil  price 

1996 

2.2 
2.4 

2.9 
2.6 

1997

2.0
1.9

3.1
2.9

STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL 
CLASS  II  FOMC

FR

REAL GDP AND CONSUMER  PRICES,  SELECTED COUNTRIES,  1994-97
(Percent;  quarterly change  at  an  annual  rate  except as  noted)

March  21,  1996

Projected

Measure and  country 

1994  1995  1996  1997 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4

Projected 

1995 

1996

REAL GDP

Canada 
France 
Germany 
Italy 
Japan 
United  Kingdom 

5.4 
4.3 
3.7 
2.9 
0.4 
4.2 

0.6 
0.7 
1.0 
2.4 
2.2 
1.9 

2.6 
2.1 
1.5 
2.8 
2.6 
2.0 

2.5 
2.6 
2.3 
2.2 
2.4 
2.5 

-0.8 
0.6 
4.4 
-0.4 
2.6 
1.6 

1.2 
0.7 
0.4 
8.0 
2.3 
1.8 

0.8 
-1.3 
-1.6 
-3.9 
3.6 
2.1 

2.6  2.6 
2.0  1.8 
-0.1  1.5 
3.5  3.3 
2.5  2.7 
1.6  1.8 

2.5 
2.3 
2.3 
2.4 
2.6 
2.2 

Average, weighted by  1987-89 GDP  2.8 

1.6 

2.3 

2.4 

1.7 

2.4 

0.5 

2.0  2.3 

2.4 

2.5
2.5
2.3
2.2
2.7
2.5

2.5

Average, weighted  by  share  of

U.S. nonagricultural  exports

Total  foreign 
Foreign G-7 
Developing countries 

4.5 
3.9 
6.0 

1.9 
1.2 
2.7 

3.4 
2.4 
5.2 

3.3 
2.4 
5.6 

NA 
0.8 
NA 

NA 
1.7 
NA 

NA 
1.0 
NA 

NA 

NA 
2.2  2.4 
NA 

NA 

NA 
2.4 
NA 

NA
2.5
NA

CONSUMER PRICES(1)

Canada 
France 
Western Germany 
Italy 
Japan 
United  Kingdom(2) 

0.0 
1.6 
2.5 
3.8 
0.8 
2.2 

2.1 
1.9 
1.6 
5.9 
-0.8 
2.9 

1.7 
1.8 
1.6 
4.2 
-0.0 
2.5 

2.0 
1.8 
2.0 
3.7 
0.0 
2.8 

3.1 
2.1 
2.2 
8.0 
0.7 
6.4 

0.9 
1.2 
1.5 
4.1 
-1.0 
0.8 

0.1 
2.3 
-0.5 
5.1 
-0.5 
1.4 

1.4  1.6 
2.1  1.8 
2.6  2.4 
3.3  6.8 
-1.6  2.0 
1.5  6.4 

1.8
1.8 
1.8 
1.6
1.8  -0.2
3.6 
-0.2 
0.8 

3.1
-0.1
1.5

Average, weighted by  1987-89  GDP  1.7 

1.7 

1.6 

1.7 

3.1 

0.8 

1.0 

1.0  3.3 

1.3 

1.0

Average, weighted by  share of
U.S.  non-oil  imports 

1.0 

1.1 

1.2 

1.3 

2.4 

0.4 

0.2 

0.5  2.4 

1.0 

0.9

Note. Annual  values  are measured  from Q4  to  Q4.
1. Not  seasonally adjusted.
2. CPI  excluding  mortgage  interest  payments;  the  targeted
mortgage  interest  payments  was  shown.

inflation rate.

Previously the  CPI  including

Strictly  Confidential  (FR) Class  II-FOMC

U.S.  INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTIONS  IN  GOODS,  SERVICES, AND  THE  CURRENT ACCOUNT
(Billions of dollars,  seasonally adjusted annual  rates)

1993

1994

1995

ANNUAL

NIPA  Real  Net  Exports
(Chained  1992  dollars)

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Ql 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2

1992 

1993 

1994

-55.2 

-67.0 

-89.1 

-86.2 

-101  3 

-112.2  -113.3 

-105.8

119.0 

-126.8

-29.5 

-74.4  -108.1

Exports  of  G&S

Goods

Agricultural
Computers
Semiconductors
Other Goods

Services

Imports  of  G&S

Goods
Oil
Computers
Semiconductors
Other  Goods

Services

Memo:(Percent  change  1/)

Exports  of  G&S
Agricultural
Computers
Semiconductors
Other Goods
Services

Imports  of G&S

Oil
Computers
Semiconductors
Other  Goods
Services

649.8
454.2
43.8
32.3
20.6
357,5
195.5

705.1
577.3
53.7
38.9
19.2
465.5
127.8

0.4
-17.8
12.0
34.4
-7.4
16.4

9.6
5.4
41.0
61.1
8.5
1.3

662.3
465.8
43.9
33.1
22.3
366.5
196.5

729.4
598.6
57.9
42.3
21.2
477.2
130.8

7.9
0.9

10.3
39.3
10.4
2.1

14,5
35.2
39.8
48.4
10.4
9.7

648.9
453.3
41.0
35.9
25.5
350.9
195.6

738.1
605.1
56.9
46.5
22.4
479.3
133.0

-7.9
-23.9
38.4
68.4
-15.9
-1.8

4.9
-6.7
46.0
24.9
1.8
6.9

681.4
484.6
43.4
38.6
28.2
374.4
197.0

767,6
629.1
58.3
49.9
25.0
495.9
138.5

21.6
25.6
33.7
50.1
29.6
2.9

17.0
10.2
32.6
53.3
14.7
17.6

680.4
481.5
40,7
40,7
33.5
366.6
199.0

781.7
643  .0
57.0
53.9
27.3
504.8
138.8

704.3
501.8
41.0
41.8
35.4
383.6
202.7

816.5
676.5
60.6
57.3
28.5
530.1
140.2

-0.6

-22.7
23.6
100.8

-8.1
4.1

14.8

3.0

11.3
23.7
20.0
7.6

7.6
-8.6
36.1
42.8
7.4
0.9

19.0
27.8
27.7
18.4
21  6
4.1

724.8
518.3
44.8
44.9
39  5

389.1
206.8

838.1
698.1
64.6
61.8
31.6
540.1
140.2

12.2
42.6
33.1
55.5

5.8
8.3

11.0
29.1
35.3
51-6

7.7
0.0

751,0
543  9
51.2
49.6
47.2
395.9
207-7

856.8
718.6
58.2
68.3
36.9
555.2
138.5

15.3
70.6
48.9
103.3
7.2
1.B

9.2

-34.1
49.2
87.1
11.6
-4.8

755.8
548.9
51.3
52.9
50.7
394.0
207.6

874.9
732.8
56.5
71.7
39.4
565.2
142.4

2.6
0.8

29.4
33.5
-1.9
-0.2

8.7
-11.2
21.4
29.9

7.4
11  7

764.3
557.7
48.2
55.7
53.3
400.5
207.4

891  2
750.5
57.4
76,3
45.3
571.5
141.1

4.6
-22.1
22.9
22.1

6.8
-0.4

7.7
6.5
28.2
74.4

4.5
-3  6

639.4
448.7
44.1
28.7
16.0
359.9
190.8

668  9
544.8
51.4
31.7
15.5
446.3
124.1

4.1
10.6
25.1
64.8

2  6
-0.8

7.4

12.1
45.1
42.0
5.5
1.4

660.6
464.5
43.0
35.0
24.1
362.3
196.2

735.0
602.5
56.7
44.4
22.0
479.5
132.5

5.0
-5.7
22.9
47.5
2.7
4.7

11.4
10.0
39.8
46.3
8.8
8.7

715.1
511.4
44.4
44.2
38.9
383.8
204.1

823.3
684.0
60.1
60.3
31.1
532.6
139.4

10.2
18  0
28.5
67.4

5.7
5.4

11.6
-0.2
36.9
48.0
11.9
-0.0

Current Account  Balance

-69.5  -97.4  -108.1  -124.7

-121.1  -151.9  -158.9  -173.1

-153.8 

-172.6

-62.5  -99.9  -151.2

Goods  &  Serv  (BOP),  net

Goods  (BOP),  net
Services  (BOP)  net

-54.3  -75.2  -88.0  -82.0
-115.8  -134.4  -146.4  -133.9
51.9

58.5 

59.2 

61.5 

-92.1  -107.7  -115.2  -109.9
-146.0  -166.0  -178.5  -174.0
64.1

63.3 

58.3 

53.9 

Investment  Income,  net

Direct,  net
Portfolio,  net

14.8
61.1
-46.2

8.3
55.3
-47.0

12.8
59.2
-46.5

0.1
49,7
-49.6

0.5
46.2
-45.7

-9.1
43.9
-53.  0

-10.1
44.6
-54.7

-18.3
45.7
-64.0

-115.6 
-177.8 
62.2 

-133.4
-194.6
61  3

-8.1
57.0
-65.1

-10.7
58.7
-69.5

-39  5 
-74.8  -106.2
-96.1  -132,6  -166.1
59.9

57.8 

56.6 

10.1
51.6
-41.5

9.0

56.3
-47.3

-9.3
45.1
-54,4

Unilateral  Transfers,  net  -30.1  -30.4  -32.9  -42.9

-29.5 

-35.1 

-33.5 

-45.0

-30.1 

-28.5

-32.1 

-34.1 

-35.8

1/ Percent  change  (AR) from previous period;  percent  changes  for annual  data  are calculated Q4/Q4.

Strictly  Confidential  (FR) Class  II-FOMC

OUTLOOK FOR  U.S.  INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTIONS  IN GOODS,  SERVICES,  AND THE CURRENT ACCOUNT
(Billions of  dollars,  seasonally adjusted annual rates)

1995

.........................................................
1996

Projection

1997

Projection

ANNUAL

NIPA Real  Net  Exports
(Chained 1992  dollars)

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4

1995 

1996 

1997

-114.3  -95.9 

-102.0  -104.9  -113.6  -108.6

-108.8  -111.4  -120.6  -118.8

-114.0  -107.3  -114.9

Exports  of  G&S

Goods

Agricultural
Computers
Semiconductors
Other  Goods

Services

Imports  of  G&S

Goods
Oil
Computers
Semiconductors
Other  Goods

Services

Memo:(Percent change 1/)

Exports  of  G&S
Agricultural
Computers
Semiconductors
Other Goods
Services

Imports  of  G&S

Oil
Computers
Semiconductors
Other Goods
Services

779.1
570.7
50.0
65.2
57.0
398.5
209.4

893.4
752.2
60.7
88.0
53.0
550.5
141.6

8.0
15.8
87.7
31.0
-2.0
3.9

1.0
25.1
76.9
86.4
-13.9
1.4

798.7
588.0
50.3
73.3
62.9
401.5
211.7

894.7
751.0
57.9
97.9
58.8
536.5
144.1

10.5
2.3

60.0
48.1
3.1
4.5

0.6
-17.2
52.9
51.8
-9.8
7.2

808.8
596.7
50.4
78.1
67.0
401.1
213.1

910.8
765.6
59.0
103.4
62.3
540.9
145.6

5.1
1.2
28.9
28.8
-0.4
2.6

7,4
7.8
24.8
26.2
3.3
4.2

827.4
613.9
48.7
83.2
71.4
410.6
214.5

932.3
785.3
63.2
108.6
66.7
546.8
147.4

9.5
-12.9
28.6
28.6
9.8
2.6

9.8
31.8
21.6
31.0
4.5
4.9

835.8
620.3
49.6
89.0
76.0
405.7
216.5

949.4
801.7
66.3
114.1
71.3
550.1
148.1

4.1
7.6
31.0
28.6
-4.7
3.8

7.6
20.9
21.6
31.1

2.4
2.0

859.1
641.6
50.7
95.2
80.9
414.7
218.5

967.6
818.9
61.6
119.7
76.3
561.3
149.1

11.6
9.2
31.0
28.6
9.2
3.7

7.9
-25.5
21.5
31.1
8.4
2.9

873.6
654.  0
51.0
101.9
86.2
414.9
220.6

982.4
832.6
61.6
125.7
81.6
563.7
150.2

7.0
2.4
31.1
28.6
0.2
4.0

6.2
-0.1
21.6
31.0

1.7
2.9

896.3
674.6
51.3
109.0
91.8
422.5
222.7

907.3
683.8
51.6
116.7
97.8
417.7
224.5

931.9
706.8
51.8
124.8
104.1
426.0
226.1

1007,7
856,8
67.0
132.0
87.4
570.4
151,3

1027.9
876.0
69.9
138.6
93.5
574.0
152.3

1050.8
897.5
65.2
145.6
100.0
586.7
153.7

10.8
2.4
31.0
28.6
7.5
3.8

10.7
40.2
21.6
31.1
4.8
3.0

5.0
2.4
31.1
28.6
-4.4
3.3

8.3

18.7
21.5
31  0
2.6
2.6

11.3
1.6
31.1
28.7
8.2
2.9

9.2
-24.4
21.6
31.0
9.2
3.7

774.5
566.3
49.9
61.8
56.0
398.6
209.0

888.5
746.6
58.1
83.5
49.1
555.9
142.3

6.4
-1.8
47.8
33.4
1 4
1.9

4.4
-0.5
43.3
59,1
-3.4
4.0

832.8
618.1
49.9
86.4
73.8
408.0
21,5.6

940.0
792.9
62.5
111.5
69.1
549.8
147.5

902.3
679.8
51.5
113.1
95.0
420.3
223.5

1017.2
865.7
65.9
135.5
90.6
573.7
151.9

7.6
0.9
29.9
28.7

3.3
3.2

8.2
6.4
22.4
29.8
4.6
3.5

8.5
2.2
31.1
28.7
2.7
3.5

8.6
5.8
21.6
31.0

4.5
3.0

Current Account  Balance

-161.0  -124.3 

-138.9  -139.4  -143.6  -152.2 

-137.1  -141.9  -146.5  -159.5 

-152.9  -143.5  -146.3

Goods  & Serv  (BOP),  net

Goods  (BOP),  net
Services  (BOP),  net

-109.2
-173.3
64.1

-87.5
-152.1
64.6

-89.4
-155.8

66.4

-92.5
-159.5
67.0

-97.7
-166.5
68.9

Investment  Income,  net

Direct,  net
Portfolio,  net

-20.7
52.7
-73.4

-6.1
68.1
-74.2

-7.1
65.6
-72.7

-13.9
64.1
-77.9

-12.9
63.5
-76.4

-91.0
-161.6
70.6

-17.7
65.0
-82.7

-89.1
161.6
72.5

-15.0
67.1
-82.1

-88.7
-163.0
74.3

-96.3
-172.5
76.2

-92.3
-169.8
77.5

-20.2
67.2
-87.4

-17.2
68.0
-85.2

-23.8
68.2
-91.9

-111.4
-174.5
63.0

-11.4
59.1
-70.5

-92.6
160.8
68.2

-91.6
-166.7
75.1

-12.9
64.5
-77.4

-19.0

67.6

-86.7

Unilateral  Transfers,  net  -31.1  -30.7 

-42.4  -33.0  -33.0  -43.5 

-33.0  -33.0  -33.0  -43.5 

-30.1  -38.0  -35.6

1/ Percent  change  (AR) from previous period;  percent changes  for annual  data  are calculated Q4/Q4.




==== GREENBOOK | 1996-03-26_fomc19960326gbpt219960321.txt ====

Prefatory Note 

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 

available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain. 

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 

gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.    

1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Confidential  (FR)  Class  III FOMC

Part  2

March  21,  1996

CURRENT  ECONOMIC
AND  FINANCIAL  CONDITIONS

Recent  Developments

Prepared  for the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee
By  the staff of the  Board of  Governors  of the Federal  Reserve  System

Confidential  (FR)  Class  III FOMC

March  21,  1996

RECENT  DEVELOPMENTS

Prepared  for the  Federal  Open  Market Committee
by the staff  of the Board  of  Governors of the  Federal  Reserve System

DOMESTIC  NONFINANCIAL
DEVELOPMENTS

DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL  DEVELOPMENTS

Despite  storms,  strikes,  shutdowns--and inventory  imbalances--

the  economic  expansion  evidently  survived  the winter.  Employment

and  industrial  production  surged in  February to  levels  that  suggest

that  real  GDP will  post a decent gain  in  the first  quarter  after

almost  stalling  out  in  the  preceding  quarter.  Meanwhile, inflation

has  remained  on  a fairly steady  trend, with  the core  CPI  continuing

to  run  in the vicinity  of  3 percent  on  a twelve-month basis.

The  General  Motors  Strike

The  UAW has announced  an  end  to  the  strike  at  Delphi Chassis

Systems,  which  produces  brake  systems  for General  Motors.  The

strike, which began on  March  5, forced  GM to  shut  down virtually all

of  its  North American  assembly plants  and  severely curtail  parts

production.  Outsourcing  of  parts  production was  the main issue  in

dispute.  In total,  GM had furloughed  about  175,000 North American

workers:  layoffs  at  GM's  suppliers  were also beginning  to mount but

are  difficult to  estimate.1  The  union will vote  on  the  agreement

on March  23.

Confidential  information  from GM  indicates  that the  strike

reduced production about  2 million units  at an  annual  rate.  The

staff forecast  assumed  that  assembly  line workers would  be  back on

the  job  on March  25  and  that  production for  the  industry as  a whole

would total  9.7  million units  in  March, more  than 2 million  units

below the  industry's  pre-strike  schedules.  (As the Greenbook was

1. About  38,000 workers were  off  their jobs  for the  entire  pay
period  covered by  the  March  employment  survey and  will  show up  as
reduced  employment  in the  report;  another  40,000  to  50,000 workers
were  off  for  part  of  the  period and  thus  will  show up  as  having
shortened workweeks.  The  strike was  a key  factor  in  the 32,000
increase in  initial  claims  for  unemployment insurance  in  the week
ended March  16,  but  its  full  effect has  not yet  shown  through  to  the
claims  data.  Analysts  at the  Department of Labor  suspect  that  some
states  have been  slow to  process  the  surge  in claims  and expect  to
see either  a revision  to  data  for the week ended  March 16  or  a bulge
in claims  this week.

II-1

II-2

CHANGES IN  EMPLOYMENT 1
(Thousands of  employees;  based on  seasonally adjusted data)

1995 

1995 

1996

1994  1995 

Q2 

Q3 

04 

Dec.  Jan.  Feb.

------------ Average monthly changes---------

Nonfarm payroll employment 2  

Private 

Manufacturing 

Durable 
Nondurable 
Construction 
Trade 
Finance, insurance,  real  estate 
Services 

Business services 

Total government 

294 
273 
30 
25 
5 
30 
75 
4 
117 
46 
21 

144 
135 
-14 
3 
-17 
11 
32 
6 
93 
26 
9 

82 
70 
-32 
-12 
-20 
-9 
24 
-3 
87 
6 
12 

Private nonfarm production workers 
Manufacturing production workers 

242 
31 

115 
-11 

54 
-31 

Total  employment 3  
Nonagricultural 

261 
225 

32  -180 
51  -113 

128 
116 
-35 
-8 
-27 
11 
42 
9 
88 
52 
12 

103 
-26 

157 
190 

142 
139 
-5 
12 
-17 
12 
44 
15 
67 
19 
3 

145  -188 
117  -159 
-75 
-28 
-47 
17 
-57 
2 
-44 
-31 
-29 

35 
54 
-19 
2 
14 
10 
63 
34 
28 

109 
-3 

105  -184 
-69 

34 

-18 
-15 

-81 
-83 

245 
42 

705
663
26
18
8
121
182
25
287
126
42

618
22

437
445

Memo:
Aggregate hours of private production

workers  (percent change) 

Average workweek  (hours) 
Manufacturing  (hours) 

.4 

.1 

3.2
34.7  34.5  34.4  34.5  34.4  34.3  33.7  34.5
42.0  41.6  41.5  41.5  41.4  41.2  39.9  41.6

-.3  -2.0 

.2 

.0 

.0 

1. Average change  from final month of preceding period to  final month of

period indicated.

2. Survey of  establishments.

SELECTED UNEMPLOYMENT AND LABOR FORCE PARTICIPATION RATES 1
(Percent;  based on seasonally adjusted data)

Civilian unemployment rate
(16  years and older) 

Teenagers 
20-24 years  old 
Men, 25 years and older 
Women, 25 years and older 

1995 

1995 

1996

1994  1995 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Dec.  Jan.  Feb.

6.1 

5.6 

5.7 

5.6 

5.5 

5.6 

5.8 

5.5

17.6  17.3  17.2  17.7  17.6  18.0  18.2  16.6
9.9
4.2
4.3

9.2  10.0 
4.2 
4.3 
4.4 
4.3 

9.2 
4.2 
4.3 

9.7 
4.8 
4.9 

8.9 
4.4 
4.5 

9.5 
4.3 
4.4 

9.1 
4.3 
4.4 

Full-time workers 

6.1 

5.5 

5.5 

5.5 

5.5 

5.5 

5.7 

5.4

Labor force participation rate  66.6  66.6  66.7  66.6  66.4  66.3  66.6  66.6

Teenagers 
20-24 years old 
Men, 25  years and older 
Women, 25  years and older 

52.7  53.5  53.8  53.4  52.9  53.0  52.7  52.5
77.0  76.6  76.9  76.2  76.1  76.0  76.2  76.7
76.0  76.0  76.0  75.9  75.6  75.5  75.8  76.0
58.1  58.3  58.2  58.4  58.5  58.4  58.4  58.3

II-3

going  to  press,  we  learned  that  the  reopening of  the GM  plants may

stretch  over  the  coming week, which would  shave  another  1/4 to  1/2

million units  from March  production.)

PRODUCTION OF  DOMESTIC AUTOS AND TRUCKS
(Millions of  units,  annual  rate;  FRB  seasonal  basis)

1995:Q4 

Jan. 

Feb. 

Sched.  Est.

1996

Mar.

U.S.  production 

Autos 
Trucks 

11.7 
6.1 
5.6 

11.2 
5.7 
5.5 

11.9 
6.1 
5.9 

11.9 
5.7 
6.2 

9.7
4.6
5.1

1. Staff  estimate based  on weekly production data

through March  16  and  latest  industry schedules  adjusted  to
reflect  confidential GM estimate  of production lost
because  of  the  strike.

In contrast  to  Chrysler  and  Ford,  GM had  fairly high

inventories  at  the  end  of February--its  dealers  had  a seventy-seven-

day  supply  of  cars  and  a sixty-eight-day  supply  of trucks,  measured

using  a three-month  average  of  sales.  Thus,  the  strike  is  not

likely to  have  much  effect  on  sales  in March.  Rather,  it  allowed  GM

to  accelerate  an  inventory adjustment  that  probably would  have

occurred  in the  second  quarter  in  the  absence  of  the  strike.

We  estimate  that  the  strike will  subtract  about  a

percentage  point  from the  growth  in  industrial  production in March.

We  also  expect it  to  reduce  real  GDP  growth about  3/4  percentage

point  at  an  annual  rate  in  the  first  quarter.

Labor  Market Developments

The  labor market  report  for February was  very  strong:

Payroll  employment  and aggregate  hours  soared,  reaching levels

substantially above  those  recorded  in  December,  and  the unemployment

rate fell  back to  around  its  year-end  level.  However,  it  seems

likely  that the  December-February movements  overstate  the  underlying

strength  of  labor  demand.  The  resurgence  in hiring by  suppliers  of

II-4

Labor Market  Indicators

Initial  Claims for Unemployment  Insurance

Thousands

Mar. 16

I 

I 

_ I 

I 

I 

I 

1 

_I 

I 

I 

I 

I

1985 

1987 

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

Note. State  programs, includes EUC  adjustment,

Conference  Board  Help Wanted  Index

1987=100

I 

I 

1 

1 

I 

I 

I 

I 

1985

1987

1989

I 

1993

I 

I

1995

1997

Manpower  Inc.'s  Employment  Outlook Survey (Index of  Net Hiring  Strength)

Percentage  Points

I 

I 

I 

I 

1 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I_ 

I

1985 

1987 

1989 

1991 

1993

1995

1997

Note. Percentage  expecting  an increase  in employment minus  those expecting a decrease.

II-5

temporary help  and  by firms  in some  other  categories may be  driven

in  part by  efforts  to  make  up January's  production  losses,

particularly  in manufacturing.  Furthermore,  the BLS  cites  seasonal

influences  as  contributing to  the  big gains  in construction and

retail  trade  jobs  early this  year. 2  Finally,  although initial

claims  have  been  trending lower of  late  (abstracting from the  GM

strike),  they  still  do  not  display the  exceptional  robustness

indicated by the  February employment  report.

In  contrast  to the  gains  in  most  other  sectors,

manufacturing  employment  dropped  50,000 between December  and

February, in  line with the  average  rate  at  which jobs have been  shed

since  the most  recent  peak in  factory employment  in March  1995.  The

average  factory workweek, which also  weakened  last year and was

further  depressed  by  the  blizzard in  January,  rebounded  sharply  in

February  to  the highest  level  since  last  September.  The  lengthening

of  the  workweek  likely  reflected  in  part  firms'  efforts  to  recoup

the  production  lost  during the blizzard, but  it  may  also be a

precursor  of  strengthening  activity  in manufacturing.  All told,

aggregate hours  of manufacturing  production workers  were  3/4  percent

higher  in February  than  in  December.

In  the nonfarm business  sector  as  a whole, a February  rise

in the  average  workweek  of production  or nonsupervisory workers  more

than  reversed  a steep  January decline.  This  swing in the  workweek,

together with  the monthly  changes  in payroll  employment, led

aggregate hours  to  decline  2.0  percent in  January  and  rise

3.2  percent  in  February.  Although  the  average  level  of  aggregate

2. According to  the  BLS,  some  of  the increase  in  seasonally

adjusted construction  employment  occurred because  seasonal  layoffs,
which normally  extend  through  February, were  made  earlier  than
usual,  beginning in November.  Similarly, employment  growth in
retail  trade  in  early 1996, may have  been  exaggerated because  the
smaller-than-usual  seasonal  hiring last  fall  implied  smaller-than-
usual  seasonal  layoffs  after  the  holidays.

II-6

hours  for  the  two months  was  0.7  percent below the  fourth-quarter

average, the  actual  labor  input  probably was  greater than  these  data

indicate because  the  January  survey  period included  the week most

affected by  the blizzard.  Making  plausible  adjustments  to  correct

for  the  blizzard, we  estimate  that  the  average  level of  hours  in

January and  February would have been  up  roughly  1/2  percent  from the

fourth  quarter.  Such  a gain normally would  indicate moderate  growth

in  real  GDP.

A similar  message  comes  from application  of the  Okun's  law

model  to  the  results  of  the household  survey.  After ticking up  in

January to  5.8  percent,  the  civilian unemployment  rate  fell

0.3  percentage  point  in February, to  5.5  percent.  Using  concurrent

seasonal  factors  and  taking  into account  the  slight  overstatement  of

the  January  unemployment  rate because  of the  blizzard, we estimate

that  the unemployment rate  in January and  February was  unchanged

from  its  December  level  of  5.6  percent;  this  points  to  a gain  in

aggregate  output  roughly  in  line with  long-run potential  growth,

which we  put  at  about  2 percent  per year.

Among  other  indicators  of  labor market  activity,  initial

claims  have  improved a bit  recently.  Although claims  under  state

programs  jumped  to  384,000  in the  week ending  on March  16,  the

increase probably was  attributable  to  the  strike  at  General  Motors.

In  the  three  preceding weeks,  claims  had averaged  358,000  versus

374,000  between  January and  mid-February.  Additionally, the

Conference Board's  index  of help wanted held  nearly  steady in

January  after  rising 6 points  in December.  On  the  other  hand,  the

Manpower Employment  Outlook  Survey  shows  that  expectations  of  net

hiring  (for the  second  quarter) have  fallen to  their  lowest  level  in

two  years.

Industrial  Production

II-7

Industrial  production is  estimated  to  have  risen

1.2  percent  in February  after  a 0.4  percent decline  in  January that

was  related  in part  to  the  blizzard.  Roughly  one-third  of  the

0.8  percent  net  rise  in  output  from  December to February  reflected

an upturn in  aircraft production  after the  settlement  of  the  strike

at  Boeing.  In  addition, output  of  office  and  computing machines

continued  to  soar.  And,  in  February, a surge  in  semiconductor

production boosted  the  index  for  durable  goods materials,  and

production  of  other  business  equipment  picked  up.  Motor  vehicles

assemblies  rose  3/4 million  units  to  an  11.9  million unit  annual

rate  in February,  thus making  a substantial  contribution  to  IP

growth  that month, but  this  increase  only  reversed  a decline in

January,  and  motor vehicles  had  little net effect  on  overall  output

growth  over the  two months.  Output  of  non-auto  consumer  goods

dropped  sharply  in January,  likely  in  response to  the  effects  of  the

blizzard  and  firms'  efforts  to  reduce inventories,  and a February

rebound  carried  production  of these  goods  only back to  about  its

December  level.  Output  of  construction supplies  also  showed little

net  change  over  the  two  months.

CHANGE  IN SELECTED  COMPONENTS OF  INDUSTRIAL  PRODUCTION
(Percent)

Proportion, 

1995:Q4 

1995 

Oct.  Nov.  Dec.  Feb.  '96

Dec.  '95
to

Total  index 

100.0 

-.5 

.3 

.1 

.8

Manufacturing 

86.5 

-.4 

.1 

.2 

1.1

Manufacturing  excluding
motor  vehicles,
aircraft,  and  parts 

Consumer  goods 
Business  equipment 
Construction supplies 
Durable  goods  materials 

79.2 
23.1 
13.6 
5.3 
20.4 

.0 
-.4 
.7 
-.1 
-.2 

.2 
.1 
.1  -.5 
.5 
.6 
.3  1.6 
-.2 

1.3 

.9
.1
2.8
.0
1.7

II-8

GROWTH  IN SELECTED COMPONENTS  OF INDUSTRIAL  PRODUCTION

(Percent change  from preceding comparable  period)

Proportion
1995:04 

19941  19951 

Q3 

Q4 

Dec.  Jan.  Feb.

1995 

1995 

1996

-Annual rate-  --Monthly rate---

Total  index 
Previous 

100.0 

6.6 
6.6 

1.5 
1.5 

3.2 
3.2 

.4 
.2 

.1 
.2 

-.4 
-.6

Manufacturing 

Motor veh. and parts 
Aircraft  and parts 

86.5 
5.5 
1.7 

7.6 
8.6 

1.4 
-2.6 
-7.9  -17.1 

2.6 
.6 

1.3 
-. 5 
-9.0  -43.2 

.2 
-.3 
.4  -3.9 
4.2  10.4 

1.2

1.4
3.8
3.0

Manufacturing excluding
motor vehicles,
aircraft, and parts 

Consumer goods 

Durables 
Nondurables 

Business  equipment 

Office  and computing 
Industrial 
Other 

Defense  and

space equipment 

Construction  supplies 

Materials 

Durables 
Nondurables 

Mining 
Utilities 

79.2 

23.1 
3.7 
19.4 

13.6 
3.1 
4.3 
6.1 

8.0 

2.2 

3.1 

2.8 

.1 

-.3 

1.2

4.7 
6.4 
4.4 

13.1 
29.6 
8.6 
8.4 

.0 
-.4 
.0 

7.6 
36.1 
3.4 
-.7 

2.7 
4.4 
2.4 

7.4 
23.9 
6.4 
2.2 

-.4 
3.9 
-1.2 

8.1 
45.0 
2.1 
-1.0 

-.5 

-.9 
.7  -4.3 
-.3 

-.8 

.5 
3.3 
.0 
.1 

1.1 
3.4 
.1 
.2 

1.0
2.0
.8

1.7
2.8
.9
.8

1.7 

-10.5 

-7.3 

-2.6  -16.7  -1.5 

-. 6 

.6

5.3 

28.7 
20.4 
8.2 

6.0 
7.5 

8.0 

-.4 

1.1 

6.0 

1.6  -2.2 

2.3

10.5 
12.1 
6.9 

3.4 
6.3 
-2.8 

1.2 
.2 

-1.9 
6.1 

2.3 
8.2 
-9.5 

-1.8 
14.2 

4.5 
8.1 
-3.0 

-8.2 
-2.6 

.0 
-.2 

-.2 
.3 
.6  -1.5 

1.3
1.4
.8

1.5
-.4 
-.6 
-.6  -1.1  -1.2

Memo:
Information-related products 3  

11.2 

20.7 

21.4 

21.0 

22.6 

.7 

1.3 

2.7

1. From the  final  quarter of the  previous period to the  final quarter of  the  period

indicated.

2. Includes computer equipment,  computer parts, semiconductors, communications

equipment,  and  selected instruments.

CAPACITY UTILIZATION
(Percent of capacity;  seasonally adjusted)

1988-89  1967-95  1994 

1995 

1995 

1996

High 

Avg. 

Q4 

Q3 

Q4 

Dec. 

Jan. 

Feb.

Total  industry 

Manufacturing 

Primary processing 
Advanced processing 

84.9 

85.2 

89.0 
83.5 

82.1 

84.7 

83.6 

82.8 

82.7 

82.1 

82.9

81.4 

84.3 

82.6 

82.0 

81.8 

81.2 

82.1

82.6 
80.7 

89.3 
82.1 

86.5 
80.9 

85.9 
80.3 

85.7 
80.1 

84.9 
79.6 

85.7
80.6

II-9

Information on  industrial  activity in March  is  limited, but

production will,  of  course,  be  depressed  substantially  by the  strike

at  GM, which we  expect to  subtract  about  1 percentage point  from  IP

growth.  Outside  of  motor vehicles  and  parts,  the available

information thus  far  suggests  little  change  in  output this  month.

On  net, manufacturing  output  has  grown  about in  line with

estimated capacity  over  the past  few months,  leaving  the  utilization

3
rate  at  around  82  percent  in  February. 

The overall  factory

utilization  rate  now stands  about  1/2  percentage  point  above  its

1967-95  average,  buoyed by  sustained high  readings  for  industrial

machinery and  computer  equipment,  primary metals,  and  petroleum

products.  In  contrast,  operating  rates  for  nondurables,  notably

textiles, apparel,  and paper,  have  fallen sharply over  the  past

year,  a drop reflecting  producers'  efforts  to  adjust production to

softer  sales;  operating  rates  for  these nondurables  now are well

below  their  long-term  averages.

Personal  Income  and  Consumption

Consumer  spending appears  to have  returned  to  a moderate  growth

path  after hitting  a lull  in  late  1995.  Although  readings  on

consumer  sentiment from both  the Michigan SRC  and  the Conference

Board  surveys  sagged  in  early  1996,  the most  recent  results  in  both

surveys  have been  quite  positive.  In  addition,  data  on motor

vehicles  and  retail  sales  suggest  that  real  outlays  for  goods  in

February were  noticeably above  their fourth-quarter  levels.

Sales  of  new light vehicles  averaged  15  million units  at  an

annual  rate in  December  and  January and  climbed  to  a hefty

15-3/4  million unit  rate  in  February.  The  recent  strength has  been

3. We  estimate  that  overall  manufacturing  capacity is  currently
growing  at  an  annual  rate  of  4.2  percent,  a pace  similar to  that  of
1995.

II-10

SALES  OF  AUTOMOBILES  AND  LIGHT  TRUCKS
(Millions of units  at  an annual rate;  FRB and BEA seasonals)

1995 

1995 

1996

1994 

1995 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Dec. 

Jan.  Feb.

Total 

15.0 

14.7 

14.4 

15.0 

14.9 

15.9 

13.9 

15.7

Autos 
Light  trucks 

9.0 
6.1 

8.6 
6.1 

8.5 
5.9 

8.9 
6.1 

8.6 
6.3 

9.2 
6.7 

7.7 
6.2 

8.9
6.9

North American 

Autos 

Big Three 
Transplants 

Light  trucks 

Foreign produced 

Autos 
Light  trucks 

12.9 
7.3 
5.7 
1.5 
5.7 

2.1 
1.7 
.4 

12.8 
7.1 
5.4 
1.7 
5.7 

1.9 
1.5 
.4 

12.5  1.2  13.1 
7.3 
7.5 
5.5 
5.6 
1.8 
1.9 
5.9 
5.7 

6.9 
5.3 
1.6 
5.5 

14.0 
7.7 
5.5 
2.2 
6.3 

12.4 
6.6 
4.9 
1.6 
5.9 

2.0 
1.6 
.4 

1.9 
1.5 
.4 

1.8 
1.4 
.4 

1.9 
1.5 
.4 

1.5 
1.2 
.3 

14.1
7.6
5.8
1.8
6.5

1.7
1.3
.4

Note:  Data on  sales of  trucks and imported autos  for the most recent  month

are  preliminary  and  subject  to  revision.

1. Components may not  add to totals because of  rounding.
2. Excludes  some vehicles  produced in Canada that are classified

as  imports

by the  industry.

Total Light Vehicle Sales

GM  and  Ford  Fleet and  Retail Sales

Millions of units

Millions  of units

Retail

Fleet

Feb.

1993 

1994 

1995

1996

1993

1994

1995

1996

| b 

r 

r 

|e trframml  rlmwi

II-11

concentrated  in  the  retail  segment  of the market--confidential  data

from Ford  and  GM indicate  that  their  combined  fleet  sales  have

fallen below the fourth-quarter  pace.  Retail  light  vehicle

purchases  in  the  past few months have been bolstered  by incentives

from Ford  and  Chrysler, which were  introduced  around the  turn of  the

year.  The  incentives also  contributed  to  the more  favorable

readings  of  the Michigan  index of  car  buying conditions  in February

and  early March.

Spending at  the  "control"  category  of  retail  stores,  which

excludes  automotive  dealers  and  building materials  and  supply

outlets,  increased  0.4  percent  in February  after  a flat January.

Most major  categories  of  retail  sales  turned  upward in  February.

Nominal  spending at  furniture  and  appliance  and  "other"  durable

goods  stores  rose  a little,  although  it  remained  noticeably below

its  level  at  the end  of last  year.  Sales  at  apparel  stores  posted  a

sizable  gain  in  February after  a languid  performance  in  1995,  and

outlays  at  general  merchandise  stores  surged  after declining  in  the

fourth  quarter  and  edging  up  in January.

Official estimates  of  spending  for  services  are  available  only

through  January, but  outlays  apparently  remain on the moderate

uptrend  that has  been evident  over  the  past  few years.  Real

spending on  non-energy  services,  which had  posted  solid  gains  in

November  and  December,  edged up  in  January  to  a level  roughly

1/2  percent  (not at  an annual  rate)  above  its  fourth-quarter

average.  In  contrast,  energy  services  declined in  January,  and  data

on weather  for  the nation as  a whole  suggest  that  spending  on  energy

services  may have  declined a bit  further  in  February;  however,  these

declines  were not  large  enough to  put much  of  a dent  in  overall  PCE.

Taking a longer view, consumer  spending has  fallen short  of  the

gain  in  real  disposable  income  over  the  past  few quarters,  and  the

II-12

Retail Sales
(Percent  change;  seasonally adjusted)

Total  sales 

Previous  estimate 

Retail controll 

Previous  estimate 
Durables 

Furniture  and appliances 
Other  durable goods 

Nondurables 
Apparel 
General merchandise 
Other nondurable  goods 

Memo:  Real  PCE  services 

Q3 

1.0 

.6 

1.8 
3,6 
.2 
.3 
-. 0 
.7 
.3 
.6 

1995 

Q4 

.7 
.7 
.5 
.4 
1.9 
2.5 
1.3 
.2 
.4 
-1.0 
.5 
.5 

1996

Dec. 

Jan. 

Feb.

.7 
.6 

.4 
.4 
-. 3 
-. 6 
-. 1 
.5 

-1.1 

.0 
.9 
.3 

-. 1 
-. 3
.0 
.0
-. 9 
-1.9 
.1 
.2 
.1 
.2 
.2 
.0 

.8

.4

.3
.3
.3
.4
1.2
2.3
-. 2
n.a.

1. Total  retail  sales excluding building material  and supply stores and  automotive dealers (but  including
auto  and  home supply stores).

PCE  Goods

e  Quarterly

Billions  of  chained  (1992)  dollars

1

Feb.

-w

2170

2100

2030

1960

1890

1820

1993 

1994

Note.  Data for  the fourth  quarter, January, and February  are  staff estimates.

I 

I 

r 

i 

I 
I 
1995

.

I 

I 

I  i 

.

1750

II-13

PERSONAL INCOME
(Average monthly  change at  an  annual rate;  billions  of  dollars)

1995 

1995 

1996

1994 

1995 

Q3 

Q4 

Dec. 

Jan.

Total personal  income 

15.9 

26.7 

24.1 

28.1 

38.4 

7.5

Wages  and salaries 

Private 

2.4 
0.6 

13.6 
12.1 

16.3 
15.1 

13.1 
12.1 

19.5 
18.3 

-6.3
-9.7

Other  labor income 

1.5 

1.9 

1.3 

1.5 

1.5 

-4.3

Proprietors'  income 

Farm 

Rent 
Dividend 
Interest 

2.8 

-0.5 

1.3 
-0.0 

1.9 
0.5 

1.4 
1.4 
3.8 

0.6 
1.3 
3.7 

-0.7 
1.5 
0.6 

1.7 
0.8 

3.3 
2.1 
3.1 

2.8 
0.7 

3.2 
1.9 
3.4 

1.2
1.8

0.5
1.5
2.6

Transfer payments 

4.2 

5.6 

4.4 

4.3 

7.5 

11.4

Less:  Personal  contributions

for  social  insurance 

1.5 

1.3 

1.2 

1.0 

1.4 

-0.9

Less:  Personal tax  and nontax

payments 

1.6 

4.7 

3.6 

2.9 

3.3 

-6.8

Equals:  Disposable personal  income  14.3 

22.0 

20.5 

25.2 

35.1 

14.3

Memo:

Personal  saving rate

(percent) 

3.8 

4.5 

4.4 

4.9 

4.6 

5.3

Personal  Saving  Rate
(Saving as a share of disposable personal  income)

Percent

1980 

1982 

1984

1986 

1988 

1990

1992

1994 

1996

II-14

Household  Balance  Sheet  Indicators

Stock Market

Index

1980 

1982 

1984 

1986 

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994 

1996

Net  Worth  as a  Share of  Disposable  Personal  Income

7000

5000

3000

1000

... .......... i lll

... 

.... ... ... 

.

-'!i  :-1.:-: >i: -: 

:[112': 

ii:;::[::;

:i[[::[; 
..  ..  .. 

"'--'-

. .,...

..........

: 

: 

: 

i'[ 'i-:'i

>1->[ -:.2[-> -[';:';

->-  I 

191":-:::':  1 

II 

I 

:[i1[ 

I 

I 

| 

, 

,, 

I  uL 

II  |

1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

Debt  Service Payments  as a  Share  of Disposable  Personal  Income

:.:.:. :.:-...... 

: 

.......... 

.. 
... 
...% 

,... 
. .. 
.... 

- . ..... 
.-. 
........ 
..... %  ...... 

.

... ....

,°.. 

..

-. 
.... 
... 
o....... 
.
.%.......%. 

-... 

.. 

. ...-..

":::::

..........

I 

-

7 , 

--

-7 

I 

1980 

1982 

1984

I  -6 

1986

...::.
.Q4 

..

.....

'..°

..-
%.....
.%....

. . . ..

T  -

1988 

1990

1,992 

l' 

1994 

Ratio

5.1

1

4.8

4.5

! |

1996

4.2

Ratio

0.18

"

0.17

0.16

0.15

0.14

t 

i 

i
1996

II-15

personal  saving  rate has  moved  up--despite  the  large increase  in

household wealth  since the  end  of  1994.  This  upturn may  prove  just

to  be  short-term noise  in  the  time  series;  it  could  even  disappear

in  later  NIPA revisions.  But  there  are  possible  explanations  for

this  seemingly anomalous  pattern.  First,  it  is  important  to note

that econometric  models  that  capture  significant stock market  wealth

effects  also  suggest  that  the  effects may  take  some  time to  play

out;  the  effect  on  the  saving rate  of  the recent  rally would be

small  to  this  point,  perhaps  on  the  order  of  1/4  percentage point

(ceteris paribus).  Second,  other  factors  could  be  masking the  stock

market  effect.  For  example,  increased  debt burdens  may be hindering

spending--the  ratio  of debt  service  payments to  disposable income  in

the  fourth  quarter was  3/4  percentage point  higher  than  its  level

one  year earlier.  Moreover,  consumer  delinquency  rates  have

generally risen  over  the  past year,  suggesting that  some households

are  having greater  difficulty  servicing their  increased  debt

burdens.  However,  as  long  as  income growth  remains  sound,  these

financial  stresses  are probably  not widespread  enough to  be  a

significant  deterrent  to  overall  consumption.

The  recent  increases  in  the  saving  rate  also  could be  part  of  a

longer-run upward  adjustment  in  response  to  demographic  changes  and

heightened  awareness  of  the need  to  provide  for  retirement  and

medical  costs.  In  addition, the media  focus  on  job  insecurity may

have  contributed to  a greater  perceived  need  for  precautionary

saving.

Housing Markets

New housing  construction edged  up  in January--despite  the

blizzard--and  rose  still  further  in February.  Total housing  starts

last month, at  1.49  million units,  were  the  highest  since December

1994.

II-16

Private Housing  Activity
(Millions  of units; seasonally adjusted  annual rate)

All units
Starts 
Permits 

Single-family units
Starts 
Permits 
New-home  sales 
Existing-home sales 

Multifamily units
Starts 
Permits 

1995T 

1.35 
1.33 

1.08 
1.00 
0.66 
3.80 

0.28 
0.33 

Q2 

1.29 
1.25 

1.02 
0.93 
0.67 
3.63 

0.27 
0.32 

1995 

1996

03 

Q4r 

Dec. 

Jan. 

Feb.P

1.42 
1.38 

1.13 
1.04 
0.72 
4.04 

0.29 
0.33 

1.41 
1.44 

1.13 
1.08 
0.67 
3.98 

0.28 
0.36 

1.43 
1.48 

1.15 
1.11 
0.67 
3.87 

0.28 
0.37 

1.45 
1.37 

1.14 
1.05 
0.69 
3.71 

0.31 
0.32 

1.49
1.39

1.17
1.07
n.a.
n.a.

0.32
0.33

Note.  p Preliminary.  r Revised.  n.a.  Not available.

Private  Housing Starts
(Seasonally  adjusted annual rate)

Millions  of units

-- 

2.4

rI 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

1977 

1979 

1981 

1983 

I 
1985 

I 
1987 

I 
1989 

I 
1991 

I 
I 
1993 

I 

I 
1995

I

II-17

Single-family  housing starts  edged  down  in  January and

increased  moderately  in February;  starts  for  the  two months  averaged

1.16  million units  at  an annual  rate,  about  2-1/2  percent  above  the

fourth-quarter  average.  Permit  issuance  for  single-family homes

also  edged  up  in February, after  falling in  January.  Judging  from

historical  relationships,  starts  in  January  and February were well

in  line with permit  issuance.

Most  other  indicators of  single-family housing activity have

also  shown  signs  of strengthening.  New home  sales  rose  4.2  percent

in  January to  693,000  units,  the  most rapid  pace  since  last August.

Moreover,  the March  sampling of builders'  opinions  suggests that  new

home  sales  rose  substantially  in  late February  and  early  March.

Consumer  appraisals  of  homebuying conditions,  as  sampled  by the

Michigan  survey,  improved  noticeably in  February  and  early March,

owing  mainly to  a more  general  perception that mortgage  rates  are

low.  Applications  for home  financing at  mortgage bankers  remained

relatively  strong through mid-March, although  they  are  down a bit

from the  very high  range  of  late  1995.

In  contrast to  the  rise  in  new home  sales,  existing home  sales

declined  for  the  fourth  consecutive month  in  January.  This  series

tends  to  be  a lagging  indicator  of  housing demand,  however,  because

a substantial  share  of  existing home  sales  are  recorded  at  the

closing,  often  months  after a purchase  contract has  been  signed.

Thus,  existing home  sales  may not  reflect  changes  that are  evident

in more timely measures  of  demand  for  single-family housing.

In  the multifamily housing  sector,  starts  rose  substantially in

January  and moderately  in February,  largely  offsetting a decline  in

December.  A step-up  from the  extremely low  levels  of  multifamily

construction  seen  in  recent years  is  not  surprising,  but  the vacancy

II-18
Indicators of Housing Demand
(Seasonally  adjusted;  FRB  seasonals)

Consumer  Homebuying  Attitudes

3-21-96

Diffusion  index

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996

Note. The  homebuying attitudes  index is calculated by the  Survey ResearchCenter  (University of Michigan) as Ihe  proportion of respondents

rating  current conditions as  good minus  the  proportion  rating such conditions as bad,

Builders' Rating  of  New  Home  Sales

Diffusion  index

-- 

80

Mar.  -

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995

I

-80
1996

Note. The index is calculated from  National Association of Homebuilders  data  as  the proportion of respondents  rating current sales as good

to  excellent  minus  the proportion  rating them  as poor.

MBA  Index of Mortgage  Loan  Applications

Index

Mar.  15

I 

I 

I 

I 

_ 

_I 

I

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

996
396

1!

Note.  MBA  purchase index equals 100 on  March  16, 1990, for NSA series.

II-19

rate for  multifamily  rental  units  is  still  high--suggesting some

limit  on the  near-term potential  for further  gains.

Business  Fixed  Investment

At  the  time  of  the last  Greenbook, investment  indicators  were

lagging  to  an  unusual  degree because  of  the  government  shutdown.

The data  releases,  though back on  schedule, are  still  not as  current

as  one would  like.  However, they  now suggest  that  equipment demand

remained  fairly robust  into  early  1996--indeed,  surprisingly  so--

while  construction  spending decelerated  somewhat.

New  orders  reported by  U.S.  manufacturers  of business  equipment

were  particularly  strong  in the  office  and  computing category,

rising  3 percent  in  January after  surging  in the  fourth  quarter.

Shipments  of  these  items  also  continued  to  post  healthy  gains.  The

sustained  strength  in  computer  spending  seems  at  odds  with the

pounding  that  computer  company  stocks  have  taken  in  recent weeks:

Our  industry  contacts'  explanation is  that  competitive  pressures

have  reduced margins  and  profitability, with the  corresponding price

competition  helping  to  maintain demand.

Orders  at producers  of  other nondefense  capital  goods,

excluding aircraft  and  parts,  were  also  quite  positive through

January,  although  shipments  dropped back  after  rising moderately in

the  fourth quarter.  Notably, much  of  the  January  drop  in  shipments

was  in  two  industries:  communications  equipment,  for  which

shipments  had  soared  in  late  1995,  and  railroad  equipment,  which

tends  to  gyrate wildly  from month to  month.

As  for  transportation equipment,  business  purchases of motor

vehicles have  been about  flat  so  far  this  year  despite the  sharp

decline  in new  orders  for heavy  trucks  in  1995.  Shipments  of

complete  aircraft have been weak in  recent months,  in  part  because

of  the  Boeing  strike.  However,  the  weakness  in  aircraft  should be

II-20

BUSINESS CAPITAL SPENDING  INDICATORS
(Percent change  from preceding comparable period;

based on seasonally adjusted data,  in current  dollars)

1995 

1995 

1996

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Dec. 

Jan. 

Feb.

Producers'  durable  equipment

Shipments  of  nondefense capital goods

Excluding  aircraft  and parts

Office  and computing
All  other categories

3.3
3.8
6.8
2.9

-5.2
-3.6
1.9
-5.3

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

Shipments  of  complete  aircraft 1

-5.0 

-7.3

-9.6 

-24.8

-35.3 

n.a.

Sales  of heavy trucks

-4.4  -7.6 

6.4 

-1.2 

-2.2 

7.4

Orders  of  nondefense capital  goods

Excluding  aircraft and parts

Office  and computing
All  other  categories

-. 3
.3
3.3
-. 5

2.1
-. 3
-. 7
-. 1

7.5
3.3
8.3
1.9

5.7
-. 9
-3.2
-. 2

-. 5
3.3
3.1
3.4

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

Semiconductor book to bill  ratio

1.17  1.17

1.14

1.12

.92 

.90

Nonresidential  structures

Construction put-in-place

Office
Other  commercial
Institutional
Industrial
Public utilities
Lodging and miscellaneous

2.4
3.9
-2.3
.3
5.6
5.0
1.5

2.8
5.8
2.1
1.0
-1.6
4.3

12.0

-1.4
-8.5
6.4
-3.8
1.3
-10.7
16.6

.3
5.8
1.4
-. 2
-1.7
-5.5

8.4

-. 2
-5.6
-. 7
.5
2.8
-. 4
3.0

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

Rotary drilling rigs  in  use

.2 

-. 9 

-5.4 

-. 1 

1.1 

n.a.

Memo:
Business  fixed  investment2

Producers'  durable equipment 2
Nonresidential  structures 2

3.6 
3.7 
3.4 

5.2 
4.8 
6.1 

6.3 
6.9 
4.7 

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

1.  From the  Current  Industrial  Report  "Civil Aircraft and Aircraft  Engines."
Monthly data are  seasonally adjusted using FRB  seasonal factors  constrained to
BEA quarterly seasonal  factors.  Quarterly data are  seasonally adjusted using
BEA  seasonal  factors.

2.  Based on  1992  chain-weighted data;  percent  change,  annual rate.
n.a. Not  available.

II-21

Recent  Data on  Orders and Shipments
(Three-month  moving  average)

Office and  Computing  Equipment

Billions  of  dollars

-

10

Jan.

Orders

nts

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

1995 

9

- 8

7

6

5

4
1996

Other  Equipment  (Excluding Aircraft  and Computers)

Bi[

lions of dollars

-

32

Jan.

- 28

-24

20

-16

12

1996

1987 

1988

1989 

1990

1991

1992 

1993

1994

1995 

II-22

Fundamental  Determinants  of Equipment  Spending

User Cost of Capital

Percent

1960 

1965 

1970 

1975 

1980 

1985 

1990 

1995

Real  Domestic Corporate  Cash  Flow

Percent

1960 

1970 
Note.  Data  on cash flow are historical only  through the  third quarter.

1965 

1975 

1980

1985 

1990 

1995

Acceleration  of Business  Output
Percent

Percentage  points

1960 

1965 

1970 

1975 

1980 

1985 

1990 

1995

Note.  The  accelerator is the eight-quarter percent  change in business  output less the year-earlier  eight-quarter percent change.

II-23

Nonresidential  Construction and  Contracts
(Six-month moving  average)

Total Building

Index,  Dec.  1982=  100, ratio  scale

1980 

1982 

1984 

1986 

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994 

1996

Office

Other  Commercial

1984 

1986 

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994 

1996

1984  1986 

1988  1990  1992 

1994  1996

Industrial

Institutional

S350

1, 

' 

P1: 

1

50   -

I-,, 

rr

1984  1986  1988 

1990  1992  1994  1996 

1984  1986  1988  1990 

1992  1994  1996

Note.  For contracts, total only includes  private while  individual sectors include public and private.

II-24

transitory:  Airline  profits  are  high, new products  are  coming on

line,  and  orders  are  surging.  Boeing has  announced plans  to  hire

additional  workers  and  expand production,  and the  prospective

improvement in  activity is  affecting many  of  its  suppliers  as  well.

A glance  at  the  chart  showing  the fundamental  determinants

suggests  the  sources  of  the  continued  expansion  in  equipment

spending.  While  accelerator effects  have been  about neutral  over

the past  year,  recent movements in  the user  cost  of capital  and  in

cash  flow have been favorable.  The  user cost  of computers  has

continued  to  plummet because  of  falling  prices,  and this  pattern  is

likely  to  be  extended  in  the  near term with, among  other  things,  a

sharp  drop  in  semiconductor prices  contributing to  the  trend.

Growth  in outlays  for nonresidential  construction appears  to

have  slowed  recently  after three years  of  progressively  stronger

increases.  Although non-office  commercial  construction has

continued  to  trend up,  the  data  on  construction  put-in-place  suggest

that  activity has  slowed  noticeably  in  recent  months  in the  office,

institutional  building,  and  industrial  sectors.  Contracts  for  these

sectors  have also  been  softening over  the  past  several  months.

Other indicators  are more  favorable:  Senior examiners  and  asset

managers  at federal  banking  agencies  remain fairly  upbeat in  their

assessments  of  commercial  real  estate  conditions  (as  compiled  in the

FDIC's  January Survey  of  Real Estate Trends);  vacancy  rates  in  the

commercial  and  industrial  sectors  are well below the  levels  of  a few

years  ago;  and prices,  as  measured by  the NREI  index, have  continued

to  firm.

Inventories

Following  only a modest  increase  in November and  outright

liquidation  of  stocks  in  December, business  inventories  expanded

sharply  in January.  Excluding motor  vehicles  at  trade

II-25

establishments,  book-value  stocks  in manufacturing  and  trade

increased  at  an  annual  rate  of  more  than  $50  billion  in January,

after  rising only  about  $10  billion in  the  fourth quarter.

Interpretation of  the  January  data  is  complicated by  the  winter

storms,  which  caused  delays  in  shipments  and  sales  and  thus may have

caused  inventories  to back  up  at  manufacturers  and wholesalers.

Retail  stocks  edged  down, despite  flat  sales.  In  any event,  firms

apparently made  considerable  progress  in  rectifying inventory

imbalances  in  late  1995,  and  recent  trends  in orders  and  production

bode  well  for  further  improvement in  early  1996.

MANUFACTURERS'  INVENTORY  INVESTMENT
(Book value, billions  of  dollars,  annual  rate)

1994 
04 

Q1 

02 

1995 
03 

04 

1996
Dec.  Jan.

Total  manufacturing 

21.1  41.1  31.7  24.7 

9.4  11.3  35.7

Capital  equipment 

Information-related 
Transportation

including aircraft 

Industrial 
Other PDE 

12.2  17.2  10.9  11.2  10.4 
4.8 
4.2 

7.9 

2.6 

5.3 

4.7  20.0
8.1
3.7 

1.3 
4.3 
4.0 

1.9 
7.7 
2.4 

1.0 
3.6 
2.1 

3.0 
.9 

2.8 
.8 
-.6  1.9 

-.7  6.3
.2  2.6
3.0

1.6 

Other 

8.9  23.9  20.8  13.5  -1.0 

6.6  15.7

Sizable  increases  in  manufacturing  inventories  in  January were

evident  in both  capital  goods  industries  and  elsewhere.  Within

capital  goods,  stocks  of  information-related equipment have

continued  to  rise briskly  in  recent months,  while  stocks  of

industrial machinery  and  "other"  producers'  durable  equipment have

shown  little  net  increase  since  mid-1995.  The  inventory-shipments

ratio for  manufacturing capital  goods  moved up  in January,  but  the

jump was  largely due  to  a sharp  drop  in  shipments,  which  the

firmness  of orders  suggests was  transitory.  The  picture  for

inventories  outside  of capital  goods  is  less  sanguine--for example,

II-26

CHANGES  IN MANUFACTURING AND TRADE  INVENTORIES
(Billions of dollars  at  book value and annual  rates;
based on  seasonally adjusted  data)

1995 

1995 

1996

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Nov. 

Dec. 

Jan.

Total 

69.7 

53.3 

15.1 

5.2 

-41.3 

64.7

Excluding wholesale  and
retail  motor vehicles 

Manufacturing 
Wholesale 

Excluding motor vehicles 

Retail 

Automotive 
Excluding auto dealers 

61.7 
31.7 
25.4 
19.1 
12.5 
1.7 
10.8 

59.0 
24.7 
17.0 
19.9 
11.6 
-2.8 
14.4 

10.5 
9.4 
6.3 
8.7 
-.6 
7.0 
-7.6 

-3.3 
1.8 
-8.2 
-8.4 
11.6 
8.3 
3.3 

-26.8 
11.3 
2.3 
5.4 
-54.9 
-11.4 
-43.5 

51.3
35.7
22.9
19.9
6.1
10.4
-4.3

INVENTORIES RELATIVE  TO SALES 1
(Months' supply;  based on  seasonally adjusted data at  book value)

1995 

1995 

1996

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Nov. 

Dec. 

Jan.

Total 

1.42 

1.42 

1.41 

1.42 

1.40 

1.41

Excluding wholesale and

retail motor vehicles 

Manufacturing 
Wholesale 

Excluding motor vehicles 

Retail 

Automotive 
Excluding auto  dealers 

1.38 
1.38 
1.34 
1.32 
1.54 
1.79 
1.46 

1.39 
1.39 
1.36 
1.33 
1.54 
1.73 
1.48 

1.38 
1.38 
1.34 
1.32 
1.53 
1.75 
1.46 

1.38 
1.37 
1.34 
1.32 
1.55 
1.77 
1.48 

1.37 
1.37 
1.32 
1.30 
1.52 
1.72 
1.45 

1.39
1.39
1.33
1.32
1.52
1.74
1.45

1. Ratio  of  end-of-period inventories  to average monthly sales  for  the period.

II-27

Inventory-Sales  Ratios
Manufacturing and Wholesale  Trade

All  Manufacturing

Wholesale

Ratio
-- %2

Ratio

1.4

1.35

1.3

1.25

1.2

2.4

2.2

2

1.8

1.6

1.4

1.3

1.25

1.2

1.15

1.1

I 

I 

1987 

I 

i 

I 

i 

I 

I I 

I

1989 

1991 

1993 

1995

1987 

1989 

1991 

1993 

1995

Manufacturing  Capital Goods

Wholesale  Capital  Goods

Ratio

Ratio

1987 

1989 

1991 

1993 

1995 

1987 

1989 

1991 

1993 

1995

Manufacturing,  Other 

Wholesale,  Other

Ratio

Ratio

1987 

1989 

1991 

1993 

1995

1987 

1989 

1991 

1993 

1995

II-28

Inventory-Sales Ratios
Retail Trade

Excluding Autos

Ratio

Ratio

Total Retail 

r 

-1i.s -

I-___I 

-1 

1987 

1989 

1991 

1993 

1995 

1.45 

II 
1987 

- 1I-1

1989 

1991 

1993 

1995

Apparel 

Furniture  and Appliances

Ratio

Ratio

1987 

1989 

1991 

1993 

1995

1987 

1989 

1991 

1993 

1995

II-29

manufacturers'  stocks  of home  goods  and  apparel,  as  well  as  some

materials,  probably  remain above  desired  levels--and  the  inventory-

sales  ratio  for  this  group  as  a whole  has  changed  little,  on  net,  in

recent  months,  after  rising  sharply over the  first half of  1995.

In wholesale  trade,  inventories  also expanded  substantially  in

January.  In  addition, the  wholesalers'  December inventory  change

was  revised up to  show a small  accumulation instead  of  the  sharp

drawdown  indicated  in the  preliminary report.  As  in manufacturing,

stocks  of  capital  goods  have  continued to  rise  at  a rapid  pace in

recent  months,  and  the  inventory-sales  ratio has  fluctuated  in  a

fairly  narrow range.  Elsewhere  in  wholesale  trade,  changes  in

stocks  have been  small  in the  aggregate  in  recent months,  and

although  the  inventory-sales  ratio  edged  up  in January,  it  remained

well  below  the highs  of  last  fall.

In  the  retail  sector,  nonvehicle  inventories fell  a bit  further

in  January,  after  plunging in December.  The January  decrease may

have been  related  in  part to  the blizzard  disruptions  and  the  backup

of  goods  at  earlier  stages  of  the  distribution  channel.  Stores

selling  apparel and  furniture  recorded  sizable  net  liquidations  over

the  two  months;  as  a result,  the  inventory-sales  ratio  for  apparel

stores has  fallen well below the  levels  that  prevailed  over much of

1995,  while the  ratio  for  furniture  stores has  also  dropped

somewhat.  In  contrast,  the  inventory-sales  ratio for  general

merchandisers  remained  at  the  elevated  level  that has  been  evident

since  late fall:  the  strong  gain  in  general merchandise  sales  in

February  should have helped  restore  stocks  to more comfortable

levels.

Federal  Sector

The  BEA estimates that  real  federal  consumption expenditures

and  gross  investment  in  the NIPA fell  at  an annual  rate  of

II-30

FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OUTLAYS AND RECEIPTS
(Unified basis;  billions  of dollars  except  as noted)

Fiscal  year to date

Dec.  &  Jan.

1995 

1996 

1995 

1996 

Dollar  Percent
change  change

Outlays 

Deposit insurance  (DI) 
Spectrum auction  (SA) 
Other 

251.8 
-5.0 
.0 
253.7 

256.6 
-2.0 
.0 
258.6 

497.1 
-7.0 
.0 
504.0 

503.4 
-4.0 
.0 
507.4 

1.3
6.4 
3.0  -42.9
n.a.
.7

.0 
3.4 

Receipts 

Deficit(+) 

262.6 

281.2 

439.3 

466.8 

27.5 

6.3

-10.8 

-24.6 

57.8 

36.6 

-21.1  -36.5

Adjusted  for payment  timing shifts 1
and excluding DI  and SA

Outlays 

National defense 
Net  interest 
Social  security 
Medicare  and health 
Income  security 
Other 

256.8 
46.5 
38.9 
55.0 
44.7 
35.7 
36.1 

258.6 
45.6 
40.7 
57.2 
46.1 
36.9 
32.0 

509.6 
90.4 
75.8 
108.3 
86.6 
68.8 
84.1 

513.3 
87.9 
80.3 
113.2 
92.7 
71.4 
67.9 

3.7 
-2.4 
4.5 
4.9 
6.1 
2.6 

.7
-2.7
6.0
4.5
7.0
3.8
-16.3  -19.3

Receipts 

Personal  income  and

social  insurance  taxes 

Corporate 
Other 

262.6 

281.2 

439.3 

466.8 

27.5 

6.3

210.3 
35.2 
17.6 

219.3 
43.2 
18.7 

361.0 
40.1 
38.6 

381.0 
47.1 
38.7 

20.0 
6.9 
.1 

5.5
17.2

.3

Deficit(+) 

-5.9 

-22.6 

70.3 

46.5 

-23.8  -33.8

n.a. Not  applicable.
1. A  shift  in payment  timing occurs when the  first of  the month falls on a
weekend or holiday.  The monthly  and  fiscal year to  date outlays  for defense,
income security, and  "other" have been adjusted to account  for this  shift.

Components may not  sum to  totals because of rounding.

II-31

12  percent  in the  fourth  quarter  of  1995,  with double-digit declines

for  both  nondefense  and defense  purchases.  The drop  in defense

outlays  was much sharper  than  the underlying  trend  as  a consequence

of  a plunge  in  deliveries  of aircraft  and  other military  equipment.

Nondefense  spending was  depressed by the  reduction  in  real  employee

compensation  during the two  government  shutdowns  and  the  restraint

implied by the  appropriations  and  continuing  resolutions  for  fiscal

1996.

In  the  unified budget,  receipts  have  grown at  a solid  pace  this

fiscal  year,  and  outlays  have  risen  only a little.  Thus,  the

deficit  for  the  first  four  months of  fiscal  1996  was  just

$37  billion,  $21  billion below that  recorded  during the  comparable

period  one year  earlier.

The  Congress has  made  only  slight  progress  on  appropriations

since  the  last  Greenbook,  and  programs  covered by the  five  unpassed

appropriations  bills  are being  funded  by the  latest  in  a string  of

continuing resolutions.  In the  aggregate, the  current  funding

levels  for  discretionary programs  are more  generous  than  those  in

the  continuing resolutions  in  place during the  first  few months of

fiscal  1996.  Moreover,  some  agencies  are  now in a position to  make

certain  large  annual  payments,  normally  disbursed  in the  fall,  that

were  delayed by  the  difficulties  in  the  appropriations  process;  for

example,  the  annual  foreign aid  payment  to  Israel,  which totals

about  $3 billion, was  not  remitted  in  its  entirety until  February.

On March  15  the  President  signed  a one-week extension  of  the

continuing  resolution, and he  is  expected  to  sign a further

4. After  adjusting  for shifts  in  the  timing of certain  federal
payments  and  excluding deposit  insurance,  the  deficit  for  the  first
four months  of  fiscal  1996  was  $46  billion,  $24  billion  less than
during the  comparable period  one  year  earlier.  (Timing adjustments
take  account  of the  shifting  of  scheduled  outlays  for  payroll  and
some  benefits  into  the  preceding month when  the first  of the month
occurs  on a weekend  or  holiday.)

II-32

ADMINISTRATION BUDGET AND  ECONOMIC PROJECTIONS 1

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002

Budget projections
(Billions of  dollars;  fiscal  years)

Receipts

Outlays

Deficit

1355 

1427 

1495 

1578 

1653 

1734 

1820 

1912

1519 

1572 

1635 

1676 

1717 

1761 

1812 

1868

164 

146 

140 

98 

64 

28 

-8 

-44

Economic  assumptions 2
(Calendar years)

-Percentage change,  Q4  to  Q4-

2.3 

2.7 

2.9 

2.3 

2.7 

2.8 

2.3 

2.7 

2.8 

2.3

2.7

2.8

2.3

2.7

2.8

2.3

2.7

2.8

-

-Percent, annual  average-

5.7 

5.7 

5.7 

5.7

5.7

5.7

4.3

5.0

4.2

5.0

4.0

5.0

4.0

5.0

4.0

5.0

Real  GDP

GDP  deflator

CPI-U

Unemployment  rate

Yield  on  selected
Treasuries

Three-month

Ten-year

1  The projections  assume  that  the  President's  tax  and  spending proposals  are

enacted.

2. Based  on  information available  as  of mid-January 1996.
Source.  The Budget  of  the  United States  Government.  Office of Management  and

Budget, March  19,  1996.

II-33

extension by tomorrow, March  22.  These  extensions  are designed  to

give  the  President  and  the  Congress  more  time  for  negotiations  on  an

omnibus  appropriations bill  for  the  remainder  of the  fiscal year.

The bill  is  expected  to  set  overall  spending at  the  levels  specified

in the budget  resolution, with  any increases  for  particular  programs

offset by  reductions  in  spending for  other  programs  or  increases  in

receipts.  In  other  recent legislation, the  President  signed  a bill

providing for  a short-term increase  in  the debt  ceiling, now  set  to

expire  on March  29.

On  March  19  the Administration  released its  fiscal  year  1997

budget.  The  President's  policy  proposals  are  similar  to  those

incorporated  in  the  preliminary budget  document  issued in  February.

However,  in  contrast  to  the  budget projections  in  the  February

document, the  Administration's new projections are  based on  a full

set  of  updated  economic  and  technical  assumptions.  According  to

OMB,  if  the  President's  plan were  enacted,  the  deficit  would  drop to

$146  billion in  fiscal  1996  and  edge  down to  $140  billion  in  fiscal

1997;  the budget  position would  improve  steadily  thereafter,  showing

a sizable  surplus  by  fiscal  2002.  Under  CBO's  December  economic  and

technical  assumptions  (with adjustments  by OMB),  the  budget would

also  show a surplus  in  fiscal  2002,  but  it would be  much  smaller

than  OMB's  estimate.  CBO will  revise  its  assumptions this  spring;

if  the  President's  budget shows  a deficit  in  fiscal  2002  under  the

revised  assumptions,  the  President will  reduce his  proposals  for

discretionary spending by  the  amount  needed to  eliminate the

deficit.

State  and  Local  Government  Sector

Total  real  consumption  and  gross  investment  spending by  state

and  local  governments has  remained  on the moderate uptrend that  has

been  evident  since  1992.  The  1-1/2  percent  annual  rate  increase  in

II-34

State  and  Local Sector  Current Account Surplus
(NIPA basis, excludes social insurance funds)

Level

Billions of dollars

1970 

1975 

1980 

1985 

1990

1995

As a  Percent  of  GDP

Percent

1970 

1975

1980 

1985

1990

1995

II-35

real  spending  in the  fourth  quarter was  a bit  below trend, but  much

of  the  slowing  reflected developments  in the  volatile  construction

category.  A noticeable  upturn in  outlays  seems  to  be  under way in

the  current  quarter,  mainly because  of a 1.6  percent  jump in  real

construction  spending in  January.  The  increase  in construction  in

January was  broadly based  and followed  average  gains  of  0.3  percent

per month in the  second  half of  last  year.  Employment  grew  15,000

per month,  on  average,  in January  and February, about  the  same  as

the  pace  over  1995  as  a whole.

The  fiscal  position of  the  state  and  local  sector  remains  sound

in  the  aggregate.  The  NIPA  surplus  of current  operating accounts,

excluding  social  insurance  funds,  probably  remained in  the  area of

$35  billion to  $40  billion  in  the  fourth  quarter,  a level  similar  to

the  readings  for  the  past two years  and  considerably  above  those of

the early  1990s.  As  fiscal  positions  have  improved, many  states

have  cut taxes,  in most  cases  by  small  amounts.  This  year  again,

governors  of many  states  are  proposing fairly  limited tax cuts.

Prices

Although  data collection  problems  related to  the  government

shutdown and  the  January blizzard  have created  some uncertainty

about  the  reliability  of the  statistics,  inflation  appears  to  have

remained  relatively stable over  the  past few months.  Notably, the

core  CPI  increased an  average  of  0.2  percent  per month over  the  past

three  months,  and the  twelve-month  change has held  steady  at  around

3 percent.  Prices  have also  remained  in check  at  the producer

level;  on  net,  the  PPI  for items  other than  food and  energy was  flat

between December and  February.

Consumer  energy prices  increased  0.4  percent  in  February  after

having  posted much  larger  increases  in December  and January.  Most

of  the  rise  in  February  reflected  a surge  in natural  gas  prices as

II-36

RECENT  CHANGES  IN CONSUMER PRICES
(Percent change;  based on seasonally adjusted data) 1

Relative 
importance,
Dec.  1995 

1994 

1995 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Jan. 

Feb.

1995 

1996

All  items 2  
Food 
Energy 
All  items  less  food
and  energy 
Commodities 
Services 

Memo:
CPI-W3  

-----Annual  rate------ 

-Monthly rate-

100.0 
15.8 
6.7 

77.5 
23.9 
53.6 

2.7 
2.9 
2.2 

2.6 
1.4 
3.2 

2.5 
2.1 
-1.3 

3.0 
1.7 
3.6 

3.5 
3.6 
5.8 

3.0 

.9 

4.3 

1.6 
2.7 
-10.5 

2.8 
2.0 
3.0 

2.4 
1.9 
1.9 

2.2 
1.7 
2.5 

.4 
.1 
1.9 

.3 
.4 
.3 

.2
.1
.4

.2
-.1
.3

100.0 

2.7 

2.5 

3.3 

1.3 

2.4 

.4 

.2

1. Changes  are  from final month of  preceding period to final month  of  period  indicated.
2. Official  index for all  urban consumers.
3. Index  for urban wage earners  and clerical workers.

RECENT  CHANGES IN  PRODUCER PRICES
(Percent change;  based on  seasonally adjusted data) 1

Relative 
importance,
Dec.  1995 

1994 

1995 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Jan. 

Feb.

1995 

1996

----- Annual  rate------ 

-Monthly rate-

Finished goods 

Consumer  foods 
Consumer  energy 
Other finished  goods 

Consumer goods 
Capital  equipment 

Intermediate materials 2  

Excluding food and energy 

Crude  food materials 
Crude energy 
Other crude  materials 

100.0 
23.4 
13.4 
62.2 
38.5 
24.7 

95.1 
81.4 

44.7 
33.7 
23.9 

1.7 
1.1 
3.5 
1.6 
1.4 
2.0 

4.8 
5.2 

2.2 
1.9 
.9 
2.5 
2.7 
2.2 

3.0 
3.1 

1.3 
-2.5 
1.5 
2.3 
2.9 
1.8 

3.9 
4.2 

1.6 
8.8 
-10.2 
2.0 
2.3 
1.8 

4.1 
4.4 
10.3 
2.9 
3.1 
2.7 

-. 6 
1.5 

-. 9 
-3.2 

-9.4 
-. 1 
17.3 

12.9 
.0 
-4.6 

4.0 
14.6 
3.9 

34.8 
-21.0 
-17.6 

20.4 
15.7 
-19.6 

.3 
.2 
2.7 
.1 
.1 
-.1 

.1 
-.3 

-.4 
7.3 
.0 

-.2
-. 3
.7
.1
.1
.1

-. 3
..2

-.5
-1.1
.5

1. Changes are  from final month of  preceding period to  final month of  period indicated.
2. Excludes materials  for food manufacturing and  animal  feeds.

II-37

the  unusually  cold  winter  depleted natural  gas  stocks  in many  parts

of  the  country.  In contrast,  prices  of  gasoline  and  heating oil

were  little  changed  in  February;  these  prices  had  soared  around the

turn  of  the  year  as  increases  in crude  oil  prices  in  late  1995  fed

through the  system.  However,  the  lull  in  prices  of  petroleum-based

products  may be  short-lived:  Stocks  of both  gasoline  and  crude  oil

remain  low, and  prices  for  crude  oil  surged  in mid-March.

Food prices  edged  up  just  0.1  percent  in February  and  have

increased  just  a little more  than  2 percent  over  the  past  twelve

months.  Prices  for  fruits  and  vegetables dropped  a bit further  in

February, while  prices  of meats,  poultry,  fish,  and  eggs  were  little

changed  for  a second  month.  In  recent months,  price  increases  in

grain  markets  seem to  have  shown  through  in some  components  of the

CPI  for food,  notably cereal  and bakery products  and  dairy  products,

but  those  increases  have been  offset  by favorable  developments  in

other  categories.  Grain stocks  at  the  end  of  the  summer  still  are

projected  to  be  tight, and  the markets  remain sensitive to  changes

in  conditions  for  the  1996  crop,  as  shown most  recently by market

perceptions  of  changing weather  conditions  in the  southern  and

central  plains,  a major  wheat-producing area.

The  CPI  for  commodities  other  than food  and  energy slipped

0.1  percent  in  February after having  risen  0.4  percent  in  January.

In  part,  this  pattern  reflects the  one-week delay in  the  January

survey  period because  of the  government  shutdown.  The  effect was

especially  pronounced for  merchandise  for which  the delayed  survey

missed  the  usual  post-holiday markdowns.  Notably, apparel  prices

fell  1 percent  in  February  after  spurting  0.7  percent  in January.

5. The high  grain  prices have  come  at a particularly bad time  for

livestock  producers  because cattle  prices  are  the  lowest  in  several
years  and  feeders'  margins  are being  squeezed.  The  low prices  for
slaughter  cattle have  been reflected  in  retail  prices  for beef,
which have  edged  down over the  past  three months.

II-38

INFLATION RATES  EXCLUDING FOOD AND ENERGY
(Percentage change  from  twelve months  earlier)

Feb. 

1994 

Feb. 

1995 

Feb.

1996

CPI 

Goods 

Alcoholic beverages  (2.0)1 
New vehicles  (6.6) 
Apparel  (6.6) 
House  furnishings  (4.5) 
Housekeeping supplies  (1.4) 
Medical  commodities  (1.7) 
Entertainment  (2.5) 
Tobacco  (2.1) 
Used cars  (1.7) 

Services 

Owners'  equivalent  rent  (26.3) 
Tenants'  rent  (7.5) 
Other renters'  costs  (2.8) 
Airline  fares  (1.3) 
Medical  care  (7.7) 
Entertainment  (3.1) 
Auto  financing  (0.8) 
Tuition  (3.4) 

PPI  finished goods 

Consumer goods 

Capital  goods,  excluding

computers 

Computers 

PPI  intermediate materials 

PPI  crude materials 

Factors  affecting price  inflation

ECI  hourly compensation2  

Goods-producing 
Service-producing 

Civilian unemployment rate 3  

Capacity utilization 3  

(manufacturing)

Inflation expectations 4 ,5

Michigan Survey 
Conference  Board 

Non-oil  import  price 6  

Consumer goods,  excluding autos,

food,  and  beverages 

Autos 

2.8 

0.8 

1.3 
3.4 
-1.1 
1.5 
0.8 
2.8 
1.2 
-7.7 
6.4 

3.7 

3.3 
2.5 
3.5 
10.0 
5.4 
4.9 
-5.4 
6.8 

0.4 

-0.5 

2.3 
-11.9 

1.1 

10.6 

3.6 
3.9 
3.6 

6.6 

3.0 

1.9 

0.9 
3.1 
-1.4 
0.5 
2.2 
2.4 
2.2 
2.4 
14.3 

3.4 

3.1 
2.4 
2.3 
-5.4 
5.5 
2.3 
29.3 
6.2 

1.7 

1.5 

2.1 
-8.4 

7.1 

16.4 

3.1 
3.1 
2.9 

5.4 

82.2 

84.2 

4.4 
4.4 

1.5 

1.0 
3.9 

4.6 
4.2 

3.8 

1.0 
3.0 

2.9

1.7

2.8
2.0
0.1
0.3
4.3
2.5
3.7
3.2
2.7

3.4

3.5
2.6
5.5
3.9
4.1
4.0
-6.9
5.3

2.1

2.3

1.9
-14.4

0.4

-8.7

2.8
2.5
3.0

5.5

82.1

4.1
4.0

2.3

1.8
2.3

1. Relative  importance weight  in CPI  excluding food and energy.
2. Private  industry workers, periods  ended in December.
3. End-of-period value.
4.  One-year-ahead expectations.
5. Latest  reported value:  March for the Michigan Survey;

February for the  Conference Board  Survey.

6. BLS import  price  index  (not seasonally adjusted),  periods  ended

in December.

II-39

Elsewhere,  prices  for  new cars  and  trucks  rose moderately  in

February  after having  remained  essentially  unchanged over  December

and  January.  Prices  of  vehicles  have  been held down  in  recent

months  by  price-based  incentives introduced  by  Ford  and  Chrysler  in

order  to  reduce  bloated  stocks;  these  incentive  programs have  also

included  generous  financing options,  which have  contributed  to  the

sharp  drop  in  the  auto-finance component  of the  CPI  for  services  in

recent  months.

The  CPI  for  non-energy  services  rose  0.3  percent  in  February,  a

rise  identical to  that  in January  and  similar  to  the  trend  for  the

past  two years.  The  February  increase was  fueled  by  a turnaround  in

airfares, which had  fallen  sharply  over  the  preceding  several

months.  On the  other hand,  the  increase  for  shelter  costs  (which

account for  about  half of  non-energy services) was  a bit below

trend,  and  the  CPI  for medical  services  rose  a relatively modest

0.2  percent.  Taking a longer  perspective,  the  twelve-month change

in  the  CPI  for medical  services  has dropped  to  around 4 percent

after having increased about  5-1/2  percent  per year  over  the

previous  two  years.

6

At the  producer  level,  prices  for  finished  goods  excluding  food

and  energy  rose  0.1  percent  in February  after  falling  a bit in

January;  these  prices have  risen about  2 percent  in  the  past twelve

months.  Prices  for  intermediate  materials  excluding  food  and  energy

6. The  inadequacies  of  the medical  care  component  of the  CPI  have
received much  attention.  The  BLS  now surveys medical  prices  as  part
of  the  producer  price  index program,  and  the  PPI's methodology  is
better  than the  CPI's  in several  respects.  In  particular, unlike
the  CPI,  which measures  only  the  "list"  prices  set  by  hospitals  and
doctors,  the  PPI  attempts  to  capture  transactions  prices,  in  part by
following  contracts  between medical  providers  and  insurance
companies.  Thus,  if a new contract with  an insurance  company  leads
to  a greater discount  relative  to  the  list  price  than  in  the  past,
it  would  be  captured by  the  PPI,  but  not  the  CPI.  Analysis  of the
PPI  data  suggests  that  the  CPI  may be  overstating the  annual
increase in medical  service  prices  by about  2-1/2  percentage  points.
Nonetheless,  the  PPI  provides  no  evidence that  the  CPI  is
understating the  deceleration in medical  costs  in recent  years.

II-40

SPOT  PRICES OF SELECTED COMMODITIES

---------------

Percent  change1 -

- -

-

-

- -

-

-

- -

-

- -

-

Current 
price 
($) 

1994 

1995 

Jan. 232 

To 

Jan. 232 

to 
Mar.  19 

Memo:
Year
earlier
to date

------------- INDUSTRIAL COMMODITIES-------------  ------

Metals

Copper  (lb.)
Steel  scrap  (ton)
Aluminum, London  (lb.)
Lead  (lb.)
Zinc  (lb.)
Tin  (lb.)

Textiles and  fibers

Cotton  (lb.)
Burlap  (yd.)

Miscellaneous materials

Hides  (lb.)
Rubber  (lb.)

1.230 
139.000 
.728 
.507 
.520 
4.128 

.815 
.360 

.785 
.785 

64.9 
2.9 
73.5 
20.7 
23.6 
21.4 

-3.5 
-6.6 
-12.9 
9.0 
-13.1 
5.1 

-12.5 
7.8 
-7.3 
.0 
2.7 
.3 

38.5 
10.2 

-8.1 
23.3 

3.3 
1.4 

14.2 
75.4 

-19.7 
3.2 

1.7 
-3.1 

3.4
-3.8
3.7
11.8
1.0
-1.4

-.1
-1.4

6.4
.0

----------------- OTHER COMMODITIES---------------

Precious metals
Gold  (oz.)
Silver  (oz.)
Platinum  (oz.)

Forest products

Lumber  (m. bdft.)
Plywood  (m. sqft.)

Petroleum

Crude  oil  (barrel)
Gasoline  (gal.)
Fuel oil  (gal.)

Livestock

Steers  (cwt.)
Hogs  (cwt.)
Broilers  (lb.)

U.S. farm crops
Corn  (bu.)
Wheat  (bu.)
Soybeans  (bu.)

Other foodstuffs

Coffee  (lb.)

Memo:
Exchange value of  the

dollar  (March 1973=100)

Yield on Treasury bill,

3-month 3

395.100 
5.525 
411.250 

-1.7 
-5.0 
7.5 

1.7 
7.2 
-2.3 

4.2 
8.0 
4.4 

287.000 
293.000 

-37.1 
1.5 

-14.4 
-6.1 

1.6 
-4.2 

20.260 
.610 
.764 

60.000 
49.500 
.511 

3.880 
5.385 
6.985 

15.6 
32.4 
12.7 

16.8 
7.7 
22.6 

-4.7 
-7.6 
-11.8 

-3.4 
-12.9 
-4.9 

-23.2 
11.4 
-19.6 

-5.7 
27.5 
10.7 

57.4 
24.0 
29.0 

-3.0 
-7.2 
7.1 

1.6 
-. 8 
.4 

-2.1
-.4
-2.8

13.0
-1.3

16.7
25.1
43.5

-6.3
17.9
-12.2

10.1
.4
-3.4

1.258 

153.1 

-39.1 

13.6 

11.3

-23.6

86.393 

-5.5 

-6.0 

2.8 

-. 7

5.050 

247 

-67 

11 

8

2.9

-69

1.  Changes,  if  not  specified, are
the last  week of the preceding year.
2.  Week of  the  January Greenbook.
3.  Changes  are  in basis points.

to the  last week of the year indicated  and from

-14.6
1.1
-8.0
22.4
-3.0
9.3

-23.0

22.4

-19.9
-16.8

3.2
17.9
-1.1

4.7
-13.1

20.0
18.0
66.8

-15.5
32.0
8.0

64.8
38.3
23.6

II-41

Commodity  Price  Measures

Joural of Commerce  Index

Metals

Ratio scale,  index,  1990=100

Mar. 19 

L'i  p' 

1 

tit 

i 

f

1^  .

1985 

1986 

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996

CRB  Spot  Industrials

Ratio scale,  index, 1967=100

1983  1984  1985  1986  1

CRB  Futures

Ratio  scale, index, 1967=100

Total

Metals

CRB  Industrials

u;ia 

rutures

125
115

105

95

85

75

210

Note. Weekly data, Tuesdays.  Vertical  lines on small  panels  indicate week of last Greenbook.  The Journal of Commerce  index is based almost

entirely on industrial commodities, with  a small weight given to energy commodities, and  Ihe CRB spol price index consists entirely of industrial
commodities,  excluding energy.  The CRB  futures index  gives about a 60 percent  weight to food  commodities and  splits the remaining weight roughly
equally among energy commodities.  industrial  commodities, and precious metals.  Copyright for Journal of Commerce  data is held  by CIBCR,  1994.

II-42

COMMODITY PRICE  INDEXES

---------------- Percent changel----------------

Last
observ-
ation

1994 

1995 

Dec.  95 
to 

Jan. 232 

Jan.  232

to
date

Memo:
Year
earlier
to date

PPI  for  crude materials 3

Foods  and feeds
Energy
Excluding  food and energy
Excluding  food and energy,

seasonally adjusted

Commodity Research Bureau

Futures  prices
Industrial  spot prices

Journal  of Commerce  industrials

Metals

Feb.

Feb.
Feb.
Feb.

Feb.

Mar. 19
Mar. 19

Mar. 19
Mar. 19

-0.5

-9.4
-0.1
17.3

17.8

4.8
29.1

22.1
31.9

Dow-Jones  spot

Mar. 19

14.8

IMF  commodity index 3

Metals
Nonfood agricultural

Economist  (U.S. dollar index)

Industrials

Feb.
Feb.
Feb.

Mar. 12
Mar. 12

15.2
39.1
14.8

31.0
38.6

4.1

12.9
0.0
-4.6

-4.6

3.3
-3.5

-1.7
-1.8

-1.8

19.3
-8.1
3.7

-7.3
-6.6

2.4

-0.1

7.3
0.6

0.0

-0.8
-0.4

-0.8
-1.5

0.3

-0.7
-4.2
-0.4

-1.2
-3.4

-0.2

0.4

-1.1
-0.1

-0.5

3.3
0.2

-0.3
1.6

1.9

2.7
0.0
3.8

0.6
0.7

4.2

10.6
6.6
-8.7

-8.6

6.6

-4.4

-3.4

2.9

-2.9

1.9
-8.5
-0.8

-10.4
-11.6

Note.  Not  seasonally adjusted.  copyright  for Journal of  commerce  data is  held by
CIBCR,  1994.
1.  Change  is  measured to  end of period, from last  observation of previous period.
2.  Week of the  January Greenbook.
3.  Monthly observations.  IMF  index includes  items not  shown separately.
n.a.  Not available.

Index Weights

Energy
O

Food  Commodities
E

Precious Metals
F:

Others 1
m

PPI  for crude materials

CRB  futures

CRB  industrials

Journal of Commerce  index

14 

12 

Dow-Jones

IMF  index

Economist

41 

41 

1 

18

57 

14 

14

100

88

58 

55 

17 

25

45

1.  Forest products,  industrial metals, and  other industrial  materials,

II-43

fell  0.2  percent  in  February,  declining for  the  fifth consecutive

month.

Prices  of industrial  commodities  have eased  a bit  since  the

last  Greenbook.  The  Journal  of Commerce  index of  industrial

commodity  prices  has  changed  little  on net  since  late  January, with

a sharp  decline  in  its  textile  component mostly  offset by  a run-up

in  the  petroleum index.  The JOC  metals index has  risen  about

1-1/2  percent  since  the  last  Greenbook.  Copper  prices,  volatile  in

recent  weeks, were  pushed  down earlier  this year  by weaker economic

activity and,  to  some  extent, by weak  export  demand,  but they  appear

to  have  recovered  and now  stand  about  3-1/2  percent  above their

level  in late  January.  Prices  for  aluminum,  also volatile  recently,

are  about  4 percent  higher than  at  the time  of  the  last Greenbook.

Lead  prices  soared  7-1/2  percent  this week, as  supplies  became very

tight  in  U.S.  markets.  In  contrast,  steel  scrap  prices  have  fallen

about  4 percent  since  the  last  Greenbook, but they  remain at  about

the  average  level  for  1995.

Labor  Costs

As  measured by the  employment cost  index  (ECI),  the hourly

compensation  of  private  industry workers  increased  at  an  annual  rate

of  3-1/2  percent  over  the  three months  ended  in  December  1995,  up

from a 2-1/2  percent annual  rate  over  the  first  nine months  of the

year.  The  uptick in  compensation  growth was widespread  across

industrial and  occupational  groups  and  largely  reflected an

acceleration  in  payments  for health insurance benefits.  Wages  and

salaries  increased  2-1/2  percent  at  a seasonally adjusted  annual

rate  in the  fourth  quarter,  a bit  less  than over  the  first nine

months  of  the  year,  and  costs  of most  nonhealth benefits--such  as

II-44

EMPLOYMENT  COST  INDEX  OF HOURLY  COMPENSATION
FOR  PRIVATE INDUSTRY WORKERS

1994 

1995

Dec. 

Mar. 

June 

Sept. 

Dec.

----- Quarterly  percent
(compound  annual

change-------
rate)

Total  hourly compensation:1
Wages  and  salaries
Benefit costs

2.6 
2.4 
3.0 

2.3
2.7
0.6

By industry:

Construction
Manufacturing
Transportation  and
public  utilities

Wholesale trade
Retail  trade
FIRE
Services

By occupation:
White-collar
Blue-collar
Service  occupations

2.0
2.9
2.9

3.6
1.0
5.4
3.5

-0.3
2.9
3.7

2.0
0.3
1.4
2.9

2.9 
2.3 
3.7 

2.9
1.6
1.0

3.3 
1.6 
3.9 

3.0
3.8
4.5

Memo:

State and  local  governments

2.6

1.9 

3.2

----- Twelve-month percent  change----

Total hourly  compensation:
Excluding  sales  workers
Wages  and  salaries
Benefit  costs

By industry:

Construction
Manufacturing
Transportation and
public  utilities

Wholesale  trade
Retail  trade
FIRE
Services

By occupation:
White-collar
Blue-collar
Service  occupations

3.7 
3.1 
3.9 

2.1
3.0
4.0

3.1 
2.7 
2.3 

3.0
2.6
2.5

2.8 
2.3 
2.4 

3.1
2.5
2.0

Memo:

State  and  local  governments 

3.0 

3.1 

3.1 

3.0 

3.0

1. Seasonally adjusted by the  BLS.

II-45

EMPLOYMENT COST  INDEX OF  HOURLY WAGES AND SALARIES
FOR  PRIVATE  INDUSTRY WORKERS
(Twelve-month percent  changes)

1994 

1995

Dec. 

Mar. 

June 

Sept. 

Dec.

Hourly wages  and salaries 

2.8 

2.9 

2.9 

2.8 

2.8

By  industry:

Construction 
Manufacturing 
Transportation  and 
public  utilities

Wholesale  trade 
Retail  trade 
FIRE 
Services 

By  occupation:

White-collar 
Blue-collar 
Service  occupations 

3.2 
3.0 
3.6 

3.0 
2.4 
1.2 
2.8 

2.8 
2.8 
3.0 

2.3 
3.3 
4.1 

4.0 
3.0 
1.1 
2.6 

2.9 
2.9 
2.7 

1.8 
3.3 
4.1 

3.7 
2.2 
3.4 
2.6 

2.8 
3.1 
2.7 

1.9 
2.9 
3.4 

4.2 
2.1 
3.7 
2.5 

2.8 
2.8 
2.7 

2.2
2.9
3.4

4.3
2.4
4.0
2.5

3.0
2.8
2.2

Memo:

State  and  local  governments 

3.1 

3.2 

3.2 

3.1 

3.2

EMPLOYMENT  COST  INDEX  OF HOURLY BENEFIT COSTS
FOR  PRIVATE  INDUSTRY WORKERS
(Twelve-month percent changes)

1994 

1995

Dec. 

Mar. 

June 

Sept. 

Dec.

Hourly benefit  costs 1

Insurance costs
Health care
Supplemental  pay
Retirement  and savings
Paid  leave
Legally  required

By  industry:

Goods-producing
Service-producing

By  occupation:

White-collar occupations
Blue-collar  occupations
Service  occupations

3.7
3.6
3.9
4.5

11.1
3.1
2.3

3.5
3.8

4.5
2.8
2.4

Memo:

State  and  local  governments

2.8

2.9
1.5
1.6
6.2
6.1
3.7
1.2

2.4
3.3

3.6 
2.1 
1.6 

3.3
1.6
1.9

2.9

2.1
0.0
-0.1
1.4
7.8
3.3
0.9

1.0
2.7

2.7
0.6
0.5
4.4
7.2
3.6
1.3

2.0
3.1

3.0

1  The  detail  on benefit  costs  is  from unpublished

data  from the

BLS.

II-46

Components  of ECI  Benefits  Costs
(Private  industry workers;  twelve-month  percent change)

Insurance  Costs

Percent

Percent

Supplemental  Pay

Paid  Leave

Retirement  and Savings

Percent

Workers'  Compensation  Insurance

Percent

State Unemployment  Insurance

Percent

II-47

paid  leave,  retirement  and  savings,  and  legally  required benefits--

also  continued  to  increase  in  line  with their  recent  trends. 7

Over  1995  as  a whole,  the  ECI  rose only  2-3/4  percent,  the  smallest

increase  since the  series  began in  1981.

Despite  the  step-up  in the  cost  of health  insurance in the

fourth  quarter,  the  decelerating  trend in  these benefits  remained

intact through  1995.  Over  the year  as  a whole,  health costs  rose

only  1/2  percent,  compared with an  increase  of  4 percent  in  1994  and

a high  of about  14  percent  in the  late  1980s.  In addition  to  the

slowing  in medical  care  costs,  the switch  in insurance  arrangements

from traditional  indemnity plans  to  HMOs  and  other managed  care

plans  and  changes  in the  provisions  of the  health  plans  (including

greater  sharing  of health care  costs with  employees)  may  also  have

contributed  to  the  slowdown in  employer-paid health benefits. 8

Analysts  remain  uncertain about how much  of the  slowing  is

sustainable  and how much is  a one-time  saving  associated mainly with

the  shift  from traditional  insurance plans  to  lower-cost

alternatives.  On  one  hand,  the  recent  CPI  and  PPI  data  suggest  that

the  trends  in  underlying medical  costs  remain  favorable;  these

should  affect  insurance  premiums with a lag.  On  the  other  hand,

some  experts,  who  note  that  insurance premiums  have  decelerated more

over  the  past  few  years  than have  underlying medical  costs,  see  some

catch-up  in  the  offing.

7. Nonproduction  bonuses,  which are  only a  small  part  of benefit

costs  in the ECI,  increased  sharply  in the  fourth quarter,  likely
in  reflection  of the  10  percent  lump-sum payment  to  Boeing workers
that  followed  the  December  1995  resolution  of their  strike.

8. According to  the  1995 Hay/Huggins Benefits Report,  69  percent

of  firms  had  a fee-for-service  plan  as  its  "primary medical  plan"  in
1991,  while 9 percent had  a preferred  provider  plan and  22  percent
had  an HMO  or  point-of-service plan.  In  1995,  only  34  percent  of
firms  had  a fee-for-service  plan as  its  primary  plan, while
29  percent had  a  preferred  provider  plan and  37  percent  had  an HMO
or  point-of-service  plan.

II-48

LABOR PRODUCTIVITY AND COSTS
(Percent change from preceding period at  compound annual  rate;
based on seasonally adjusted data)

19941  19951  Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4

1995

Output per hour

Total business 

Nonfarm business 

0.7 
0.7 

0.7  -1.6 
0.8  -1.1 

3.0 
3.0 

1.6 
0.0
1.7  -0.5

Compensation per hour

Total business 

Nonfarm business 

Unit  labor  costs

Total  business 

Nonfarm business 

2.3 
2.5 

4.1 
4.1 

3.4 
3.7 

5.6 
5.4 

4.3 
4.3 

3.3
3.0

1.6 
1.8 

3.4 
3.3 

5.0 
4.9 

2.5 
2.3 

2.7 
2.5 

3.3
3.5

1. Changes are  from fourth quarter of  preceding year to  fourth

quarter of year  shown.

Compensation  per  Hour
(Change  from comparable  period one  year earlier)

Percent

index

1980

1982 

1984

1986 

1988 

1990

1992

1994

1996

II-49

Nonfarm hourly  compensation, from  the  productivity and  cost

data,  rose  3 percent  at  a seasonally adjusted  annual  rate  in  the

fourth  quarter;  for  all of  1995,  nonfarm hourly compensation

increased  about  4 percent,  after  rising  2-1/2  percent  in  1994.

Because  this  pattern differs  so  dramatically  from  that in  the ECI,

it  is  useful  to  note  that although  the  two  compensation measures

show fairly similar  long-run patterns,  they often diverge

substantially over  shorter  periods--especially  in  recent  years,  when

the  NIPA compensation  data  have not  yet been benchmarked  to

comprehensive  source data.  Much  of  the  discrepancy  arises  simply

because  the  data  are  collected  from different  sources.  In  addition,

because  nonfarm hourly compensation does  not  use  fixed weights  as

does the  ECI,  it  can  be affected by  changes  in the  composition of

employment. 9  Also,  the ECI  explicitly incorporates  current

information  on  benefit  costs,  whereas  the  hourly compensation

measure  tends  to  extrapolate  recent  trends  in benefits.

Productivity  in  the  nonfarm business  sector apparently  fell in

the  fourth quarter  as  output  decelerated  sharply. 1 0  The  decline

followed  strong  gains  over  the  preceding two  quarters;  nonetheless,

over  1995  as  a whole,  productivity  growth fell  short  of  its  long-

term trend, which  we  estimate  at  about  1 percent  per year.

Labor  cost  data  for  1996  are  sparse.  Average  hourly earnings

of  production or  nonsupervisory workers  in private  nonagricultural

9. The wage  and  salary portion  of nonfarm hourly compensation  for
1995  is  based largely  on average  hourly earnings  (AHE).  Whereas  the
ECI  holds  the  mix  of  industries  and  occupations in  its  sample
constant,  the  AHE  does not.  The  0.3  percentage  point  acceleration
of  the AHE between  1994  and  1995  is  largely  attributable  to  changes
in  the  industrial  composition of  employment; a chain-weighted
version  of  the AHE, which has  been  available  since  January  1994  and
holds  the  industry mix  constant,  shows  an  increase  of  2.8  percent  in
each year.

10.  The  fourth-quarter  report  on productivity and  costs  showed
output  per hour  dropping  1/2  percent  at  an annual  rate.  However,
given  the  likely  revisions  to  output, we  expect  the  decline  in
productivity to  be  revised  to  about  1 percent.

I-50

AVERAGE  HOURLY EARNINGS
(Percentage change;  based on  seasonally adjusted data)1

1995 

1995 

1996

1994  1995  Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Dec.  Jan.  Feb.

-Annual rate- 

-Monthly rate-

Total private nonfarm 

2.8 

3.1  3.2  3.9 

2.4 

.3 

.4 

-. 1

Manufacturing 

Durable 
Nondurable 

Contract  construction 
Transportation  and

public  utilities 
Finance,  insurance,

and  real  estate 

Total  trade 
Services 

2.2 
2.0 
2.3 
2.4 

2.6  2.3  3.6 
.3  4.1 
1.7 
3.9  3.9  3.5 
1.8  5.5  1.1 

1.9 
.3 
5.2 
-1.3 

.2  1.1 
1.1 
.1 
1.0 
.5 
1.9 
-. 5 

-. 4
-. 2
-. 8
-. 6

2.3 

2.8  4.6  2.8 

2.3 

-. 1 

.1 

-. 1

3.4 
3.0 
2.9 

4.3  4.7  5.0 
3.2  3.2  4.5 
3.5  2.9  3.6 

2.6 
3.1 
4.6 

.2 
.6 
.5 

-. 1 
.4 
.1 

.6
-. 9
.2

1.  Annual  and  quarterlv  changes  are  measured  from the  final 

month  of

the  preceding period to  the  final month of the period  indicated.

Earnings  of  Production and  Nonsupervisory Workers
(Twelve-month  change)

Percent

1985 

1987

1989 

1991 

1993

1995

II-51

establishments  edged  down  in February  after jumping 0.4  percent  in

January.  For the  twelve-month period  ended  in February,  average

hourly  earnings  grew 2.9  percent--in  the  middle of  the range

observed  since  late  1994.

Recession  Probabilities

The  recession probability measures based  on the  indexes  of

leading  economic  indicators  continue  to  diverge.  According  to  a

measure  based on  the  Conference  Board's  index of  leading economic

indicators  (LEI).  the probability  of  a recession  starting within  six

months  was  60  percent  in  January,  after  readings in  the  range  of

30  percent  to  50  percent  since  the  spring  of  1995.  These  relatively

high  probabilities  reflect  the sizable  decline  in  sensitive

materials  prices,  which make  up  about  40  percent  of  the  index,  since

mid-1995.  It  is  difficult  to  interpret the declines  in  sensitive

materials  prices  because  they have been  largely  concentrated in

wastepaper,  where  prices have  reversed the huge  run-up  between

mid-1994  and mid-1995.  The  probability  of  recession from  a version

of  the  LEI  that excludes  materials  prices  was  just  16  percent  in

January.  The  recession probability was  also boosted  substantially

in  January by  the  decline  in  the  manufacturing workweek  (which was

more than  reversed  in  February).

The  January  reading of  the  National  Bureau of  Economic Research

(NBER) measure, which  places  a heavier weight on  financial

variables,  puts  the probability of  recession  at  only  1 percent.  An

alternative version of the  NBER index  that  excludes  interest  rates

and  interest  rate  spreads  puts  the probability  of  recession at

13  percent.  The  NBER indexes  do  not  include  the manufacturing

workweek, but  they  do  include  part-time  employment  due  to  slack

work;  this  variable  declined  in January,  possibly because  of  the

blizzard, making  a positive  contribution to  the  indexes.

II-52

Probability of a  Recession

Generated  from  LEI

-
Including sensitive materials prices
-------  Excluding sensitive materials prices

Percent

Jan.  -
59.8%

S  16.2% 

-

_4

1994 

1995

1996

1981 

1983 

1985 

1987 

1989 

1991 

1993 

1995

Generated  from  NBER  Leading Index

With  interest  rates

.- - --  Without interest rates

Percent

Jan.
"13%

1994 

1995 

1996

1994 

1995 

1996

1981 

1987 
Note.  Each  probability represents  the likelihood that a recession  will begin during the next six months.

1989 

1985 

1991 

1993

1983 

1995

DOMESTIC  FINANCIAL
DEVELOPMENTS

III-T-1

Selected  Financial  Market  Quotations 1

(Percent  except  as  noted)

1994 

1996 

FOMC, 

Feb. 3 

High 

Jan.  30 

Mar. 20 

Feb.  3 

Change  to  Mar.  20,1996  from:

1994 

1994 

high 

FOMC.

Jan.  30

5.36 

2.29

..30 

10

1.89 
!.75 
1.60 

2.28
2.11

2,24
2.08
1.96

5.51 
5.32 

5.44 
5.36 

5.35 
5.33 
5.37 

-.07
.04

.76
-1.36
-1.72

-.69 
-.96 

.75
-1.06
-1.52

-1.96
-1.70
-1.51

.86 
1.43 

-1.42
-1.24

Instrument 

Short-term  Rates

Federal  Funds

Treasury  Bills'

3-month
6-month
1-year

Commercial  paper

I -month
3-month

Large  negotiable  CDs'

] -monthi
3-month
6-month

Eurodoliar  deposits'

S-month
3-month

Bank  Prime  Rate

Intermediate- and  Long-term  Rates

U.S.  Treasury  (constant  maturity)

3-year
10-year
30-year

Municipal  revenue  (Bond  Buyer)5

Corporate-A  Utility,  recently  offered

Home  mortgages'

FHLMC  30-yr  fixed  rate
FHLMC  I-yr  adjustable  rate

Stock  Exchange  Index

Dow-Jones  Industrial

NYSE  Composite

NASDAQ  (OTC)

Wilshire

Record 
high

1989 

1996 

Percentage  change  to  Mar.  20  from:

Low, 

FOMC,

Record 

Level

5683,60

351.70

1117.79

6449.34

Date

Jan.  3 

Jan,  30

3/18/96

2144.64

5381.21

3/6/96

3/6/96

154.00

378.56

337.28

1051.30

3/6/96

2718.59

6161.64

Mar. 20

5655.42

348.20

1101.82

6389.24

high 

.,50

-1.00

-1.43

.93

1989

low

163.70

126.10

191.06

135.02

FOMC,

Jan.  30

I.  One-day  quotes  except  as  noted.
2.  Average  for  two-week  reserve  maintenance  period  closest  to  date shown.  Last  observation  is  average  maintenance  period  to  date  ending

March  27.  1996.
3.  Secondary  market,
4.  Bid rates  for  Eurodollar  deposits  at  11  a.m.  London  time.
5.  Most  recent  observation  based  on one-day  Thursday  quote  and  futures  market  index  changes.
6.  Quotes  for  week  ending  Friday  previous  to  date  shown.

Short-Term

Monthly

Selected  Interest  Rates

Percent

Daily
FOMC
1/30

---- 
-- 
........  Discount rate  (daily)

Federal funds
Three-month  Treasury bill

Percent

-1  10

Federal funds

.

r 

-

-

Three-month  T-bill

p 

p 

w I 

I

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995

I 

1/26  2/2 

l 
2/9 

l 

l 

2/16  2/23 

3/1

1996

I 
3/8 

I
3/15

Percent

Percent

-
-..- 
-- 

Prinary fixed-rate  mortgage
Corporate  bond (A-rated  utility)
Thirty-year Treasury bond

1  10

Lon

ig-Term 

Mo  thly

- A
I

I1 

1990 

I  1991 
1991 

1 
1992 

I  1994

1993 

1994 

1995

1/26  2/2 

2/9  2/16  2/23  3/1 

3/8 

3/15

1996

DOMESTIC  FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS

Intermediate- and  long-term interest  rates  have  backed up  about

55  to  65  basis  points  since  the  beginning  of February,  primarily  on

stronger  economic  data.  Short-term interest  rates  fluctuated  during

the  period, but  now stand  near their  levels  at  the  January  FOMC

meeting.  Short-term interest  rates  initially had  edged  down  about

1/4  percentage point  following the  System policy change at  the

January meeting and,  judging  from federal  funds  futures  data  in

early  February, market  participants  appeared to  place  high  odds  on  a

further  25  basis  point  cut  in the funds  rate  at  the March  FOMC

meeting with  additional  easing by early  summer  (chart).  However,

Chairman Greenspan's  testimony before the  Congress  regarding  the

FOMC's  forecasts  of moderate  economic  growth  along with the

subsequent  release of  stunningly strong employment  data in  early

March  were seen  as  largely  erasing any possibility of  near-term

System  easing  and  as  raising  questions  about  the  direction  of

monetary policy down  the  road.  Moreover,  election-year rhetoric

suggested that  agreement  on  a major deficit-reduction  plan was  an

even more  remote  probability.  Despite  the  rise  in  interest  rates,

major  stock-price  indexes  advanced  between 3 and  5-1/2  percent  over

the  intermeeting  period.

The  growth  of  aggregate  nonfederal debt has  not  deviated

appreciably  from the  moderate pace  of the past two  years.  Although

some  recent  signs  point  to  a slowing  in household  borrowing,

consumer  credit  has  continued to  climb  relative  to  disposable

income.  Corporate bond issuance  has  slackened with the  backup  in

rates;  overall  business  borrowing this  quarter will  be  buoyed,

however, by  the  completion  of large  merger transactions.  New

issuance  of state  and  local  government  securities  also  dipped with

III-1

III-2

Selected  Financial  Market  Quotations

Treasury Yield Curves

Percent

Change  Since 02/01/96

Basis  points

1  3  5  7 

10 
20
Maturity  in Years

.25 

.5  1 

2 

3 

5 
Maturity  in Years

7 

10

20 

30

Federal  Funds Futures  Rates

Percent
1 

6.0

Eurodollar  Futures  Rates  (3-Month)

Percent

.... 

--- 

03/20/96
02/21/96
02/01/96

-

........ 

03/20/96*
02/21/96
02/01/96

-

\ 

---

****

__

Mar 

Apr 

May 
Contract  Months

Jun 

Jul

I  I 
M-96 

I 
J-96 

I 
I 
S-96 
D-96 
Contract  Months

I 
M-97 

I  I

J-97

SLast day of trading for the  March  1996 contract was
March  18.

III-3

the  rise  in yields  in  late  February;  on  balance, tax-exempt  debt  has

continued  to  contract with heavy retirements  of pre-refunded  debt.

The  federal  government's  borrowing  has  picked up  after  the

disruptions  of  the  fourth  quarter.  The  Treasury's  plans  have  been

complicated  to  a small  degree by  the  continuing dispute  over the

debt  ceiling,  but  regular  monthly two-  and  five-year note  auctions

proceeded  on  schedule.

Equity  Price  Developments

Although  share  prices  posted  strong gains  over  the  intermeeting

period,  broad measures  of  stock prices  declined  sharply on  Friday,

March 8, after  the  release of unexpectedly  strong  employment  data

for  February.  At  one  point  that  day,  the  Dow Jones  Industrial

average had  declined  215  points--approaching the  250 point  trigger

that  would  have  suspended  trading  on the  NYSE  for  one  hour.

However,  prices  recovered,  finishing  down  171  points,  and most broad

indexes  have  since  recouped that  day's  decline; indeed,  some,

including the  DJI,  have  proceeded  to  register new highs  (chart).  At

the  same time,  the markets  have  been  quite  volatile  (chart).

The  run-up  in  stock prices  this  year  seems  hard to  reconcile

with  higher  interest  rates  and with  reports  that  securities  analysts

have,  if  anything, lowered their  earnings  forecasts  for  1996.  Based

on  some benchmarks  for  equity valuation,  stock  prices  appear

somewhat  overvalued.  For  example,  the  expected  earnings  yield for

the  S&P 500--the  ratio  of  security analysts'  expectations  for  year-

ahead  earnings to  current  price--moved  roughly  in parallel  with

long-term bond yields  during  1994  and  1995,  but  has  fallen

appreciably this  year  to  a  rather  low level  (chart, middle  panel).

This  decline, viewed  against  the  recent  backup  in long-term yields,

implies  a considerable  decline  of the  so-called  equity  premium,

which  some  have asserted  was  already  unsustainably  narrow.

III-4

Stock Market

Selected  Stock  Indexes 

Index,  Dec  29, 1995=1 

-

1.16 

Volatility of the  S&P 500*

Daily 

Five-day moving  average

DJ1A 

-

1.12 

1.08

Mar  20

-

1.04 

S1.2

., 

,- 

NASDAQ 

1

0.96
0,96 

0.92 

.

,' 

S- 

, 

January 

-

" 
February 
1996 

Percent

2,8

- 2.4

1.6

Mar 20

- 0.8

0.4

0

1996

March 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2

1995 

* Calculated  as the difference between  the  daily high  price
and daily low  price as a percent of the  daily low.

12-Month  Forward  Earnings-Price  Ratio Against 30-Year  Treasury  Rate

Monthly

Nominal Treasury  rate

Percent

12

10

Mar

SP 

ratio 

'".-:.:-.'" 
" 

:::-:i: 
:i:i:

-" 

^ 

'" 

"v 

Mar -4

SReal 

III- 

1986 

1988 

1990 

* Nominal rate  less expected  10-year inflation rate.
Ratio  of  Price of  Put  Options to Price  of
Call Options  on S&P500  Futures  Contract 1
Index 

Treasury  rate 

IIII

1992 

1994 

- 2

1996

Ratio
-

3

Mar 

- 2.8

/ 

- 2.6

S&P 500  Index 2  
-

r "- ' -

/ 

/2.2

/ 

\- 

Put-Call  Ratio 

Mar 20 

1989 

I 

I 

1991 

I 

I 

1 

1993 

1995

-

-

2.4

2

"  1.8

1.6

-

1.4

.2

1

1. Options are 3  percent out-of-the-money.  All observations  except thelast one are closing prices on Thursday of the first full week
of the  first month  of the  quarter.
2. Monthly average  of daily closing levels of the S&P 500  Index.  March  value is average of daily dosing levels for March  1 through  March  20.

720 

630 

540 

450 

-

360 

270 

III-5

Nonetheless,  at  least  one  indicator  suggests  that  confidence  in

the  prospects  for  a continuation  of the  bull market  has  not  been

weakening.  On  certain  assumptions,  the  ratio  of prices  on  out-of-

the-money  put  and  call  options  on  stock price  indexes  can  help  to

gauge  the  market's  assessment  of risks  associated with prevailing

stock  prices.  A  put-to-call  price  ratio  greater than  1, for

example,  can  be  interpreted as  implying  a greater  likelihood  of  a

downward movement  in  stock prices.  For  futures  contracts  on  the  S&P

500  stock  index, the  put-call  ratio  has  fallen considerably  on

balance  since  the  end  of  1994,  suggesting that  investors  have become

less  concerned  about  the  prospects  for  a significant  drop  in  stock

prices.  Indeed,  the  historical  record  of  sharp  sizable  stock price

declines  over  the  past  forty  years--declines  on  the  order  of  10

percent  or more  over  a two-month period--reveals  little precedent

for  such market  breaks  in  the  absence  of  a significant  Federal

Reserve tightening  or  a jump  in  oil  prices.  The  only  instance  in

which  stock  prices  fell  in the  absence  of at  least  one  of these

factors  was  in  1962,  when the  Kennedy administration pressured the

major  steel  producers  to  roll  back large  price  increases,  setting

off  fears that  the  administration would  pursue  anti-business

policies.

Mutual  Funds

Stock mutual  funds  continued to  experience  sizable  inflows

through  early March,  although the  recent  volatility in the market

may have  diminished  somewhat the  enthusiasm for  equity investment.

Preliminary weekly  data  suggest  that  stock  fund  inflows,  though

still  positive, moderated  during the  week  ended March  13--the  week

including the  sharp  one-day market  decline.  Inflows  to bond  funds,

which had  trended  down over  February and  early  March,  turned

negative  that week.

III-6

Recent  Developments  in the Mutual  Fund  Industry

NET  SALES  OF  MUTUAL  FUNDS  CLASSIFIED  BY  TYPE
(Billions of  dollars, monthly  rate,  not  seasonally  adjusted)

1995 

1996

Q3 

Q4 

Dec. 

Jan. 

Feb.e 

Memo:
Jan.
Assets

Total  stock 

International 
Domestic 

Total bond 

GNMA 
Government 
High-yield 
Tax-exempt 
Income 
Other 

Total  money  fund 

Taxable 
Tax-exempt 

14.1 
1.3 
12.8 

2.5 
-. 2 
-. 2 
.9 
.1 
1.8 
.0 

11.3 
10.3 
1.0 

16.8 
1.7 
15.1 

25.9 
3.7 
22.2 

4.3 
-. 1 
-. 2 
1.0 
.3 
2.8 

.5 

9.5 
8.3 
1.2 

5.2 
-. 2 
-. 6 
1.1 
-. 2 
4.2 

.9 

1.0 
.1 
.9 

29.6 
8.1 
21.4 

6.6 
-. 3 
-. 2 
1.3 
.6 
3.7 
1.4 

12.2 
8.7 
3.5 

20.8  1,332.3
212.3
16.7  1,119.9

4.1 

3.6 
.0 
-,3 
.6 

-. 5 
3.1 
.6 

32.5 
29.3 
3.2 

811.1
55.2
87.8
61.9
253.9
285.5
66.9

775.6
644.3
131.4

e Staff  estimate.
Source.  Investment Company  Institute.

Percent

Liquidity Ratios*

Monthly

ar  t

* 

I

Stock funds

Bond funds

1984 
* Cash and  short-term  securities as a percent of total  assets.

1986 

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994

III-7

Various  industry reports  suggest  that  mutual  fund  investors

generally have  long  investment  horizons.  For  their  part, mutual

fund  managers  have  been holding  relatively  small  cash  and  short-term

securities  positions,  suggesting that they  do  not  perceive

themselves  to  be  particularly vulnerable  to  a surge in  redemptions

(chart).l 

Indeed,  in  the  weeks  following the  October  1987  stock

market  break, investors  redeemed  less  than  4 percent  of their  stock

fund  holdings,  and net  outflows  have  been  far  smaller  during  other

periods  of falling  prices.

Money  and  Depository  Credit

The  strength  in  mutual  fund  inflows  early this  year  does  not

appear  to  have  come  at  the  expense of the  broad monetary aggregates.

Spurred by the  policy  easings  at  the  December and  January FOMC

meetings,  M2  and  M3  growth picked up  over  the  first  two  months  of

the  year.  Moreover,  preliminary data for March  suggest  a

considerable  further  acceleration of M2  and  continued  robust  growth

in  M3,  placing  them both  further  above the  upper  bounds  of their

respective  annual  ranges.  Much  of the  recent  advance  of the  broad

aggregates  has been  fueled by  growth in  retail  and  institution-only

money  funds.  Money fund  yields  lag  changes  in short-term market

interest  rates,  thus  making them particularly  attractive investments

in  the  wake  of  System policy  easings.

In  contrast to  the  broad  aggregates, M1  continued to  contract

over  the  first  two  months  of the  year,  with the  impact  of new  retail

OCD  "sweep"  accounts  far  outweighing the  impetus  from narrowing

opportunity  costs.  More  than  $25  billion  of OCD  balances  have  been

swept  just  this  year.  Partial  data  suggest  positive M1  growth  in

1. Mutual  fund  managers  face  considerable  competition from index

funds  and  so  may be  quite  reluctant  to  sacrifice yield by holding
liquid  assets--at  least  until the  bull market trend  is  perceived to
have  reversed.  Another  factor holding  down  liquidity  ratios  is  that
many mutual  funds  maintain backup  credit  lines  with banks  to  cover
emergency liquidity needs.

III-8

MONETARY  AGGREGATES
(Based on seasonally adjusted data)

1995 

1995 

1996 

1995 

Q3 

Q4 

Dec. 

Jan. 

1995:Q4 
Level
to 
(bil. $}
Feb.  Feb. 96  Feb. 96
(p) 

(p) 

(p)

Percentage change (annual  rate) 1

-1.8 
4.0 
5.9 

-1.5 
6.9 
8.0 

-5.1 
3.9 
4.2 

-4.5 
5.5 
3.3 

-6.2 
4.7 
7.2 

-2.1 
5.3 
10.0 

-4.1 
5.0 
6.8 

1117.0
3690.8
4636.1

5.4 

1.4 

2.1 

3.8 

5.7 

-0.4 

5.2 

4.9 

1.3 

-1.0 

1.5 

373.3

11.4 

11.9 

9.0 

397.4

Aggregate or component 

Aggregate

1. Ml
2.  M22
3.  M3

Selected components

4. Currency

5. Demand deposits

6. Other  checkable deposits

-11-2 

-11.7 

-18.8 

-24.3 

-34.0 

-19.2 

-24.1 

337.5

7. M2  minus M13

6.7 

10.9 

8.1 

9.9 

9.5 

8.6 

9.0 

2573.8

8.  Savings deposits
9.  Small  time deposits
10. 

Retail  money market  funds

-3.4 
14.9 
20.1 

3.5 
8.4 
36.9 

7.8 
4.2 
16.5 

14.9 
2.4 
13.0 

18.3 
-0.9 
9.0 

14.3 
-1.8 
15.6 

14.9 
0.2 
12.7 

1165.5
933.6
474.7

11.  M3  minus M24

14.2 

12.2 

5.4 

-5.1 

17.3 

28.9 

14.1 

945.3

12. 
13. 

14. 
15. 

Large time deposits,  net5
Institution-only money market

mutual  funds

RPs
Eurodollars

15.4 

13.2 

17.2 

5.5 

-2.6 

15.3 

7.3 

421.8

22.9 
4.5 
10,3 

27.7 
-5.1 
13.3 

9.3 
-16.2 
-6.9 

12.9 
-60.3 
-15.8 

17.5 
51.2 
33.4 

70.0 
8.5 
5.2 

32.8 
0.7 
5.7 

243.1
184.6
92.6

Memo

16.  Monetary base
17.  Household M2 6

Memo

Selected managed liabilities
at  commercial  banks:

Large time  deposits,  gross
Net due to  related foreign

18. 
19. 

institutions

20.  U.S.  government deposits
at  commercial  banks

4.1 
4.3 

1.7 
7.1 

2.6 
4.3 

5.0 
5.4 

0.6 
3.6 

-4.1 
5.3 

0.1 
4.6 

433.7
3293-9

Average monthly change  (billions of  dollars) 7

6.4 

4-9 

-0.8 

-0.4 

1.3 

5.8 

-0.3 

6.8 

8-6

6.6

1.5 

-1.8 

4.3 

-6.5 

-2.7

443.7

276.8

12.5

1. For  the years  shown, fourth  quarter-to-fourth quarter percent  change. For  the  quarters  shown, based  on

quarterly  averages.

2. Sum of  seasonally adjusted Ml,  retail money market  funds,  savings deposits, and small  time deposits.
3. Sum of retail  money  funds,  savings deposits, and  small time  deposits, each seasonally adjusted separately.
4. Sum of  large  time deposits,  institutional money  funds, RP liabilities  of depository  institutions, and

Eurodollars held by U.S.  addressees, each  seasonally adjusted separately.

5. Net of holdings of depository  institutions, money market  mutual  funds,  U.S.  government,  and  foreign  banks

and official institutions.

6. M2  less  demand deposits
7. For the years  shown,  "average monthly change"  is  the  fourth  quarter-to-fourth quarter dollar  change,

divided by 12.  For  the  quarters shown,  it  is  the quarter-to-quarter dollar  change,  divided by  3.

p--Preliminary.  n.s.a.--Not  seasonally adjusted.

Note:  Data  incorporate  revisions  from the  annual benchmark and  seasonal  review, as well  as  a redefinition

of  the M2  aggregate, involving  a shift of  overnight  RPs and Eurodollars to non-M2 M3.

III-9

March,  largely  propelled by  a surge in  demand deposits.  M1  could

get  could  get  a further  boost  at  the  end  of March  with the

introduction  of  the  new  $100  bill:  Overseas  demand  for the  current

$100  bill  reportedly  has  been weak  in  anticipation  of  the  new bill.

The  growth of bank credit  slowed  to  a tepid  3-1/2  percent  rate

in  February  (table) with  a deceleration  in  loans more  than

offsetting  an  uptick  in  securities.  All major  categories  of  bank

lending weakened  in  February,  and preliminary data  point  toward

continued  sluggish  growth  in  March.  Bank  securities  portfolios

expanded  considerably  in  February, with  much of the  increase

concentrated  at  branches  and  agencies  of  foreign  banks.

To  an  extent,  the weakening  in consumer  lending  in February

probably  reflected  a rapid  pace  of securitizations.  Even  adjusting

for  securitizations,  however, bank  consumer  loans  expanded at  a pace

well  below that  over  much  of  last  year.  Although delinquency  and

chargeoff rates  for  consumer  loans  have  turned up  in  recent  months,

the  January  Senior Loan  Officer  Opinion  Survey  indicated  only  a

slight  tightening  in  lending  standards  for  consumer loans.

Business  loans  expanded  at  a 6 percent  pace in  February--down

considerably from the  previous month,  but  about  in  line with the

average  growth  over  the  final months  of  last  year.  The  deceleration

in  business  loans  has  likely  reflected moderation  in  demand,  as

banks  reportedly  remain willing  lenders  and have  been  pricing  loans

attractively.  Indeed,  the  February  Survey of Terms  of Bank Lending

shows  a narrowing  of  spreads  over  the  federal  funds  rate  on  loans

larger  than  $100,000.  The  average  spread  on  business  loans  has  now

fallen  to  levels  not  seen  since  the  mid-1980s  (chart).  Call  Report

data  for the  fourth  quarter of  1995  indicate that  delinquency  and

charge-off  rates  for  C&I  loans  are  at  or near  their  lows  for  the

series  (chart).

III-10

COMMERCIAL  BANK  CREDIT
(Percentage  change;  seasonally  adjusted annual  rate) 1

Type of credit

r1995 

1995 

Q3 

1995 
Q4 

1995 
Dec 

1996 
Jan 

1996 
Feb 

Level,
Feb
1996
(billions of S)

1. Total  loans and  securities 

8.5 

6.0 

4.8 

3.6 

8.5 

3.4 

3,635.2

2.  Securities

3.4 

-4.2 

3.4 

3.0 

-1.0

6.4 

995.9

3. 

U.S. government

-2.9 

-1.6 

4.1 

-5.0 

-14.0 

21.5 

717.1

4. 

Other2

5.  Loans 3

6. 

7. 

Business

Real  estate

24.8 

-10.7

1.6 

24.2 

31.9 

-30.2 

278.8

10.6 

10.0

5.4 

3.9 

12.1

2.2 

2,639.3

9.2 

6.8 

5.7 

10.9

6.0 

728.6

8.4 

8.8 

3.4 

.4 

7.4 

3.2 

1,086.7

Home  equity

5.2 

5.2 

3.1 

6.1 

7.6 

3.0 

79.9

Other

8.7 

9.1 

3.4 

.2 

7.2 

3.2 

1,006.8

10. 

Consumer

9.7 

4.8 

4.9 

10.7

.0 

497.6

Adjusted 4

16.2 

15.5 

14.3 

14.6 

11.9

8.7 

627.1

12. 

Security

6.1 

-3.7 

-48.7 

17.4

8.6 

84.5

13. 

Other

17.4 

20.9 

15.0 

32.3 

38.6 

-10.8 

241.9

1. Monthly levels  are pro rata averages  of Wednesday  data. Quarterly  and  annual  levels  (not shown)  are  simple
averages of monthly levels and levels  for the fourth quarter respectively.  Growth  rates shown are  percentage  changes in consecutive
levels,  annualized  but  not compounded.
2. Includes  municipal securities,  foreign  government securities,  corporate  bonds,  equities,  and  trading  account assets.
3. Excludes  interbank loans.
4. Includes  estimates  of consumer  loans that  have been  securitized  by banks  and  are  still outstanding.
5. Includes  loans to  nonbank  financial  institutions, farmers,  state and  local  governments,  banks abroad,  foreign
governments,  and all others  not elsewhere  classified.  Also includes  lease financing  receivables.

III-11

Loan  Performance  at  Commercial  Banks
(Quarterly,seasonally  adjusted)

Delinquency  rates

Percent

Charge-off  rates

Percent

1987 

1989 

1991 

1993 

1995

1985 

1987 

1989 

1991 

1993 

1995

Note: Data  are  from  FFIEC's quarterly Reports of Condition.  Delinquent loans include those  past due 30  days or more  and still  accruing interest, as well  as
those on  nonaocrual  status.Charge-off  rates are annualized, net of recoveres.  Before 1987,  the dataon delinquency rates  are for domestic  loans only.

Quarterly Survey  of Terms  of Bank Lending
Spread  of Average  Loan  Rate  Over  Intended  Federal  Funds  Rate

Percent. NSA

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995

1996

Percent

Percent

Measures  of Profitability at  U.S.  Commercial  Banks
(Annual)

1971 

1973 

1975 

1977 

1979 

1981 

1983 

1985 

1987 

1989 

1991 

1993 

1995

III-12

Growth of  real  estate  loans  dropped  off in  February, perhaps

slowed by  securitizations  of fixed  rate  mortgages  originated  in

recent  months.  Delinquency  and  charge-off  rates  on bank  real  estate

loans  fell  to  record  lows.  The decline  in  the  overall  delinquency

rate  of bank  real  estate  loans  was  largely  associated with

improvements  in  commercial mortgage  loan  performance.  In  contrast,

delinquency  rates  on  single-family  residential  loans  at banks  edged

up  over  1995.

With most measures  of  loan  performance quite  favorable,  banks

remained  highly profitable  in the  fourth quarter,  pushing their

return on  assets  for  the  year  to  a level  just  short  of the  record

set  in  1993  (chart).  Low provisioning  for loan  losses,  cuts  in

deposit  insurance  premiums,  and  strong fee  income  helped buoy  bank

profits  last  year.  Given  the  ongoing  cost  cutting  and  consolidation

efforts in  the  industry, market  participants  appear to  be  looking

for  another  strong  earnings year  for  banks  in  1996.  Overall, bank

stock prices  have  climbed  substantially  this  year,  generally

outpacing broad market  averages.

Preliminary  Call  Report  data  for the fourth quarter  indicate

savings  associations  expanded  assets,  albeit  slightly,  last  year  for

the first  time  since  1988  while their  return on  assets  was

essentially unchanged from  the previous  year.  Clouding the  outlook

somewhat for  thrifts  is  the  gap  in  deposit  insurance  premiums

between BIF- and  SAIF-insured  institutions, which  industry

representatives  say  is  impairing  their  competitive  position and

encouraging them  to  pursue nondeposit  funding more  aggressively. 2

Both  the FDIC  and  the  Treasury have  expressed concern  that  if

legislation to  restructure  SAIF  is  not  enacted  soon,  large  declines

2. Only  slight  evidence  of these  effects  is  evident  in  fourth-

quarter  Call Report  data.  The  incentives to pursue  nondeposit
funding may have  been held  in check to  some extent  last year by  the
expectation that  Congress  would  resolve  the premium disparity issue.

in  the  SAIF  deposit base  might ensue--leaving  SAIF  insurance

premiums insufficient  to  cover  the  interest  on  Financing  Corporation

III-13

(FICO) bonds.

Business Finance

Public  bond  issuance  by  nonfinancial  corporations  remained

strong  through mid-February  as  many firms  took  advantage  of  low

rates  to  lock  in  favorable  long-term funding  and pay  down higher

cost  debt.  However, the  backup  in  long-term rates  since  mid-

February has  greatly depressed bond  offerings.  At  the  same  time,

nonfinancial  commercial  paper  has  increased  quite  a bit  in  recent

weeks,  fueled  primarily by merger  financing.

Gross  equity  issuance by nonfinancial  firms  picked up  in

February and  remained  substantial through mid-March.  Data  on

registrations  point to  a continued  hefty pace  of issuance  in  the

near term.  Initial  public  offerings  have  accounted  for  nearly one-

half of total  nonfinancial  equity issuance  since  the  fourth  quarter

of  last year--an  unusually high  share--as many rapidly  growing

companies  have  taken  advantage  of the  funding  opportunities provided

by the  ebullient  stock market.

Even with the  pickup  in total  gross  issuance,  net  issuance has

remained  negative  because  of the  continuing  wave of  equity

retirements.  In  addition to merger activity,  share  repurchase

programs have  been a  significant  factor driving  retirements  of

equity  shares.  Firms  undertaking  repurchase programs  have  generally

been  quite  profitable,  and  they  generate  cash  flow well  in  excess  of

that  needed to  fund  current  capital  expenditures  and  dividends

(chart).  Many  firms  that  have  implemented  repurchase programs  have

also deployed  excess  funds  to  pare  debt  outstanding,  leaving their

leverage  ratios  little  changed  on  balance  (chart).

III-14

GROSS OFFERINGS  OF  SECURITIES  BY U.S. CORPORATIONS 1
(Billions of dollars;  monthly  rates,  not  seasonally adjusted)

Type  of  security 

1994 

1995 

Q3 

Q4 

Dec. 

1995 

1996
Jan. P   Feb. P

All U.S. corporations 

Stocks 2  
Bonds 

40.61 
5.49 
35.12 

46.52 
6.10 
40.42 

48.19 
6.42 
41.77 

49.65 
7.80 
41.85 

40.24 
5.70 
34.54 

43.34 
4.84 
38.50 

52.58
8.58
44.00

Nonfinancial  corporations
Stocks 2  

Sold  in  U.S. 
Utility 
Industrial 

Sold abroad 

Initial  public  offerings 
Seasoned  equity  offerings 

Bonds 

Sold  in  U.S. 
Utility 
Industrial 

Sold  abroad 

By  quality 3

Aaa  and Aa 
A  and  Baa 
Less  than Baa 
Unrated or  rating unknown 

Financial  corporations
Stocks^ 

Sold  in  U.S. 
Sold  abroad 

Bonds 

Sold  in  U.S. 
Sold abroad 
By  quality 3

Aaa  and Aa 
A and  Baa 
Less  than  Baa 
Unrated or  rating unknown 

3.10 
2.89 
.38 
2.51 
.22 

1.14 
1.96 

7.35 
6.45 
2.19 
4.26 
.90 

.58 
3.82 
2.01 
.01 

2.64 
2.38 
.25 

4.39 
4.04 
.29 
3.75 
35 

1.70 
2.68 

9.66 
8.44 
2.83 
5.61 
1.22 

1.07 
5.38 
1.95 
.04 

1.73 
1.71 
.02 

4.61 
4.32 
.22 
4.11 
.29 

1.29 
3.32 

9.01 
7.69 
2.89 
4.81 
1.32 

.66 
4.82 
2.12 
.08 

1.84 
1.80 
.03 

5.75 
5.30 
.33 
4.97 
.45 

2.51 
3.24 

10.62 
9.46 
3.26 
6.20 
1.16 

1.29 
5,94 
2.19 
.04 

2.09 
2.04 
.04 

3.98 
3.78 
.47 
3.31 
.20 

1.86 
2.12 

8.88 
8.24 
2.37 
5.87 
.64 

1.13 
5.64 
1.36 
11 

1.72 
1.72 
.00 

3.25 
3.11 
.35 
2.76 
.14 

1.20 
2.06 

9.95 
9.20 
3.75 
5.45 
.75 

1.38 
5.84 
1.90 
.08 

1.58 
1.58 
.00 

4.78
4.60
.89
3.70
18

2.25
2.53

10.45
9.70
4.30
5.40
.75

.75
5.19
3.74
.02

3.84
3.80
.04

27.77 
23.98 
3.78 

30.76 
25.63 
5.14 

32.76 
26.72 
6.03 

31.23 
27.96 
3.27 

25.66 
23.98 
1.68 

28.55 
20.80 
7.75 

33.55
28.30
5.25

3.72 
9.02 
.31 
.10 

3.86 
10.37 
.11 
.23 

4.42 
9.83 
.13 
11 

2.56 
10.46 
.07 
.30 

2.83 
8.69 
.04 
.39 

2.75 
9.35 
.10 
.28 

2.15
10.41
.10
.03

Note.  Components may  not  add  due  to  rounding.
1.  Securities  issued  in  the private  placement market  are not  included.  Total

reflects gross proceeds  rather  than par value of  original  discount bonds.

2.  Excludes  equity  issues  associated with equity-for-equity swaps  that have

occurred in  restructurings.

3.  Bonds  categorized according  to Moody's bond  ratings,  or  to  Standard & Poor's

if  unrated by  Moody's.  Excludes mortgage-backed and asset-backed bonds.

p  Preliminary.

III-15

Companies  with  New  Repurchase  Programs

Income-to-Assets

Median

Percent

Percentage points

Change  in Debt-to-Equity  Ratio

Median 

New  programs

New  programs

J 

I 

I 

1986 

I 

II 
1989 

I 

I 
1992 

I
I 
1995 

I 

I 

I 
_ 
1986 

I 
I 
1989 

I 

I 
19

I 
92

I 
I
1995

Source.  Staff estimates from  Compustat.  1995  figures are based on data  through the  third quarter.

Rating Changes  for Nonfinancial Corporations

Amount  of Debt Affected

Billions of dollars,  annual rate
-1

H1 

Upgrades

Li

1989 

1991 

1993

1995 

1996

Ll 

]  t  U

1985 
Source.  Moody's Investor Service.
* Through  March  5.

1987 

Rating Activity in 1996
(Amount of debt affected,  billions of dollars)
Utility 

Retail 

Total 

Merger 

Other

Rating  Changes 
(through  March  5)

Watchlist 
(as  of March  5)

- Net  Downgrades*  -

6.6 

46.6 

4.1 

3.1 

2.9 

-0.5 

26.6 

7.7 

0.2

9.2

*  Volume  of debt downgraded  less volume  upgraded.
Source.  Moody's  Investor Service.

III-16

TREASURY FINANCING
(Billions of  dollars;  total  for  period)

Item 

1995 

04 

1996

QIp 

Jan. 

Feb.e 

Mar.

Total  surplus/deficit  (-) 

-55.9 

-81  2 

19.3 

-47  5 

-53.0

Means  of  financing  deficit
Net  cash  borrowing  and
repayments  (--) 

Nonmarketable 
Marketable 
Bills 
Coupons 

33.3 
.14.9 
48.2 
18.2 
30.0 

58.8 
11  3 
70.0 
45.0 
25.0 

-4,7 
10.6 
5.9 
-3.4 
9.3 

49.9 
-0.5 
50.4 
34.8 
15  7 

13.6
-0.1
13,7
13  7
0.0

Decrease  in  cash balance 

17.5 

5.6 

17.0 

6 3 

16.3

Other 1  

5  1 

16.9 

2.4 

-8.7 

23.1

Memo:
Cash  balance,  end  of  period 

20.5 

14.9 

37.5 

31  2 

14.9

Note,  Data reported  on  a payment  basis.  Details may  not  sum to

totals  because  of  rounding,

p  Projection.
e  Estimate.
1  Accrued  items,  checks  issued  less  checks  paid,  and  other

transactions.

NET  CASH BORROWING  OF  GOVERNMENT-SPONSORED

ENTERPRISES

(Billions of  dollars)

Agency 

FHLBs 
FHLMC 
FNMA 
Farm Credit  Banks 
SLMA 

Q3 

13.8 
3.1 
6.3 
1 9 
0.4 

1995 
04 

6.3 
8.4 
22.0 
1,6 
-4,1 

Dec. 

Jan. 

Feb.

1996

4.2 
4.4 
9.4 
0.7 
-3.0 

1  3
-8.5 
2.9
0.9 
6.5
-1.5 
1 3 
1 1
n.a,  n.a

Note.  Excludes  mortgage  pass-through securities  issued

by FNMA  and  FHLMC.

n.a.  Not  available,

III-17

Overall,  nonfinancial business  credit  quality  this  year  appears

to  have  slipped  just  a bit.  The  volume  of  credit  rating downgrades

has  exceeded  upgrades by  a small  margin,  and Moody's  Watchlist  of

potential  actions  includes many more  new potential  downgrades  than

upgrades  (chart).  Utilities,  facing  changes  in  regulation  and  new

competition,  and  retailers,  facing market  saturation, have  accounted

for  all  of the  volume  of  downgraded  debt  and  for  nearly two-thirds

of the  debt  under  review for  a downgrade.  In  addition,  ratings

actions  this  year  have  reflected  the  agencies'  growing  concern with

the  debt  service  obligations  implicit in  some  recent merger

transactions.  Still,  signs  of  deteriorating  credit  quality  in the

nonfinancial business  sector have not  produced  any  notable  market

reaction.  Spreads  of  investment-grade  bond  yields  over Treasuries

have  changed little  since  year-end, while  spreads  in  the  junk bond

market,  where  defaults have  been running below  last year's  pace,

have  narrowed.

Treasury Finance

Secretary Rubin's decision  to  disinvest several  government

trust  funds  for up  to  $19.9  billion,  along with  congressional

approval  a $29  billion increase  in the  debt  ceiling until March  15,

allowed the Treasury to  hold  normal  coupon  auctions  in  January  and

February  and  to  cover  social  security  payments  in early March.  A

further temporary increase  in  the  debt  ceiling  enacted  earlier this

month  allowed the  Treasury to  continue  borrowing until  March  29.

Longer-term solutions  to  the  debt  ceiling  problem are  currently

being  considered by the  Congress;  one  proposal  recently  approved  by

both  houses  contains  a longer-lasting debt  limit  extension  tied  to

provisions  for  a line  item veto.

State  and  Local  Government  Finance

III-18

The  general  pattern  of tax-exempt  borrowing has  paralleled  that

in the  nonfinancial  business  sector.  Until  mid-February, state  and

local  governments  had  been issuing substantial  gross  volumes  of

long-term debt  targeted,  in part,  to  refund  existing  higher  cost

debt.  With the  backup  in  long-term  interest  rates,  refunding

volumes  have  diminished  substantially.  On  net,  debt  continues  to

contract  as  heavy retirements  outpace  new issues.

GROSS  OFFERINGS  OF MUNICIPAL  SECURITIES
(Monthly rates,  not  seasonally  adjusted,  billions  of  dollars)

1994 

1995 

03 

04 

Jan. 

Feb.

1995 

1996

1. Total tax-exempt 

16.1 

14.9 

15.3 

17.2 

11.9 

13.1

2.  Long-term 
3. 
4. 

Refundings 
New  capital 

12.8 
4.0 
8.8 

12.1 
3.6 
8.5 

5. 

Short-term 

3.3 

2.8 

11.2 
3.9 
7.3 

4.1 

6. Total  taxable 

.7 

.7 

.6 

15.5 
5.3 
10.2 

1.7 

1.3 

11.1 
5.1 
6.0 

.8 

.4 

11.0
5.2
5.8

2.1

.3

Note:  Includes  issues  for  public  and private  purposes.
1. Includes  all  refunding bonds,  not  just  advance  refundings.

Yields on  municipal  bonds  rose  less  than  those  on comparable

Treasuries  between  year-end  and  late  February, apparently  reflecting

fading  concerns  over  prospective  "flat  tax"  reforms that  might

affect  the value  of the tax-exemption for interest  on municipal

bonds.  In  recent  weeks,  the  ratio  of tax-exempt  to Treasury  yields

on  longer-term securities has  backed up,  possibly  in response to  the

growing  backlog of  issues that  have  been postponed  since  rates

climbed  (chart).

III-19

Value  of  Municipal  Long-Term  Debt  Rating  Changes

Billions of dollars

I  Upgrades

SDowngrades

I  I

I 

I

1995

Q3 

04

-$  Billions-

3.2 

-54.9 

8.0

-4.0

Upgrades

Downgrades

1990 

1991

1992

1994

Source:  Standard  & Poors

Tax-Exempt  to Taxable  Ratio

Ratio

J  FM  A  M  J 

J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J 

J  A  S  O  N  D  J  FM  A

Note.  Bloomberg's  30-year and  1-year AAA G.O. yields relative to comparable  maturity  Treasury yields.

1994 

1995 

1996

III-20

MBA  Indexes  of Mortgage  Loan  Applications
(Seasonally adjusted  by Board  staff)

March  16,  1990 =  100

Purchase Index

Weekly

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996

Refinancing  Index

Weekly

March  16, 1990  =  100

1800

1500

1200

900

600

300

1990 

1991

1992 

1993 

1994

1995

1996

III-21

In  the  fourth  quarter,  Standard  and  Poor's  upgraded  about  $8

billion of  debt  and  downgraded  about  $4 billion  (chart),  but  for  the

year as  a whole,  the  dollar  volume  of downgrades  exceeded  upgrades

by  a sizable margin.  These  rating  actions  reflected  problems  for  a

few  large  cities  and  counties  and the  utility sector,  but  have  not

affected the  bulk of  state  and  local  issuers.  Quality  spreads  on

long-term municipal  debt  have  remained  rather  narrow since  the

beginning  of  1995.

Mortgage  Markets

Data  on  mortgage  lending in  the  current  quarter  suggest  that

credit  growth may  have  slowed  a little.  Consistent  with the  backup

in mortgage  rates,  the Mortgage  Bankers  Association's  index of  loan

applications  for  home  purchases  in  the  first  quarter  is  running

about  8 percent  below the  fourth  quarter  of  last  year  (chart).  The

refinancing index  also has  declined  sharply  and  is  likely  to  show

further  weakness  in  coming  reports.  Partial first-quarter  data  for

securitized mortgage  credit  reveal  a continued  climb in  gross

issuance  of mortgage-backed  securities,  evidently  fueled  by the

large  share  of  fixed  rate mortgage  originations  in  recent  months

(chart).  Most  new issuance has  been  in the  form of pass-through

securities,  but  the  CMO market--which had  been moribund  until very

recently--has  shown  some  stirrings with  an  appreciable  pickup  in

issuance  this  year.

The  MBA's  broadest measure  of home mortgage  delinquency rates

was  about  unchanged  in  the  fourth  quarter  at  4.25  percent.  The

average  delinquency  rate  on loans  thirty days  or more past  due  rose

9 basis  points,  to  2.95  percent  (chart).  By  contrast,  the  average

delinquency  rate  on mortgages  sixty days  or more  past  due  was

unchanged  last  quarter, while  delinquency  rates  on  loans  ninety days

or  more past due  moved  down  8 basis points.

III-22

Issuance  of Agency Mortgage  Pass-Through  Securities
(Not  seasonally adjusted)

Billions  of dollars

Monthly

Gross  Issuance

-

50

Jan.

.*  Jan.-

Net  Issuance

.9 

a;.

:" 

.7.,

..

* 

* 

9 

.

*

- . -'
*
' 

4

-

.

* 
.9  .

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I

II 

I 

I 

I

1985 

1986

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996

Home  Mortgage  Loan  Credit Performance
(Seasonally adjusted)

30  days or more  past due

L."

60 days or more past due

.. 

4.4*.

Percent

7

6

5

4

3

01

-

-1

I  | 

1968 

|r  1  I t, 
1972 

1970 

1974 

I 
I 
1976 

I 
I 
1978 

,
1980

1 

I 

I 

I 

I 

1982 

1984 

1986 

1988 

I
""' 
' 
1990

'
1992 

1994 

1996

Source: Mortgage  Bankers  Association

III-23

Several  trade  reports  indicate  that mortgage  credit  quality

problems  have been  concentrated  in  loans  originated  in  recent  years.

For  example,  an  analysis  of  25  million  to  30 million loans  across

thirty-five  states  by Mortgage Research  Group--a New Jersey-based

market  research  firm--indicates  that  mortgages  originated  in  1994

and  1995  are  experiencing much higher rates  of  foreclosure than  more

seasoned  loans.  Moreover, compared  with  loans  originated  in  1992

and  1993,  default  rates  on the  newer mortgages  have  reached levels

in  only a few months  after  closing  that typically  are  not  observed

until  after a few years  of seasoning.  The  upward  trend  in  default

rates  and  foreclosures  is  evident in  all  regions  of  the  country, but

the  incidence  is  greatest  in the  West, where  real  estate  prices  in

many  states have  remained  depressed.

To  some  extent,  the  poorer  performance  of  recently  originated

loans  is  consistent with the  reported  easings  of lending standards

by mortgage bankers  in  recent  years.  Not  surprisingly,  for  example,

both  lenders  and  mortgage insurers  have  begun to  report that  loans

originated  in the  past two  years  under  special  "affordable" home

loan  programs have  performed especially poorly. 3

Consumer  Credit

Consumer installment  credit  continued  to exhibit  brisk growth

in  January, increasing at  a 12  percent  seasonally adjusted  annual

rate  after  an upward-revised  11-1/2  percent  gain in December

(table).  Nevertheless, over the  past  few months,  the  pace  of

consumer  credit  growth  appears  to  have  slowed a notch from that

reached  in  1994  and  early last  year  (chart).  Slowing  growth in

February at  commercial banks,  which  account  for nearly half of total

3. Affordable  housing  loans  refer to  those  loans underwritten
using more  lenient  standards  for  certain  key  risk factors,  including
loan-to-value  ratios,  required cash  reserves,  debt-to-income ratios,
and  credit  histories.

III-24

GROWTH  OF  CONSUMER CREDIT
(Percent change:  seasonally adjusted  annual  rate)

Tye of  credit 

1994 

193 

Q4 

De. 

Jan. 

11995 

995 

1996 

Memo:
Outstanding
Jan.  1996
(billions
of  dollars)

Installment 

Auto 
Revolving 
Other 

14.2 
13.1 
16.7 
12.5 

13.5 
11.4 
18.2 
10.0 

9.6 
12.6 
10.5 
4.6 

12.5 
14.3 
13.8 
8,4 

11.6 
14.4 
15.7 
2.1 

12.1 
9.3 
16.1 
9.8 

1.035.1
356.1
400.5
278.5

Noninstallment 

10.1 

8.5 

26.4 

-15.2 

.4 

7.3 

63.6

Total 

14.0 

13.2 

10.6 

10.7 

10.9 

11.8 

1.098-8

r  Revised.
p  Preliminary.

INTEREST RATES  ON CONSUMER LOANS
(Annual percentage rate)

Type  of  loan 

1994 

1995 

Aug. 

1995 
Nov. 

Dec. 

Jan. 

Feb.

1996

At commercial  banks !

New  cars  (48  month) 
Personal  (24  month) 
Credit cards 

8.1 
13.2 
16.2 

9.6 
13.9 

n.a. 

9.4 
13.8 

n.a. 

9.4 
13.8 
n.a. 

n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 

n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 

9.1
13.6

n.a.

Credit cards 2

All  accounts 
Accounts assessed

interest 

At auto  finance cos.

New  cars 
Used  cars 

n.a. 

16.0 

16.0 

15.8 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a. 

15.8 

15.9 

15.7 

n.a. 

n.a, 

9.8 
13.5 

9.8 
13.5 

10.9 
14.2 

10.8 
14.0 

10.5 
13.8 

9.7 
13.3 

n.a.

n.a.

n.a,
n.a.

Note. Annual  data  are  averages of  quarterly data  for  commercial bank rates  and of

monthly data  for  auto  finance  company rates.

1  Average  of  "most  common" rate  charged  for specified  type  and maturity during  the

first week  of the middle  month of  each  quarter.

2. The  rate  for  all accounts is  the  stated APR averaged across  all credit  card
accounts at  all  reporting  banks.  The  rate  for accounts  assessed interest is  the
annualized  ratio  of  total  finance  charges  at all  reporting banks  to  the  total
average  daily balances against  which  the  finance  charges were  assessed  (excludes
accounts  for which no  finance charges were assessed)

3. For monthly data.  rate  for all  loans  of  each  type  made  during the month

regardless  of  maturity.
n.a.  Not  available.

III-25

outstandings,  suggests  that  the  gradual  deceleration may have

continued  in  February  as  well.

A broad-based but modest  rise  in delinquency  rates  on  consumer

loans  occurred in  the  fourth  quarter.  Credit  card  delinquency

rates--calculated  from the  Call  Report  data--rose  each  quarter  in

1995,  approaching  4 percent  in  the  fourth  quarter  from a low  of  3.3

percent  in  the  second  half of  1994  (chart).  Even at  4 percent,

however, credit  card delinquency  rates  were  still  well below the

most  recent peaks  in  1991.  The American  Bankers Association  (ABA)

reported  a small  increase in  credit  card  delinquencies  for  the

fourth  quarter.  After  rising  sharply in the  final  quarter  of  1994

and  the  first  quarter  of  1995,  this  series  rose  only marginally  over

the  rest  of last  year.  The  ABA  recorded moderate  increases  in

delinquencies on  closed  end  loans  throughout  the year;  nevertheless,

this  series  is  still  much  closer to  its  lows than  its  highs  of the

past twenty years.

Delinquencies  on  auto  loans  at  the  captive  finance  companies

are  at  historically  levels,  but  may be  leveling  off  after  rising

steadily for  two  years.  (Readings on  delinquency rates  in  January

and  February are  at  about  the  same  level  as  in  the  fourth quarter  of

last  year.)  According  to  a  credit  manager  at  one  company,  the  climb

in  delinquency  rates  was  an  expected  side-effect  of efforts  to  sell

cars  by  liberalizing  lending  standards.  Delinquency  rates  at

captive  finance  companies  have  also been  boosted a bit  by the  shift

away  from  loans  toward  leasing  in  recent  years;  performance  data for

leases  are  not  included  in the  loan  delinquency rate  and  lease

customers  have  tended  to  be better-than-average  credit  risks.

The upturn  in  consumer  loan  delinquency rates  is  consistent

with the  recent  climb  in  personal  bankruptcies  over the past  few

quarters  (chart).  This  increase no  doubt  reflects  in  part  the  rise

III-26

Household  Borrowing  Experience

Growth  in Consumer  Installment  Credit
Quarterly change, seasonally adjusted  annual rate

Percent

1960 

1966 

1972 

1978

1984

1990

1996

Consumer  Loan  Delinquency Rates at Banks
Seasonally adjusted,  quarterly averages

Percent

\ 

Credit cards

All  loans

1983 
Source:  Call  report.

1985

1987

1989

1995

Nonbusiness Bankruptcy  Petitions  Filed
Seasonally adjusted, quarterly total

Per  100,000 persons

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

Iurl 

ui.I 

m-

1983

1985

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

Source:  Administrative  Office of the  U.S.  Courts;  seasonally adjusted at the  Federal  Reserve  Board.

III-27

in  debt  payment  problems but  also importantly an  increased

likelihood  for  individuals  to  declare bankruptcy as  a means of

dealing  with  financial  strains.  Some changes  in  federal  bankruptcy

law effective  last  year--principally  an  increase  in  the dollar

amount  of  assets  that  can be  exempted  from  liquidation--likely made

bankruptcy more  attractive to  troubled debtors.

Despite these  signs  of deterioration  in consumer

creditworthiness,  interest  rates  on  consumer loans  declined in  the

opening months  of  this  year.  The average most  common  rate  on  a

forty-eight-month new-car  loan at  banks  was  9.1  percent  in  the

Board's  quarterly  survey taken in  early  February,  down from 9.4

percent  in  November  and the  recent  high  of  9.8  percent  last  May.

Average  new-car  rates  have  dropped more  sharply  at  the  auto  finance

companies,  from  12  percent  last  March to  9.7  percent  in January.

This  drop  stems  partly from the  effect  of  special  reduced-rate

financing  programs  subsidized by the manufacturing parent  companies.

__

INTERNATIONAL  DEVELOPMENTS

INTERNATIONAL  DEVELOPMENTS

U.S.  International  Trade  in  Goods  and  Services

In December,  the  deficit  in  U.S.  international  trade  in  goods

and  services  remained  at  about  the  same  level  as  in  November.  Both

exports  and  imports  rose  1 percent  between November  and  December.

Data  for  January  are now scheduled  to  be  released  on  March  29.

NET TRADE  IN  GOODS  &  SERVICES
(Billions of  dollars,  seasonally adjusted)

Real  NIPA  1/
Net  exports  of  G&S 

1995 

Annual  rates 
1995 
03 

04 

02 

Monthly  rates
1995
Nov 

Oct 

Dec

-113.6 

-126.8  -114.3  -94.1

Nominal  BOP
Net  exports  of  G&S 

Goods,  net 
Services,  net 

-111.4 
-174.5 
63.0 

-133.4  -109.2  -87.5 
-194.6  -173.3  -152.1 
64.6 

64.1 

61.3 

-8.2 

-6.8 

-6.9

-13.7  -12.1  -12.2

5.5 

5.3 

5.4

1.  In billions  of  chained  (1992)  dollars.
Source.  U.S.  Dept.  of  Commerce, Bureaus  of Economic  Analysis and  Census.

In  the  fourth  quarter,  the  deficit  narrowed  to  a level  last

recorded  in  the  first  quarter  of  1994.  Exports  were  2.2  percent

higher than  in  the  third  quarter with  the  largest  increases  recorded

in machinery  (a wide  range  of  products)  and  services  (particularly

receipts  from foreigners'  travel  and  transportation  expenditures  in

the  United  States).  Imports  declined  0.5  percent,  with decreases

recorded  largely  in  automotive  products,  consumer goods,  and  oil.

Imports  of  non-oil  industrial  supplies  and  machinery  other  than

computers  and  semiconductors  declined  as  well.

The  trade  deficit  for  1995  was  only  slightly larger  than in

the  previous  year.  This  followed  two years  of  substantial  increases

in  the  deficit.  In  price-adjusted dollars,  a distinct  downturn

appeared during  the  second  half of  1995  in  imports  of  consumer

goods,  automotive  products,  non-oil  industrial  supplies  (especially

IV-1

IV-2

3-20-96

U.S.  International  Trade  in Goods  and  Services
(Seasonally adjusted annual  rate)

Net  Exports

NIPA Exports  and  Imports

Billions of  dollars

Ratio scale, billions of chained  (1992) dollars

1989  1990  1991  1992  1993  1994  1995  1996

1989  1990  1991  1992  1993  1994  1995  1996

Selected NIPA  Exports

Selected  NIPA  Imports

Ratio  scale, billions of chained  (1992) dollars

Ratio scale,  billions of chained  (1992) dollars

-

F/ 

Consumer goods

'-/,,

/

/'\

Industrial supplies

-,

S ' 
', 

",I 

Automotive /'

, 

-

Machinery
ex computers  &
semiconductors

I

I 
'I

Tnd.  supplies ex oil 

hinery
ex computers  &
semiconductors

I 

I 
1989  1990  1991  1992  1993  1994  1995  1996

I 1994  1995  19

I 

I 

1989  1990 
1989  1990  1991  1992  1993  1994  1995  1996

991  1992  1993  1994  1995  1

1220

1020

820

620

420

180

160

140

120

100

80

IV-3

U.S.  EXPORTS  AND  IMPORTS  OF  GOODS  AND  SERVICES
(Billions of  dollars,  SAAR,  BOP  basis)

Levels

1995 

3_ 

__ 
Q4 

1995

Mov 

Dec

-Amount  Change  j/
1995 
-03  __  Q 

Nov 

__ 

-1995

Exports_ of  G&S

791.2 

808.6 

811.0 

819.9

13.8 

17.4 

10.2

Goods  exports
Agricultural
Gold
Computers
Other  goods

Aircraft  & pts
Semiconductors
Other  cap  gds

Automotive
to  Canada
to  Mexico
to ROW

Ind  supplies
Consumer  goods
All  other

580.2
58.7
3.4
41.4
476-7

23.6
35.7
134.5

61.0
32.3
6.7
22.1

133.2
64.8
23.9

595.3
60.8
3.7
43.7
487  1

24.9
38.0
142.9

60.2
33.9
7.0
19.3

130.6
66.0
24.5

595.0
60.4
3.2
44.1
487.3

24.2
39.4
141.5

59.2
33.4
6.3
19.5

127.3
65.5
30.2

605.5
61  7
2.8
43.8
497.2

28.1
37,7
145.6

64.1
36.1
6.7
21.3

131.2
66.8
23.8

Services  exports

211.0 

213.2 

216.0 

214.4

9.5
5.2
-4.4
4.3
4.4

-7.5
3.0
4.6

2.2
1.0
0.2
1 1

1.4
0.3
0.5

15.2

2.1
0.4
2.3
10.4

1,3
2.3
8.4

-0.9
1.6
0.3
-2.7

-2.5
1.1
0.6

1.8 
2.5 
-0.1 

1.9
1.3
-1  7
2.2

-6.1
-0.2
1  2

I

10.5
1 .3
-0.5
-0.3
10-0

3.9
-1 7
4.1

5.0
2.6
0.5
1.9

3.9
1  3
-6.4

1.6

Imports  of G&S

900.4 

896.1 

891.6 

901.3 

-10.4 

-4.3 

7.2

9.7

Goods  imports

Petroleum
Gold
Computers
Other  goods

Aircraft  & pts
Semiconductors
Other  cap  gds

Automotive

from  Canada
from  Mexico
from  ROW

Ind  supplies
Consumer  goods
Foods
All  other

753.5
56.2
2.5
58,9
635.9

10.4
42.0
117.0

123.5
43.7
18.2
61  7

123.2
161.5
33.3
25.0

747.5
53.5
3.4
62.6
628.0

10.6
45.4
114.8

117.7
45.4
21  1
51.2

121.2
157  7
33.0
27.6

741.1
54.8
3.1
60.8
622.4

9.3

45.3
115.7

114.8
44.8
21.3
48.8

121.2
155.2
32.7
28.2

752.7
54.5
2.2
63.2
632.8

9.5
46.2
113.9

124.1
46.7
19.0
58.4

120.0
157.7
32.8
28.6

-11.8
-2.1
-8.3
5.8
-7.2

-0.8
4.8
-0.9

-5.0
0.9
0.6
-6.5

-4.4
-1.6
0.5
0.1

-6.0
-2.7
0.9
3.7
-7.9

0.3
3.4
-2.2

-5.8
1.8
2.9
*10.5

-2.0
-3.8
-0.2
2.6

-11.6
3.6
-1.8
-2.7
10.7

-3.8
0.4
0.7

0.6
-0.0

1  7
2.4

1.3
-5.0
-0.9
-1.5

11.6
-0.3
-0.9
2.4
10.4

0.2
0.9
1.8

9.2
1.9
-2.3
9.7

1  2
2.6
0.1
0.5

Services  imports

146.9 

148.6 

150.4 

148.6

4.3 

-1.9

Memo:
Oil  qty  (mb/d)
Oil  price  ($/bbl)

9.61 
16.00 

9.14 
16.02 

9.55 
15.71 

9.05
16.49

0.52
1.55

-0.47 
0.01 

0.71
-0.13

-0.50
0.78

1.  Change  from previous  quarter  or month.
Source.  U.S-  Dept.  of  Commerce, Bureaus  of  Economic Analysis  and  Census,

IV-4

metals),  and  capital  goods  (other than  computers  and  semi-

conductors).  All  of  these  categories  had been  on  an  upward

trajectory through  early  1995.  Exports  trended  upward  during  the

year  (although at  a slower  rate  than  a year  earlier).  Most  of  the

increase was  in  capital  goods  (even when  computers  and  semi-

conductors  are  excluded)  and  industrial  supplies.  Capital  goods

and  industrial  supplies  together account  for  nearly  70  percent  of

the  nominal  value  of  merchandise exports.

Oil  Imports

The  quantity  of  oil  imported  during  November-December  declined

slightly  from October  rates.  The  large  seasonal  inventory drawdown

offset  increases  in  oil  consumption.  Preliminary  Department of

Energy  statistics  indicate  that  in January-February  imports  should

fall  due  to  a continued  drawdown  in  oil  inventories.

The price  of  imported  oil  rose  slightly  in  November,  and  then

accelerated  in  December  and  January  resulting  in  a price  level  10

percent  above  that  of  January  1995.  Spot  WTI  rose  nearly  $0.20  per

barrel  in  February,  averaging  $19.07  per  barrel,  roughly unchanged

from  its  average  in  December.  Prices  have risen  during March  and

are  trading  in  the  $20.00  per  barrel  range.  Unusually  cold  weather

in  North America  and  Japan  as  well  as  weather-related  production

disruptions in  the  North  Sea  and  Australia helped keep  prices  firm.

Prices  have  also  been more volatile  -- spot  WTI  jumped  to  $23  per

barrel  in  intraday  trading  on  February  20  -- with  inventories

reported  to  be  at  very  low  levels.  Refiners have been  reluctant  to

build  inventories  because  of  the fear  of  a sharp  price  decline  if

negotiations  between  Iraq and  the  United Nations  for  a limited  oil

sale  result  in  an  additional  700,000  barrels  per  day of  oil  on world

markets.

IV-5

PRICES  OF  U.S.  IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS
(Percentage change  from  previous  period)

Annual  rates 
199 

02 

03 

04 

Nov 

Dec 

1995 

1996

Jan

_ 

Monthly  rates

Merchandise  imports

Oil
Non-oil

Foods,  feeds,  bev
Ind  supp  ex  oil
Computers
Capital  goods  ex  comp
Automotive  products
Consumer  goods

Merchandise  exports

Agricultural
Nonagricultural

Ind  supp  ex  ag
Computers
Capital  goods  ex  comp
Automotive products
Consumer  goods

8.5
36-3
5.8

-3.8
10.4
4.4
9.5
5.2
3.4

7.1
17.0
6.0

13.8
-2.4
3.9
-0.2
2.9

-BLS

-1  7
-29.7
1.8

prices
1  1
0.2
-1  1

0.8
5.5
-1.9
0.1
1.6
1.2

i.0
21  7
.1.5

-6.8
-6.9
2.3
0.9
0.7

7.5
0.1
7.3
-2.5
1.6
-0.0

0.0
23.0
-2.8

11.0
7.4
1.9
5.0
0.4

(1990=100)

0.2 
0.5 
0.2 

0.8
-0.2
0.3
0.5
0.0
0.2

-0.1
2.2
-0.4

-1.4
-0.6
0.3
0.2
0.2

0.4 
4.4 
0.0 

-0.9
0.0
-0.7
0.0
0.0
0.5

0.0
0.8
-0.1

0.1
0.0
-0.1
-0.1
-0.1

0.3
5.5
-0.3

-2.3
0.1
-0.5
-0.2
-0.3
-0.1

0.5
1.8
0.2

0.5
-2.2
0.4
0.0
0.3

-Prices in  the  NIPA  accounts  (1992=100)

Fixed-weight
Imports  of  gds  &  serv,
Non-oil  merchandise

Exports  of  gds  &  serv
Nonag merchandise

9.0 
4.8 

5.5 
4.8 

-2.3 
-1.2 

0.8 
-1.2 

-1.5
1.5

-0.4
-3.1

Oil Prices

3-20-96

Dollars per  barrel

Spot  West Texas  intermediate

1987 

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996

Prices  of Non-oil  Imports  and  Exports

IV-6

Prices  of  U.S.  non-oil  imports  decreased  in  January.  The

largest  declines were  in  food  prices.  In  addition,  there were

smaller  price  decreases  in most  other  major  trade  categories.  For

the  fourth  quarter  compared  with the  third  quarter,  prices  of non-

oil  imports  declined  1 percent  at  an  annual  rate;  this  followed ten

consecutive  quarters  of  price  increases.  The  largest  declines  were

in  capital  goods  and  foods.  In  addition,  the  rate  of  increase  in

prices  of imported  industrial  supplies  slowed  to  near  zero  in  Q4

from double-digit  rates  in  the  first  two  quarters  of  the year.  Data

for  February  are  scheduled  to  be  released  on  March  26.

Prices  of  exports  increased  in  January, the  largest  rise  since

April  1995.  Overall,  prices  of exports  have  changed  very little

since  mid-1995;  prices  of  exported  agricultural  products  have  risen

sharply  and  (until  January) prices  of  other  exported  products  have

declined.  Much  of  the  increase in  the  price of  total  exports  in

January  was  accounted  for  by  agricultural  commodities;  agricultural

export  prices  have  risen  at  double-digit  annual  rates  since  the

first  quarter  of  1995  in  response  to  disappointing  harvests  abroad

last  year  and  robust  world  demand.  The price  of  nonagricultural

exports  rose  moderately in  January--the  first monthly  increase  since

last  June.  Since  mid-1994, movements  in  nonagricultural  export

prices  have  been dominated  by  sharp  swings  in  the  prices  of  exported

industrial  supplies,  including  a runup through mid-1995,  a reversal

during  the  third  and  fourth  quarters  of  last  year,  and  a pickup  in

January.

U.S.  Current Account

IV-7

The  U.S.  current  account  deficit narrowed  $36.7  billion SAAR

in  the  fourth  quarter.  The  largest  changes  were  reductions  in  the

deficits  in  trade  (discussed above)  and  in  investment  income.

The  deficit  on  investment  income  narrowed  $14.5  billion  SAAR

in  the  fourth  quarter.  This  change was  more than  accounted  for  by

the  increase in  net  direct  investment  income.  Earnings  of  U.S.

direct  investors  abroad  improved  dramatically,  by over  $10  billion

SAAR,  lead  by  the  performance  of the  computer  industry;  profits  of

foreign  direct  investors  in  the  United  States  fell  marginally, in

line  with  anecdotal  reports  of  a weakening  of corporate  profits  in

the U.S.  domestic  economy.

For  the  year  1995,  the  current  account  deficit  was  virtually

unchanged  from  1994.

U.S.  CURRENT  ACCOUNT
(Billions of  dollars,  seasonally  adjusted annual  rates)

Goods  & services 
balance 

Investment 
income,  net 

Transfers, 

net 

Current  acct
balance

Years
1994 
1995 

Quarters
1994-1 
2 
3 
4 

1995-1 
2 
3 
4 

Memo:
$  Change
Q3-Q2 
Q4-Q3 

-106.2 
-111.4 

-92.1 
-107.7 
-115.2 
-109.9 

-115.6 
-133.4 
-109.2 
-87.5 

-9.3 
-11.4 

0.5 
-9.1 
-10.1 
-18.3 

-8.1 
-10.7 
-20.7 
-6.1 

-35.8 
-30.1 

-29.5 
-35.1 
-33.5 
-45.0 

-30.1 
-28.5 
-31.1 
-30.7 

-151.2
-152.9

-121.1
-151.9
-158.9
-173.1

-153.8
-172.6
-161.0
-124.3

24.1 
21.8 

-9.9 
14.5 

-2.7 
0.4 

11.6
36.7

Source.  U.S.  Department  of  Commerce, Bureau of  Economic Analysis.

IV-8

U.S.  International  Financial  Transactions

Foreign  official  reserve  assets  in  the  United  States  continued

to  increase sharply  in  January,  after  a record  $109  billion  increase

in  1995. 

(See line  1 of the  Summary  of  U.S.  International

Transactions  table.)  Much  of the  increase  in  January was  accounted

for by  a wide  range of  developing  countries  in  Asia  and  Latin

America.  Partial  data  for  February  from FRBNY  indicate  continued

increases  by  developing  countries  as  well  as  large  increases  by G-10

countries  associated with  foreign  exchange market  intervention.

Net  purchases  of  U.S.  corporate and  government  agency bonds  by

private  foreigners were  strong  in  January  (see line  4b).  Both U.S.

financial  corporations  and  government  agencies  have been actively

issuing bonds  in  global  markets  in  the  first  quarter.  Some  of  these

issues  have been  in  exotic  currencies  (for example,  South  African

rand,  Egyptian pound,  Polish  zloty,  and  Portuguese  escudo),  probably

to  hedge  exposure  or  to  take  advantage  of  swap  opportunities.

Net purchases  of U.S.  Treasury  securities by private

foreigners were  modest  in  January,  held  down by very  large  net  sales

by  financial  institutions  located  in  the  Caribbean  (line 4a). 

For

1995,  Caribbean  financial  centers  accounted  for  almost  40  percent  of

the  record  $100  billion  in  foreign  private  net  purchases  of  U.S.

Treasury  securities.  Part  of  the funding  to  finance  these  purchases

appears  to  have  come  from RP  transactions  with nonbank  securities

dealers  located  in  the  United  States,  contributing  to the  outflow

reported  in  line  3.  Net  purchases  of  Treasury  securities by

residents  of Japan  directly  from the  United  States  were  also

substantial  in  1995  and  in  January  1996.

Foreigners  continued  to  add  to  their  holdings  of  U.S.

corporate  stock  in  January  (line  4c).  For  the fourth  quarter  of

1995,  BEA has  added  an  estimate  of  stock  acquired  through  a merger-

IV-9

SUMMARY OF U.S. INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTIONS
(Billions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted except as noted)

Official capital

1. Change in foreign official reserve

asuets in U.S. (increase, +)

a.  G-10 countries

b.  OPEC countries

c.  All other countries

2.  Change in U.S. official reserve

assets (decrease. +)

Private capital

Banks

3.  Change in net foreign positions

of banking offices in the U.S. 1

Securities 2

4.  Foreign net purchases of

U.S. securities (+)
a.  Treasury securities3
b.  Corporate and other bonds 4

c.  Corporate stocks

5. 

U.S. net purchases (-) of

foreign securities

1994 

1995 

1995 

1996

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Dec 

Jan

37.9 

108.8

22.2 

37.2 

39.4 

10.1 

-2.8 

14.2

28.9

-3.3

12.3

5.3

32.9

4.3

71.6

-9.7

16.9

14.1

.4

4.8

-5.3

.2

23.2

-2.7

5.6

6.2

27.5

-1.9

3.2

-2.1

13.0

1.2

103.4

-30.7 

-8.6 

24.9 

-6.7 

9.6 

5.1

92.8 

188.9 

45.9 

51.3 

68.6 

23.0 

-11.8 

13.4

34.6

53.9

4.3

99.6

81.0

30.1

19.3

30.5

18.5

37.3

26.0

8.1

-3.5

2.4

5.3

1.8

-14.1

17.3

3.9

.2

2.1

2.4

9.1

2.0

-57.3

-97.6

-7.7

-22.8

-35.1

-32.1

-10.8

-10.8

a.  Bonds

b.  Stocks

-9.2 

-46.9 

-3.5 

-12.5 

-13.0 

-17.8 

-48.1 

-50.7 

-4.1 

-10.2 

-22.1 

-14.3 

-4.0 

-6.8 

-4.4

-6.4

Other flows  (quarterly data, s.a.)

6.  U.S. direct investment (-) abroad

-49.4

-96.9

-22.6

-17.2

-16.2

-40.9

7.  Foreign direct investment in U.S.

49.4

74.7

17,2

12.9

23.7

8.  Other (inflow. +)5

U.S. current account balance (s.a.l

-16.6

-151.2

8.7

-21.7

-59.7

17.3

-152.9

-38.5

-43.1

-40.3

-31.1

20.9

23.1

Statistical discrepancy (s.a.)

-14.3 

6.6 

19.1 

19.2 

-48.8 

17.2 

n.a

n.a

Note.  The sum of official capital, private capital, the current account balance, and the statistical

discrepancy is zero.  Details may not sum to totals because of rounding.

1. Changes in dollar-denominated positions of all depository institutions and bank holding companies
plus certain transactions between broker-dealers and unaffiliated foreigners (particularly borrowing
and lending under repurchase agreements). Includes changes in custody liabilities other than U.S.
Treasury bills.

2. Includes commissions on securities transactions and therefore does not match exactly the data on

U.S. international transactions published by the Department of Commerce.

3. Includes Treasury bills.
4.  Includes U.S. goverment agency bonds.
5. Transactions by nonbanking concerns and other banking and official transactions not shown elsewhere

plus amounts resulting from adjustments made by the Department of Commerce and revisions in lines 1
through 5 since publication of the quarterly data in the Survey of Current Business.
n.a. Not available.  * Less than $50 million.

IV-10

related  stock  swap  (discussed below) to  the  reported  data,  bringing

BEA's  published  total  for  the  year  1995  to  $12.8  billion.

After  a weak  first  quarter  in  1995,  U.S.  net  purchases  of

foreign  securities  were  very strong;  that  strength  continued  in

January  1996  (line 5). 

Stock purchases  were  concentrated  in  the

industrial  countries.  Net  purchases  of  stocks  in  Japan were

particularly strong  in  January,  accounting  for  57  percent  of  the

total,  up  from  40  percent  for  1995.  In  contrast,  since  the Mexican

crisis  U.S.  investors  have  shown  limited  interest  in  adding to  their

holdings  of  stocks  or  bonds  from  developing  countries  in  Latin

America.  Interest  in  stocks  from  developing  countries  in Asia  was

better  maintained.

Data  recently  released  by  the Department  of  Commerce  indicate

that  direct  investment  inflows  and  outflows  rose  to  record  levels  in

1995  (lines  6 and  7). 

Large mergers  and  acquisitions  added

substantially to  the  flows  in  both  directions;  examples  include  the

takeover  of  Marion Merrell  Dow by Hoechst  and  the merger  of

Pharmacia  and  Upjohn.  The  latter  deal,  because  of the  way it  was

structured  (a stock swap  with the  new merged  firm incorporated  in

Delaware),  increased  U.S.  direct  investment  abroad,  but  this

increase was  balanced  by an  increase  in  foreign  holdings  of  U.S.

stock and  an  increase  in foreign  direct  investment  in  the  United

States.  In  addition,  privatizations  abroad  attracted  large

investments by  U.S.  firms.  In  contrast  to  U.S.  portfolio

investment,  direct  investment  outflows  to  Latin America  continued  to

grow  in  1995,  as  did  U.S.  direct  investment  flows  to  developing

countries  in  Asia.

IV-11

INTERNATIONAL BANKING  DATA

(Billions of  dollars)

1992 
Dec. 

c1993

Dec.

1994
Dec.

June 

1995
Sep.

Dec. 

Jan. 

Feb.

1996

1. Net  claims  of  U.S.

-71.6 

-122.1 

-224.0 

-235.3 

-244.3 

-260.0 

-273:6

-272.1

banking offices
(excluding IBFs)
on own  foreign
offices and  IBFS

a. U.S.-chartered

banks

17.0 

4.2 

-70.1 

-88.7 

-86.1 

-86.1 

-90.5

-88.1

b. Foreign-chartered

-88.6 

-126.3 

-153.9 

-147.6 

-158.2 

-173.9 

-183.1

-184.0

banks

2.  Credit  extended to

U.S. nonbank
residents
a. By foreign

branches of
U.S.  banks
b. By Caribbean
offices  of
foreign-chartered
banks

3. Eurodollar holdings
of  U.S.  nonbank
residents

a. At  all U.S.-

chartered banks and
foreign-chartered
banks  in  Canada  and
the  United Kingdom

b. At  the  Caribbean
offices  of
foreign-chartered
banks

24.8 

21.8 

23.1 

25.2 

25.7 

26.5 

27.6 

-27.8

n.a. 

90.9 

78.4 

85.3 

86.3 

86.3 

n.a. 

n.a.

90.0 

77.8 

85.6 

92.3 

94.6 

91.2 

94.4 

94.9

n.a. 

79.2 

86.0 

109.2 

89.9 

92.3 

n.a. 

n.a.

MEMO:  Data as recorded  in  the
4. Credit  extended to  U.S.

nonbank residents

U.S.  international  transactions  accounts

188 

195 

190 

209 

215

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a.

5. Eurodeposits  of U.S.

236 

231

289 

279 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a.

nonbank residents

1,  Data  on lines  1 through 3  are from Federal  Reserve sources and sometimes differ  in timing

from the banking data  incorporated in the U.S.  international  transactions accounts.

Lines  la,  lb,  and 2a  are averages  of  daily data reported on the  FR 2950  and  FR 2951.
Lines  2b and 3b are  end-of-period data reported quarterly on  the  FFIEC  002s.
Line  3a  is  an  average  of  daily  data  (FR  2050)  supplemented  by  the  FR  2502  and  end  of  quarter
the  series  in

data  supplied  by  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  the  Bank  of  England.  There  is  a  break  in 
April  1994.

Lines  4  and  5  are  end-of-period  data  estimated  by  BEA  on  the  basis  of  data  provided  by  the
It  includes  some  foreign-currency

BIS,  the Bank  of  England,  and  the  FR 2502  and  FFIEC  0028. 
denominated deposits and loans.  Source:  SCB

Foreign  Exchange Markets

IV-12

Since the  FOMC meeting  on  January  31,  the  exchange  value  of

the  dollar  depreciated  1/4  percent  against  the  yen,  3/4  percent

against  the mark,  and  1-3/4  percent  against  sterling.  On  a

weighted-average basis,  the  dollar  declined  1-1/4  percent.

In  the  first  half  of  the  intermeeting period  the  dollar

declined amid  changing  market  expectations  about  the  future  course

of  German  and  Japanese  monetary  policies.  In Germany,  stronger-than-

expected  growth  in  the  M3  money  supply  and  in  industrial  production

may  have  led  some  market  participants to  conclude  that  the

Bundesbank's  easing  cycle  had  ended.  This  perception was  reinforced

by  the Bundesbank's  announcement  on  February  1 that  it  would conduct

repurchase  operations  at  a fixed  rate  of 3.30  percent  at  the  tenders

on  February  7 and  14.  (The Bundesbank  announced  on March  14  that

the  repo  rate  will  remain  fixed  at  3.30 percent  through March  27.)

In  Japan,  data  releases  that  generally were  stronger  than  expected

suggested  that  monetary  tightening by  the  Bank of  Japan may  soon be

at  hand.  This  perception  was  reinforced  by  ill-timed  official

comments  that  pensioners  were  suffering from  low  interest  rates.

However,  in  late  February,  the  dollar  rebounded  due to  a

number  of  factors.  First,  incoming  data  suggested  that  economic

prospects  in  Germany  and  Japan were not  as  rosy  as  earlier  data  had

indicated,  while  economic  data  in  the  United  States  generally were

stronger than  expected.  In  Germany, business  confidence  dipped  in

January,  and  the  strong  growth  in  industrial  production  that  was

registered  in  December was  revised  sharply  downward.  Although  the

Japanese  Tankan  survey continued  to  climb  from  lows  recorded  in  late

1993,  the  rise  in  February was  not  as  strong  as  the  market  had

expected.  Second,  accommodative  money market  operations  by the  Bank

of  Japan have  signalled  that  monetary  tightening  is  not  imminent.

IV-13

Weighted  Average  Exchange  Value  of the  Dollar
(Daily data)

Index,  March  1973  =100

FOMC
Jan.  31

December 

January 

February 

March

Interest  Rates  in  Major  Industrial  Countries

Three-month  rates

Ten-year bond yields

Jan. 31  Mar  21 

Change

Jan. 31 

Mar  21 

Change

Germany

Japan

United Kingdom

Canada

France

Italy

Belgium

Netherlands
Switzerland

Sweden

Weighted-average

foreign

United States

3.30
0.56
6.19

5.30

4.25

9.81

3.30
2.98

1.69
7.67

4.23

5.24

3.25

0.59

6.00
5.19

4.12

9.81

3.24

3.12

1.75

6.80

-0.05
0.03

-0.19

-0.11

-0.13

0.00

-0.06
0.14

0.06

-0.87

4.15 

-0.08

5.32

0.08

_

0.60
0.04

0.62
0.65

0.34

0.45

0.48

0.61

0.01

0.44

5.88

3.14

7.42

7.04

6.35

6.48

3.18

8.04

7.69

6.69

10.19

10.64

6.82

6.51

4.12

8.66

6.34

5.90

4.11
8.22

6.30

5.60

6.74

0.44

6.28P

0.68

Note.  Change is  in percentage points,

p.  Preliminary

IV-14

Third,  the  dollar  may have  been  supported  by very heavy  intervention

purchases  by  the  Bank  of  Japan.

Except  in  France,  the  United Kingdom,  and  Sweden,  short-term

interest  rates  are  little  changed  on  net  since the  last  FOMC  meeting

as  monetary  policy has  remained  on  hold  in most G-10  countries.  The

Bank  of  France  reduced  its  intervention  rate,  the  effective  floor

for  short-term market  interest  rates,  by  a cumulative  amount  of

40  basis  points  as  the French franc  strengthened  somewhat  against

the  mark.  Citing  subdued  inflation  pressure  and below-trend  growth,

the  Bank of  England  reduced  official  rates  by  1/4  percentage  point

on  March  8.  In  Sweden,  the Riksbank  lowered  its  repo  rate  by

85  basis  points  cumulatively as  downward  pressure on  the krona,

which  followed  market  concerns  that  the  government was  wavering  in

its  commitment  to  fiscal  austerity, has  subsided,  and  incoming

inflation  data was  quite  favorable.  On March  21,  the  Riksbank

reduced  its  official  interest  rates  by  3/4  percentage  point,  and  the

Bank  of Canada  lowered  its  target  range  for  the  overnight  rate  by

1/4  percentage  point  to  4-3/4 to  5-1/4  percent.

Long-term  interest  rates  in most  G-10  countries  rose  over  the

intermeeting period.  Although the  increase  in U.S.  long-term  rates

is  consistent  with stronger-than-expected  data,  the backup  in  long-

term rates  in  some  other  G-10  countries,  particularly  in most

European  countries where  recent  data  releases  generally  have been

weaker  than  expected,  is more  difficult  to  explain.  The  rise  in

long-term  rates  in most  European  countries  may  reflect market

perceptions  that monetary  easing  in  Germany, and  by extension  in

most  other  European  countries,  has,  or  will  soon,  come  to  an  end  as

faster  growth  in  the  United  States  and  Canada may herald  strength  in

other  countries.  Higher European  long-term  rates may also  reflect

market  concerns  that  relaxation  of  the  Maastricht  fiscal  convergence

criteria,  in  order to  begin EMU  as  scheduled  in  1999,  may  lead  to

IV-15

higher  long-run  debt  positions  and,  perhaps,  inflation in  those

countries.  In  Japan,  long-term interest  rates  rose  earlier  in  the

intermeeting  period, but  declined  after  the  release  of  the  weaker-

than-expected  Tankan  survey  on  March  1, and  are  about  unchanged  on

balance.

In Mexican  financial  markets,  the  peso  declined  1-1/2  percent

against  the  dollar  over  the  intermeeting period.  The  Mexican  stock

market  declined  by  as  much  as  7 percent  as  interest  rates  on  peso-

denominated  cetes  obligations  rose  early  in  the  intermeeting  period

due  to  heightened  inflationary  concerns.  However,  in  recent  days,

interest  rates  have  reversed  direction,  and the  stock market  has

rallied.  On  balance,  one-month  interest  rates  are  up  2 percentage

points,  but  1-year  interest  rates  are  down  1/2  percentage  point,

since  the  last  FOMC  meeting.  The  Mexican  stock market  is  1 percent

lower  on  balance  since  January  31.

The  Desk  did  not  intervene  in  foreign exchange markets  over

the  intermeeting  period.

Developments  in  Foreign  Industrial  Countries

Economic  activity  remained  sluggish  late  last  year  on  balance,

as  real  GDP  contracted  or  registered  little  growth  in  many major

foreign  industrial  countries.  An  exception was  Japan, where  growth

picked  up  significantly,  and  a moderate  recovery appears  underway.

Indicators  for  the  current  quarter  are  limited,  but  point  to

continued moderate  growth  in  Japan,  and  incoming data  suggest  that

activity has  picked up  in  Canada.  In  contrast,  activity  still

appears  to  be  weak in Germany  and  France, while  indicators  for  the

United Kingdom  and  Italy have  been mixed.

Inflationary pressures  remain  subdued.  Prices have  fallen

further  in  Japan,  and  recent  consumer  price  inflation has  averaged

IV-16

2 percent  or  less  in  Germany, France,  and  Canada.  Italian  inflation

remains  high  but  has  slowed  considerably  in  the  past  couple  of

months.  U.K.  consumer  price  inflation has  been moderate,  while

producer  price  inflation  has  trended  downward.

Individual  country notes.  In Japan,  recently  released  fourth-

quarter  data  and  revised  third-quarter  data  show  sustained moderate

output  growth.  This  growth  has  been  led  by  large  increases  in

public  and  private  investment  and  moderate  increases  in  private

consumption.  In  the  fourth  quarter,  government  investment  accounted

for half  of  the  increase  in  total  fixed  investment.  Net  exports

have  been  a  significant drag  on  growth,  reflecting the  lagged  effect

of  yen  appreciation  in  early  1995.

JAPANESE  REAL  GDP
(Percent  change  from  previous  period,  SAAR) 1

1994 

1995 

1995

GDP 

Total  Domestic  Demand 
Consumption 
Investment 
Government  Consumption 
Inventories  (contribution) 

Exports 
Imports 
Net  Exports  (contribution) 
1.  Annual  changes  are  Q4/Q4.

0.4 

2.2 

Q1 
0.5 

Q2 
2.6 

0.4 
1.1 
-1.4 
0.6 
0.2 

9.0 
11.3 
-0.0 

1.3 
3.6 
0.4 
2.4 
5.8 
-2.1 
2.8  17.8 
0.2 
0.1 

3.7 
16.5 
-1.3 

-0.2 
8.0 
-0.8 

2.4 
2.9 
4.8 
-4.6 
-0.3 

17.9 
18.1 
0.2 

Q3 

2.3 

4.6 
4.7 
4.3 
1.0 
0.3 

-6.3 
12.6 
-2.1 

Q4

3.6

6.1
1.8
16.9
-1.5
0.3

4.7
28.4
-2.3

Prices  have  continued  to  fall.  The  February  CPI  for the  Tokyo  area

was  0.2  percent  below  year-earlier  levels,  while wholesale  prices  were

down  0.1  percent  over  the  same  period.  The  GDP  deflator  in  the  fourth

quarter  was  0.5  percent  below  its  level  four  quarters  earlier.

IV-17

JAPANESE  ECONOMIC  INDICATORS
(Percent  change  from  previous  period  except  where  noted,  SA)

1995 

1996 

1995 

1996

Industrial  Production 
Housing  Starts 
Machinery  Orders 
New  Car  Registrations 
Unemployment  Rate  (%) 
Job  Offers  Ratio1  
Business  Sentiment 2  
CPI  (Tokyo  area) 3  
Wholesale  Prices3  
1.  Level  of  indicator.
2. Percent  of manufacturing  firms  having  a  favorable  view  of  business

Nov 
Q1 
1.5 
n.a. 
4.5 
n.a. 
n.a. 
4.9 
n.a.  -1.4 
3.4 
n.a. 
0.63 
n.a. 
-- 
-12 
n.a.  -0.9 
0.0 
n.a. 

Dec 
0.8 
2.4 
1.1 
-1.6 
3.4 
0.64 
-- 
-0.5 
-0.3 

Q4 
2.3 
11.5 
5.9 
2.4 
3.3 
0.63 
-14 
-0.8 
-0.1 

Q3 
-2.3 
-1.2 
0.7 
5.1 
3.2 
0.61 
-18 
-0.2 
-0.9 

Jan 
0.0 
2.8 
5.7 
3.3 
3.4 
0.67 
--
-0.5 
-0.2 

conditions  minus  those  with  an  unfavorable  outlook.

Feb
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
1.7
n.a.
n.a.

-0.2
-0.1

3.  Percent  change  from  previous  year.

In  the  Bank of  Japan's  February  survey  (Tankan),  the  index of

business  sentiment  of major  manufacturing firms  (the percentage

having a favorable  view of business  conditions minus  the  percentage

with  an  unfavorable  outlook)  registered  -12,  slightly  less  negative

than the  previous  survey taken  in November.

The  current  account  surplus  has  continued  to  decline,

registering  about  $110  billion  for  the  year  1995,  down  about  $19

billion  from the  previous  year.  The  current  account  surplus

declined  again  in  January, and  trade data  for  February show  a

further  decline  in  the merchandise  trade  surplus.

For  nearly three  weeks,  the  opposition New Frontier  Party has

blockaded  the  entrance to  the  Budget  Committee  room  and  prevented

the  Diet  from  considering the  FY1996 budget.  This  blockade is  in

protest to  the  budget's  allocation of  ¥685  billion  ($6.4 billion)  of

public  funds  to  help  resolve  the  problem  of  insolvent housing  loan

companies  (jusen).  The  government  plans  to  introduce  a provisional

budget  for  the  first  few weeks  of the  fiscal  year  that  does  not

IV-18

include money  for  the  jusen while  it  tries  to  negotiate with  the

opposition  parties  on  the  regular  budget.

In  Germany, real  GDP  contracted  1.6  percent  (SAAR) during the

final  quarter  of  1995.  The  softening of  the  economy  in  1995

reflects  a slowdown  in  domestic  demand,  despite  a pickup  in  private

consumption spending  (to rates  slightly  below those typical  of  an

expansion).  Growth  in  investment  declined  in  1995,  as  construction

dropped  sharply  with  the  expiration of  assorted  tax  incentives  at

the  end  of  1994  that  had  accelerated building  plans  and,  more

recently,  from  the very  cold  winter,  while  spending  on  machinery and

equipment  was  little  changed.  Data  for  the  fourth  quarter  indicate

a  sizable  inventory correction,  which  could  bode  well  for  current

quarter  production.  However,  since  inventories  are  not measured

independently  in  the German  statistics  but  are  the  residual  in  the

national  accounts,  inferences  from the fourth  quarter  inventory

drawdown  could  be  misleading.

GERMAN REAL GDP
(Percent change from previous period, SAAR)'

1994  1995 

1995

GDP 
Total Domestic Demand 
Consumption 
Investment 
Government Consumption 
Inventories  (contribution) 

3.7 
4.0 
0.3 
8.8 
1.2 
1.6 

Exports 
Imports 
Net Exports  (contribution) 

8.9 
9.9 
-0.3 

1.  Annual changes are Q4/Q4.

Q1 
1.0 
0.1 
4.0 
-5.9 
5.6 
-1.8 

-6.6 
-9.7 
0.9 

Q2 
4.4 
3.8 
2.7 
4.3 
3.8 
0.5 

15.3 
12.4 
0.6 

Q3 
0.4 
0.3 
-1.1 
-0.9 
1.6 
0.8 

0.8 
0.4 
0.1 

Q4

-1.6
-4.2
1.8
-5.5
2.2
-4.5

14.2
2.9
2.7

1.0 
-0.1 
2.9 
-2.1 
3.3 
-1.3 

5.5 
1.2 
1.1 

IV-19

Data  for  the  first  quarter  are  generally  consistent  with

continued  weakness.  Unemployment has  increased  further,  rising  by

107,000  persons  (seasonally adjusted)  in  February to  bring the  total

number  of  unemployment  to  nearly  4 million.  Rising  uncertainty

about  job  prospects  may  be  causing  consumers  to  save  the  court-

mandated  tax  cuts  that  went  into  effect  on  January  1 and  were  widely

expected  to  generate  a pickup  in  private  consumption.  A  survey  of

current  and  expected  conditions  in  the  construction  sector  showed

further  declines.  However,  industrial  output  was  up  sharply  in

January,  and  export  expectations  of manufacturing firms  rose

strongly.

Price pressures  remain modest.  Over the  12  months  ending  in

February,  consumer  prices  in  the  western  states  rose  1.4  percent.

Producer  and  import  prices  continue to  evidence no  sign  of

inflationary  pressures,  with  the  most  recent  monthly  data  showing

declines  on  a  12-month  basis.

GERMAN ECONOMIC INDICATORS
(Percent change from previous period except where noted, SA)

1995 

1996

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Nov 

Dec 

Jan 

Feb

n.a.
n.a.

0.9 
1.6 
9.7 
8.5 
14.7 
-- 

-0.5 
-0.6 
9.4 
8.4 
14.0 
85.3 

-1.8 
-2.7 
9.7 
8.5 
14.7 
84.4 

Western Germany 
Eastern Germany 

Industrial Production 
Orders 
Unemployment Rate (%) 

0.7 
0.3 
9.3 
8.2 
13.7 
Capacity Utilization1   85.9 
Business Climate1 '2  
3.0 
Retail Sales3  
-3.0 
Consumer Prices1'3  
1.9 
1. Western Germany.
2. Percent of firms  (in manufacturing, construction, wholesale, and
retail) citing an improvement in business conditions (current and
expected over the next six months) less those citing a deterioration in
conditions.

-9.0  -12.0  -13.0 
-1.0 
-3.0 
1.4 
1.4 

-4.3  -10.3 
-2.3 
-2.7 
1.7 
1.5 

1.6 
-0.4 
10.1 
8.7 
15.7 
-- 

-1.0 
-1.6 
9.9 
8.6 
15.2 
-- 

10.3
8.9
16.4
--

n.a.
n.a.
1.4

1.0 
1.5 

3. Percent change from previous year.

IV-20

As  of  March  15,  the  Finance  Ministry began  requiring  special

approval  for  large  federal  expenditures,  in hopes  of  reducing  the

1996  deficit  overrun  now  estimated  to be  in  the  range  of DM  15-20

billion.  A  similar  measure  was  instituted  last  October  when  it

became  clear  that  tax  revenues  were  likely to  fall  short  of

expectations.  This  emergency measure  does  not  rule  out  a

supplementary budget  later  this  year  or  the  possible  institution  of

additional  tax  measures  in order  to  meet  the  federal  deficit  target

of  DM  60  billion.

In  France,  real  GDP  contracted  1.3  percent  (SAAR)  in  the

fourth  quarter.  This  contraction was  in  line  with expectations,  and

was  attributed  in  part  to  the  public  sector  strikes  in  late  November

and  December.  During  the  fourth  quarter,  private  consumption

declined  and  inventories  fell  sharply  while  investment,  government

spending,  and  net  exports  contributed  positively to  growth.

FRENCH REAL GDP
(Percent change from previous period, SAAR)1

1994 

1995 

1995

GDP 

4.3 

0.7 

Q1 

2.8 

Q2 

0.6 

Q3 

Q4

0.7 

-1.3

Total  Domestic  Demand 
Consumption 
Investment 
Government Consumption 
Inventories  (contribution) 

5.0 
1.7 
4.5 
0.9 
2.8 

Exports 
Imports 
Net Exports (contribution) 

7.6 
10.4 
-0.7 

1. Annual changes are Q4/Q4.

0.6 
1.2 
1.1 
2.8 
-0.9 

0.7 
0.3 
0.1 

0.9 
1.2 
4.7 
2.1 
-1.2 

10.9 
4.0 
1.9 

0.3 
5.3 
-5.5 
2.5 
-2.1 

-0.4 
-1.6 
0.3 

3.0 
-0.7 
3.7 
4.0 
1.8 

-1.5 
6.6 
-2.3 

-1.8
-1.0
1.7
2.4
-2.0

-5.6
-7.3
0.5

Monthly  indicators  suggest  that  economic  activity will  remain

subdued  in  the  current  quarter,  after  factoring  in  some  bounceback

IV-21

in  production following  the  strike.  Although  business  surveys

suggest  that  confidence  has  stabilized  early  this  year,  output  is

expected  to  remain weak  through  the  first  quarter.  The  surveys  also

suggest  that  inventories  remain  above  normal,  pointing  to  a

continued  inventory  correction  in  the  near-term, and  the

unemployment  rate  rose  further  in  January  to  11.8  percent.  Real

consumption  of  manufactured  products  rose  sharply  in  January  from

its  fourth-quarter  average,  but  at  least  part  of  this  pickup  stems

from a  strike-rebound  effect.  Consumer  confidence  in  January and

February  improved modestly  from  December  but  remains  far  below  last

summer's  levels.  Consumer  price  inflation  remained  moderate through

February.

FRENCH ECONOMIC INDICATORS
(Percent change from previous period except where noted, SA)

1995 

1996

Industrial Production  -0.1 

Q2 

Q3 

0.8 

Q4 

2.8 

Nov 

Dec 

Jan 

Feb

0.5 

-0.7 

n.a. 

n.a.

Capacity Utilization 

84.8 

84.2 

83.5

Unemployment Rate (%) 
Consumption of 

Manufactured Products

11.6 
2.7 

11.5 
-1.0 

11.6 
-1.9 

11.6 
4.8 

11.7 
-0.8 

11.8 
5.0 

n.a.
n.a.

Consumer Prices1
1.  Percent change from previous year.  Includes the increase in the VAT on

1.6 

1.8 

2.0 

1.9 

1.9 

2.1 

2.0

August 1, 1995

In  the  United  Kingdom,  real  GDP  rose  2.1  percent  (SAAR) in  the

fourth  quarter  of  1995,  mainly the  result  of  robust  growth  in

consumption  and  a modest  pickup  in  investment.  At  the  same  time,

inventory  accumulation  slowed  noticeably  compared to  the  two

previous  quarters.

IV-22

(Percent change from previous period

UNITED KINGDOM REAL GDP

1994 

1995

SAAR) 1

1995

GDP

Total Domestic Demand
Consumption
Investment
Government Consumption
Inventories  (contribution)

4.2 

1.9 

3.5 
2.7 
1.8 
1.5 
1.2 

1.0 
2.2 
1.9 
0.8 
-0.8 

Q1 

2.2 

-2.8 
0.1 
5.2 
-0.7 
-3.7 

Q2 

1.6 

3.9 
3.1 
2.5 
2.1 
1.2 

Q3 

1.8 

2.0 
2.5 
-4.4 
0.9 
1.1 

Exports
Imports
Net  Exports  (contribution)

10.6
6.8
0.9

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

2.4
-11.5
4.2

-1.1
7.5
-2.4

8.6
9.8
-0.4

Q4

2.1

0.8
3.0
4.4
0.8
-1.9

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

Non-oil  GDP

4.1 

1.8 

1.5 

2.3 

1.5 

2.0

1.  Annual  changes  are  Q4/Q4.

Available data  for the  current  quarter  are  mixed.  While

manufacturing output  increased  0.3  percent  in  January,  overall

industrial  production  contracted,  reflecting  weather-related

weakness  in  the  utility  sector.  In  February, manufacturing

employment  declined  somewhat.  However,  retail  sales  rebounded  in

February,  and  the  February  Confederation of  British  Industry survey

showed  the  balance  of  firms  expecting  to  increase output  versus

those  expecting to  decrease  output  rose  to  +20  from the  December  low

of +2.

Targeted  inflation,  measured  as  the  year-on-year  change  in

retail  prices  excluding mortgage  interest  payments,  has  been  little

changed  through  February  from  the  fourth  quarter  average  of  2.9

percent.  A  declining  trend  in  price  pressures  has  been more  visible

in producer  price  indexes.  Growth in  average  earnings  continues  to

be  modest  despite  a gradually  falling  unemployment rate.  Surveys  on

pay  settlements  show that  most were  settled  in  the  3 to  4 percent

range  in  the  fourth  quarter,  slightly higher  than  in  the  first  half

of  1995.

IV-23

UNITED KINGDOM ECONOMIC INDICATORS
(Percent change from previous period except where noted, SA)

1995 

1996

Industrial Production 
Retail  Sales 
Unemployment Rate (%) 
Consumer Prices1  
Producer  Input  Prices 
Average Earnings 2  
1. Retail prices excluding mortgage interest payments.  Percent change

Q3 
0.7 
0.1 
8.2 
2.9 
9.5 
3.3 

Q4 
-0.1 
0.7 
8.0 
2.9 
6.4 
3.3 

Q2 
0.0 
0.9 
8.3 
2.7 
10.9 
3.6 

Jan 
-0.4 
-0.6 
7.9 
2.8 
3.3 
3.3 

Nov 
0.4 
0.9 
8.0 
2.9 
6.1 
3.3 

Dec 
0.5 
0.4 
8.0 
3.0 
5.4 
3.3 

Feb
n.a.
0.6
7.9
2.9
3.0
n.a.

from previous year.

2. Percent change from previous year.

In  Italy,  the  advance  GDP  release  stated  that  real  economic

activity declined  4 percent  (SAAR) in  the  fourth quarter,  following

an  8 percent  gain  in  the  third  quarter.  Large  swings  in  inventory

investment  have  been  primarily responsible  for  quarter-to-quarter

movements  in  GDP  this  year.  The  preliminary Q4  release  implies  that

for  1995  as  a whole,  real  GDP  expanded  2.4  percent  on  a Q4/Q4 basis,

largely the  result  of  strong  export  growth.  Forward-looking

indicators  are  limited.  Business  sentiment  picked  up  considerably

in  December and  January,  but  consumer  confidence  edged  down  in

February  and  remains  below levels  registered  in mid-1995.

Inflation has  continued  to  decline.  In  February,  the  consumer

price  index was  5 percent above  its  year-earlier  level,  down  from  a

peak of  6.1  percent  in December.  Wholesale price inflation  has  also

slowed  somewhat.

On  February 16,  President  Scalfaro  dissolved the  parliament

and  called  for  elections  on  April  21,  three years ahead  of  schedule.

On  February  27,  Prime  Minister Dini  announced  that  his  fledgling

IV-24

political  party will  support  the  center-left  coalition in  the

upcoming  elections.  Current  opinion  polls  suggest  that  neither  the

center-left  nor  the  center-right has  sufficient  support  for  a  strong

majority.  If  the  election  does  not  produce  a  strong majority,

prospects  for  further  fiscal  reform  could be  jeopardized.

ITALIAN  ECONOMIC  INDICATORS
(Percent  change  from  previous  period  except  where  noted,  SA)

1995 

1996

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Nov 

Dec 

Jan 

Feb

-0.5 

3.0 
77.5 
12.1 

-0.9 
78.5
11.9

1.1 
78.6 
12.0 

Industrial  Production 
Cap.  Utilization  (%) 
Unemployment  Rate  (%) 
Consumer  Confidence 
Bus.  Sentiment 2  (%) 
Consumer  Prices 3  
Wholesale  Prices3
1. Level of index, NSA.
2. Percent of manufacturing firms having a favorable view of business

21.0 
5.6 
9.1 

18.0 
6.1 
10.4 

18 
5.5 
11.4 

113.2  116.1  110.0  110.9  108.4  109.7  107.2

8.0 
5.9 
10.8 

17.3 
5.8 
11.3 

11.3 
5.9 
10.8 

n.a. 

3.1 

n.a.
5.0
n.a.

n.a.

conditions minus those with an unfavorable outlook.

3. Percent change from previous year.

Economic  activity  in  Canada  remained  weak in  the  fourth

quarter  of  1995,  as  real  GDP  expanded  0.8  percent  (SAAR).  Machinery

and  equipment  investment  picked  up  sharply,  reversing  a drop  in  the

third  quarter,  but  this  increase  was  partially  offset by  further

declines  in  residential  and  non-residential  construction.  Net

exports  contributed  positively  to  growth,  despite  the weak pace  of

activity  in  the  United  States.  A  drop  in  consumption  expenditures,

a  reduced  pace  of  inventory  investment,  and  lower  government

spending  also  contributed to  the  quarter's  sluggish  pace.

IV-25

CANADIAN REAL GDP
(Percent change from previous period, SAAR)'

1994 

1995 

1995

GDP 

5.4 

0.6 

2.7 
Total  Domestic  Demand 
3.3 
Consumption 
6.1 
Investment 
Government Consumption 
-1.8 
Inventories (contribution)  -0.2 

-0.2 
0.6 
-1.4 
-1.6 
0.1 

Q1 

1.1 

2.0 
-0.6 
-5.9 
2.7 
3.2 

Q2 

-0.8 

0.8 
1.2 
0.5 
-1.0 
0.2 

Exports 
Imports 
Net Exports  (contribution) 
1. Annual changes are Q4/Q4.

20.4 
13.0 
2.4 

5.4 
4.1 
0.5 

8.1  -11.1 
-6.0 
-2.2 

10.7 
-1.0 

Q3 

1.2 

Q4

0.8

-2.8 
2.4 
-7.4 
-6.0 
-1.4 

12.8 
2.5 
3.9 

-0.7
-0.4
7.8
-2.0
-1.7

13.9
10.1

1.5

Recent  indicators  are  limited but  suggest  a pickup  in economic

activity.  In  January,  retail  sales  rose  and  manufacturing  shipments

edged up,  while  new factory  orders  through  January have  posted  three

consecutive monthly  increases.  Conditions  in  the  labor market  have

also  improved  recently.  Between  November  1995  and  February  1996,

employment has  grown  1 percent,  more than  three  times  the increase

over  the  previous  twelve months.  However,  the unemployment  rate

remained  high  at  9.6  percent  in  February, as  recent  job  growth has

led  to  increased  labor  force  participation.

After  rising to near  the top  of  the  Bank  of Canada's  1-3

percent target  band  in  the  first  half of  last  year,  consumer price

inflation has  been  subdued  recently,  reflecting  the  excess  supply  in

the  economy,  stabilization of  the  Canadian  dollar,  and  moderation in

industrial  product  price  inflation.

The  Chretien  government's new budget,  released  on March  6,

calls  for  continued  significant  reductions  in  government spending  to

reduce  the  deficit  from  4 percent of  GDP  for the  fiscal  year  ending

March  31,  to  3 percent  of  GDP  in  1996-97  and  to  2 percent  of  GDP  in

IV-26

1997-98.  A  sizable  operating  surplus  will  continue  to  be offset  by

rising debt  service  costs.  The  federal  government  net  debt-to-GDP

ratio  is  expected  to  peak  at  nearly  75  percent  of  GDP  this  year.

CANADIAN ECONOMIC INDICATORS
(Percent change from previous period except where noted, SA)

1995

1996

Industrial Production  -0.6 
Manufacturing Survey:

Q2 

Shipments 
New Orders 
Retail Sales 
Housing Starts 
Employment 
Unemployment Rate (%) 
Consumer Prices1  
1.  Percent change from year earlier.

-1.3 
-2.9 
0.2 
-14.9 
0.1 
9.5 
2.7 

1.1 
1.2 
0.4 
-3.3 
0.1 
9.5 
2.4 

Q3 
0.3 

Q4 

Nov 

Dec 

Jan 

Feb

-0.2 

0.3 

-0.6 

n.a. 

n.a.

0.1 
0.2 
-0.9 
5.9 
0.3 
9.4 
2.1 

1.1 
1.3 
0.1 
8.1 
-0.3 
9.4 
2.1 

0.1 
0.9 
0.4 
2.0 
0.3 
0.1 
4.6  -17.4 
0.3 
0.4 
9.6 
9.4 
1.6 
1.7 

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
13.3
0.3
9.6
1.3

(Billions  of U.S.  dollars

, seasonally  adjusted)

EXTERNAL BALANCES

1995

Japan:  trade

106.6

current account1

110.5

Germany:  trade2

65.2

current account

n.a.

France:  trade

current account2

U.K.:  trade

20.8

17.2
-17.8

current account

n.a.

Italy:  trade

current account2

Canada:  trade

current account

n.a.

n.a.

20.6
-9.5

1995

Q3

25.5
29.6
15.3
-9.4

3.8
1.1
-5.3
-2.1

7.5
9.2
5.6
-1.9

Q1
27.2
28.8
14.1
-3.5

5.6
7.0
-3.0
-1.4

7.2
2.6
4.3
-3.2

Q2

31.5
30.9
17.7
-0.8

5.9
4.9
-5.1
-1.9

7.0
7.7
4.3

-3.4

1996

Q4

27.5
22.4
18.0

Dec

8.1
8.5
4.9

n.a.

n.a.

Jan 

Feb

4.6
5.0 
5.6 
n.a.
n.a.  n.a.
n.a.  n.a.

5.4
4.0
-4.4

n.a.

n.a.
n.a.
6.5
-0.9

1.4

n.a.

n.a.

-0.9

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.
n.a.

2.3

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

balance was revised

1.  The definiticn of the Japanese current account

in January 1996.

2.  Not seasonally adjusted.
--  Data not available on a monthly basis.

IV-27

3-21-96

Industrial Production  in Selected  Industrial  Countries
(Monthly  data; seasonally  adjusted; ratio  scale, index)

Japan

19870100

1  130

W.  Germany

II 

1992 

France

1993 

1994 

!

I 

1995 

1996

120

110

100

130

120

110

100

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996

United  Kingdom

1992 
1992 

1992 1993 
993 
1993 

1994 
1994 
1994 

1995 
1995 
1995 

1996
1996
1996G

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996

Canada

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996

IV-28

3-21-96

Consumer Price  Inflation  in  Selected  Industrial Countries
(12-month  change)

Japan

W  rrrmanv

Percent

-- % A

y 

Percent

B~

^ 

A

I 

! 

i 

-

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996

I 
I 

1992 

I

l
I 

1

1993

1994 

1995 

1996

France

United Kingdom

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996

1992 
Note:  Excludes mortgage  interest payments.

1994 

1993 

1995

Italy

Canada

1996

-- 

9

199 

1992 

199 
1993

199 
1994 

199 
1995 

1996
1996

-III

1992 
1992 

1993 
1993 

1994 
1994 

1995 
1995 

1996
1996

Economic  Situation  in  Other  Countries

IV-29

In  Latin America,  real  GDP  growth  rebounded  moderately in  the

fourth  quarter  of  1995  from  generally  sharp  declines  earlier  in  the

year,  while  inflation continued  to  move  lower,  except  in  Venezuela.

Asian  real  GDP  growth  slowed  a bit  to  more  sustainable  rates.  Trade

performance  continued  to  be  stronger  in Latin  America  compared with

a year  earlier.  In  contrast,  the  Chinese  trade balance moved toward

a deficit.

Individual  country  notes.  In  Mexico, recent  data  suggest  that

the  recession bottomed  out  in mid-1995.  Fourth-quarter  real  GDP

declined  6.6  percent  from  its  year-earlier  level,  bringing  GDP  for

all  of  1995  to  6.9  percent  below  its  1994  level,  the  steepest

decline  in  the  post-war  period.  However,  on  a  seasonally adjusted

basis,  GDP  is  estimated  to  have  increased  about  3.7  percent  (not at

an  annual  rate)  in  the  fourth  quarter  after  rising  1.3  percent  in

the  third  quarter.  The  fourth-quarter  increase was  considerably

greater  than  expected  and,  in  contrast  to  previous  quarters,

reflected  a rebound  in  domestic  demand while  net  exports  weakened.

However,  much  of the  increase in  domestic  demand  was  attributable  to

a reduced  pace  of  inventory decumulation  rather  than  a rebound  in

final  demand.  The  rebound  in  GDP was  mirrored  in  a strengthening  of

industrial  production  in  November  and  December,  as  well  as  in the

steady  decline  in  the  unemployment  rate.  On  a seasonally adjusted

basis,  the unemployment  rate  is  estimated  to  have  declined  further

in  January and  February,  suggesting that  economic  activity may have

continued  to  expand  early  this  year.

Seasonal  factors  help  to  explain the  rise  in  December  and

January inflation  rates.  The  reduction in  the  inflation  rate  to  2.3

percent  in  February,  as  well  as  the  recent  stabilization  of  the  peso

and  an  easing  of  seasonal  price  pressures,  suggest  that  inflation

will  decline  on  balance in  the  coming months.

IV-30

Largely as  a  result  of an  improved trade  performance, the

current  account  deficit  declined  to  only  about  $650  million  in  1995

compared with  a  $29  billion  deficit  in  1994.  More  recently, the

merchandise trade  surplus  rose  sharply  in January,  in  part  reversing

monthly  declines  registered  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  last  year.

MEXICAN  ECONOMIC  INDICATORS

(Percent  change  from  year  earlier 

1994 

1995 

except  where  noted)
1995 

1996

Real  GDP 
Industrial  Production  (s.a.) 
Unemployment  Rate  (%) 
Consumer  Prices 1  
Trade  Balance 2  
Imports 2  
Exports 2  
Current  Account 2  
1. Percentage  change  from  previous  period.
2. Billions  of U.S. dollars,  n.s.a.

3.5 
3.8 
3.2 
7.1 
-18.5 
79.4 
60.8 
-28.9 

-6.9 
-7.7 
6.3 
52.1 
7.4 
72.5 
79.9 
-0.7 

Q3 

Q4 

Jan  Feb

-9.6  -6.6
-11.3  -8.3
5.9 
7.5 
8.0 
5.9 
2.2 
1.7 
17.9  19.4 
20.1  21.0 
0.5  -0.5 

6.4  6.3
3.6  2.3
0.7
6.7
7.4

-- 

-

Partly  as  a result  of  the  intensification  of  financial  market

pressures  late  last year,  past-due  loans  as  a share  of  total  loans

rose  from  9 percent  at  end-1994  to  about  18  percent  in  December.  In

February,  it  was  announced  that the  Bank of Montreal  would be

purchasing  a significant  ownership  share  in  Bancomer,  Mexico's

second  largest  bank, while  the  Bank of Nova  Scotia would be

acquiring a majority stake  in  Inverlat.  The  recapitalization of

these banks  will  be  supported  by  government  purchases of  their  loan

portfolios.

In  Brazil,  real  GDP  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  1995  rebounded

partially from  its  steep  decline  in  the  second and  third  quarters,

bringing  growth  for the  year  as  a whole  to  4.2  percent  (largely

reflecting very  strong growth  in  the  fourth quarter  of  1994  and  the

first  quarter  of  1995).  Indications  are  that  economic  activity

IV-31

continued  its  recovery  in  the  first  quarter  of  1996.  By Brazilian

standards,  inflation  remains  relatively  low.

BRAZILIAN  ECONOMIC  INDICATORS
(Percent  change  from  year  earlier  except  where  noted)

1994 

1995 

1995 

Real  GDP 
Industrial  Production  (s.a.) 1  
Open  Unemployment  Rate  (%) 
Consumer  Prices 1  
Trade  Balance 2  
Current  Account 2  
1. Percentage  change  from  previous  period.
2. Billions  of  U.S.  dollars,  n.s.a.

5.7 
7.8 
3.4 
929.0 
10.4 
-1.5 

4.2 
2.0 
4.4 
22.0 
-3.6 
-- 

Q3 
0.9 
-3.5 
5.2 
3.1 
0.8 
-2.2 

Q4 
0.2 
1.7 
4.4 
4.7 
0.3 
-- 

1996

Jan 

Feb

-- 
-- 
5.3 
1.5 
0.0 
-- 

-
--
--
0.8
0.0
--

Despite  the  pickup  in  economic  activity, Brazil  recorded

balanced  trade  in  January  and  February  1996,  as  it  did  in the  fourth

quarter  of  1995.  Strong  net  capital  inflows  prompted  the  central

bank  in  early February  to  tighten  capital  controls.  The  inflows

occurred  as  domestic  interest  rates  remained high  relative  to  the

rate  of  depreciation allowed  by  the  central  bank under the  crawling

peg.  In  January  1996,  international  reserves  were  an  estimated

$54  billion  (liquidity definition),  up  considerably from a low of

$32  billion  in  early  1995.

Top  central  bank  and  government  officials  have  come  under  fire

from  Congress  over  revelations  that a large  private bank, which ran

into  financial  trouble  in  late  1995  and  was  rescued  by  the  central

bank  at  a heavy  cost,  had  hidden  its  losses  by  engaging  in

fraudulent banking  practices  for  a decade.  Some  observers  have

expressed  concerns that  a Senate  inquiry  into  the  matter could

reveal  more  evidence of  banking  irregularities  and  further  weaken

confidence in  the  banking  system.

In  Argentina,  real  GDP  contracted  by  an  estimated  3.5  percent

in  1995,  while inflation  remained  low.  Consumer  prices  rose

IV-32

0.4  percent  in  February from  a year  earlier.  In  1995,  exports

rose by  31  percent  over  a year  earlier,  while  imports  declined

almost  9 percent.  However, the  trade  surplus  peaked  in  June. Gross

international  reserves  have  increased  somewhat  in  the  last  month

and  stood  at  $19  billion  at  end-February.  Of  the  $19  billion,

$2.6  billion  are  in  dollar-denominated  Bonex bonds  and  $3.4  billion

are  in  net  repurchase  agreements.  The  monetary  base was

$12  billion,  leaving  $7 billion  in  excess  reserves.

ARGENTINE  ECONOMIC  INDICATORS
(Percent  change  from  year  earlier  except  where  noted)

1994 

1995 

1995 

Q3 

Q4 

1996

Jan  Feb

Real  GDP 
Industrial  Production  (s.a.) 

7.4 
3.7 

-- 
-10.4 

-7.7
-12.0 

-10.4 

-9.8

17.4

Unemployment Rate (%)2 
Consumer Prices 1  
Trade Balance 3  
Current Account 3  
1. Percentage change from previous period.
2. Unemployment figures available only in May and
figure for 1994 is the average of the two surveys.
3. Billions of U.S. dollars, n.s.a.

11.7 
3.9 
-4.0 
-9.9--

1.7
2.7

-
0.5 
0.7 

16.4

0.2 
0.3 

0.3 

-0.3

-0.1

October  of each  year.  The

Argentina's  current  Extended  Fund  Facility arrangement  with

the  IMF  expires  on March  30,  1996.  In mid-February,  Argentina

reached  a preliminary  agreement  on  a new  21-month  stand-by

arrangement  with the  IMF,  with  the  amount  due  to  be  fixed  in  the

first  half  of  April,  although  it  is  likely to be  for  about

$1 billion.  The  package  of  laws  intended  to  give  President Menem

power  for  one  year  to  raise  taxes  and  cut  some  spending without

Congressional  approval  was  passed,  slightly  amended,  by the  Senate

on  February 29.  The  "Reform of  the  State  II"  law,  as  it  is  called,

is  expected  to  be  passed  shortly by the  lower house  of Congress.

In  Venezuela, real  GDP  grew  an  estimated  2 percent  in  1995,

due  to  the  strong performance  of  the  oil  sector,  which  grew

IV-33

6 percent.  Economic  activity  in  the non-oil  sector  continued  to

decline,  contributing  to  rising  unemployment, which was  above

10  percent  at  the  end  of  1995.  Consumer  price  inflation  picked  up

in  December  due  to  the  devaluation of  the  bolivar  that  month  and  has

reached  8 percent  a month  in  both  January  and  February.  Venezuela

registered  a merchandise  (non-oil) trade  deficit  of  $5.6  billion  for

the  first  eleven months  of  1995,  versus  a deficit  of  $3.6  billion

during  the  same  period  in  1994,  reflecting  a 37  percent  increase  in

imports  and  a  16  percent  increase  in  exports.

VENEZUELAN  ECONOMIC  INDICATORS

(Percent  change  from  year  earlier 

except  where  noted)

1994 

1995 

1995 

-2.8 
8.5 

Real GDP 
Unemployment  Rate  (%) 
Consumer  Prices 1  
Trade  Balance 2  
Current  Account 2  
1. Percentage  change  from  previous  period.
2. Billions  of U.S. dollars,  n.s.a.,  non-oil  trade  balance.

2.2 
10.8 
56.6 
-- 
-- 

71 
-3.6 
2.5 

-2.0 
-- 

-- 
-- 

Q4 
Q3 
-- 
-- 
10.7 
-- 
9.5  17.1 

1996

Jan 

Feb

-

--
-- 
8.0  8.0
--
-- 
--
-- 

In  China,  strong  import  growth  and  negative  export  growth have

shifted  the  trade balance  towards  deficit  in  recent months.  China's

trade  deficit  of  $0.5  billion in  the  January-February period

compares  with a  surplus  of  $4.5  billion  in  the  same  period  of  1995.

The  dollar  value  of  exports  fell  2 percent  from a year  earlier,

while  imports  rose  34  percent.  Inflation  continues  to moderate.

CHINESE  ECONOMIC  INDICATORS

(Percent  change  from year  earlier 

1994 

1995 

except  where  noted)
1995 

Real GDP 1  
Industrial  Production 
Consumer  Prices 
Trade  Balance 2  
1. Cumulative  from  the  beginning  of the  year
2. Billions  of  U.S.  dollars,  n.s.a.

11.8 
22.0 
25.5 
5.2 

10.2 
15.8 
10.1 
17.2 

Q4 
Q3 
9.8  10.2 
14.6  15.9 
13.2  10.1 
0.8 

3.2 

1996

Jan 

Feb

--
-

-- 
-- 
9.0  9.3
-1.0  0.5

IV-34

In  February  1996,  China  announced  plans  to  liberalize  access

to  the  interbank foreign  exchange  market.  The  new  regulations,

effective  April  1,  1996,  eliminate  the  existing  segmented markets

for  Chinese  and  foreign  enterprises.  Chinese  officials  suggest  that

full  current-account  convertibility  will  be  achieved by  the  year

2000.  China has  no  plans,  however,  to  ease  restrictions  on  capital-

account  transactions.

In  Taiwan,  real  GDP  growth  slowed  to  4.9  percent  in  the  fourth

quarter  of  1995  from the  year-earlier  period,  in  part  reflecting

sluggish  consumption  growth.  For  1995  overall,  real  GDP  grew at  its

lowest  rate  since  1990  and  its  second  lowest  rate  since  1984.  M2

rose  8 percent  in  the  twelve-months  ending  in  January  1996,  the

lowest  annual  growth  rate  since  Taiwan began  recording  monetary

statistics.  The  slow  growth in  monetary aggregates  in  part  reflects

capital  outflows,  as  foreign  exchange  reserves  fell  to  $90  billion

at  the  end  of  1995  from  its  high of  $100  billion  in  June  1995,

reflecting  increased  tensions  with  China.  Reserves  fell  further  in

early  1996,  to  an  estimated  $85  billion  in  early March.

TAIWAN  ECONOMIC  INDICATORS

(Percent  change  from  year  earlier 

1994 

1995 

except  where  noted)
1995 

Real  GDP 
Industrial  Production 
Consumer  Prices 
Trade  Balancel 
Current  Account 1  
1. Billions  of U.S.  dollars,  n.s.a.

6.5 
6.6 
2.6 
12.0 
6.0 

6.1 
4.3 
4.6 
8.3 
5.0 

Q4 
Q3 
4.9 
6.0 
5.6  -0.6 
4.6 
2.0 
4.1 
2.4 
3.6 
0.6 

1996

Jan 

Feb

--
-- 
2.6  3.1
2.3  2.7
1.1  0.6
--
-- 

The  approach  of Taiwan's  first  direct  presidential  election  on

March  23  has  led to  rising  tension with mainland  China,  which  in

turn  has  been  reflected  in  financial  markets.  Taiwan's  stock  market

fell  28  percent  in  1995  and  has  fallen 5 percent  so  far  this  year.

In  an  attempt  to  support  the  stock market,  Taiwan  in  February

IV-35

announced  a  new  $7  billion  stock-market  stabilization  fund,  using

contributions  from  banks,  insurance  companies,  postal  funds,  and

pension  funds.  In  addition,  Taiwan  announced  that  it  was  opening

the  stock market  to  foreign  individual  investors;  previously,  only

foreign  institutional  investors  were  permitted.

In  Korea,  activity  appears  to  have  slowed  somewhat  in  recent

months,  compared with  the  nearly  double-digit  growth  experienced  in

the  first  three  quarters  of  1995.  However,  it  is  difficult  to  gauge

the  magnitude  of  the  slowdown.  An  abrupt  deceleration  in  capital

goods  imports  since  the middle  of  last  year  suggests  that  investment

demand has  slowed markedly.  On  the  other  hand,  industrial

production increased  sharply in  January  (on a  year-over-year  basis),

after  decelerating  significantly  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  1995.

Consumer  price  inflation was  5.1  percent  in  February  1996  (on  a

year-over-year basis).

(Percent  change  from year  earlier 

except  where  noted)

KOREAN  ECONOMIC  INDICATORS

1994 

1995 

1995 

Real GDP 

Industrial  Production 

Consumer  Prices 

8.4 

10.7 

5.6 

Trade  Balance 
Current  Account 1  
1. Billions  of  U.S.  dollars,  n.s.a.

-3.1 

-4.7 

-- 

11.7 

4.7 

-4.5 

-8.8 

Q3 

9.9 

11.4 

4.7 

Q4 

-- 
7.1 

4.5 

-0.8 

0.4 

-2.1  -0.5 

1996

Jan 

Feb

-- 
12.4 

--

--

5.1  5.1

-1.0 

-1.5 

--

--

Korea  recently announced  that  it  will  raise the  ceiling on

foreign  participation  in  its  stock market  from  its  present  limit  of

15  percent  of  market  capitalization  to  20  percent  by the  second half

of  this year.  It  also  announced  measures  that  will  allow increased

foreign  competition  in  the  provision of  financial  services,

including  allowing foreign  securities  firms  to  conduct  brokerage

operations  on  outbound  portfolio  investment.  These  steps  were

IV-36

announced  to  enhance Korea's  prospects  of  gaining  admission  to  the

OECD.  Korea's  application  will  be  reviewed  formally  in  April.

In  Russia, monthly  inflation fell  to  a post-reform low  of

2.8  percent  in February, down  from 4.1  percent  in  January.  The

ruble has  continued  to  depreciate  slowly  against  the  dollar,

remaining  comfortably  within  its  4550-5150  rubles  per  dollar band.

During  February,  real  GDP  was  down  3 percent  from  a year  earlier,

and  industrial  production  declined  by  4 percent.  Russia's  trade

surplus  increased  to  $17.9  billion  in  1995,  as  exports  increased by

13  percent  and  imports  grew by  10  percent.

RUSSIAN  ECONOMIC  INDICATORS

(Percent  change  from  year  earlier 

1994 

1995 

except  where  noted)
1995 

1996

Real GDP 
Industrial  Production 
Consumer  Prices 1  
Ruble  Depreciation 1  
Trade  Balance 2  
Current  Account 2
1.Monthly Rate.
2.Billions of U.S. dollars, excludes intra-FSU transactions.

-15 
-21 
10 
9 
14.4 
3.4 

-4 
-3 
7 
2 
17.9
4.7

-4 
-5 
4 
1 

Q3 
-1 
1 
5 
0 

Q4 

Jan 

Feb

-3 
-5 
4 
2 

-3
-4
3
2

In  late February, the  IMF  and  the Russian  government  reached

agreement  on  a three-year  $10.2  billion  equivalent Extended  Fund

Facility  (EFF),  as  a successor  to  the  stand-by  arrangement  that

Russia  successfully completed  in  early  February.  The  conditions  of

the  EFF  focus  on  increased  fiscal  discipline,  including  a pledge  to

reduce the  budget  deficit  from  5 percent  of  GDP  in  1995  to  4 percent

of  GDP  in  1996  and  2 percent  of  GDP  in  1998.  The  structural  reforms

outlined  in  the agreement  include  tax  reform  (particularly improved

revenue  collection),  trade  liberalization,  further  privatization,

and  intensified  efforts  to  strengthen  bank  supervision  and

regulation.




