==== GREENBOOK | 1998-09-29_FOMC19981015confcall.txt ====

Federal  Open  Market  Committee
Conference  Call

October  15,  1998

A  consultation  of the Federal  Open  Market Committee  was held by telephone  on

Thursday,  October  15,  1998,  at  12:30  a.m.  Locations  of participants  other than  those  at  the

Board  of Governors in Washington  are indicated in parentheses.

PRESENT:  Mr. Greenspan,  Chairman

Mr. McDonough,  Vice Chairman  (New York)
Mr. Ferguson
Mr. Gramlich
Mr. Hoenig  (Kansas  City)
Mr. Kelley
Ms.  Minehan  (Boston)
Mr. Poole  (St. Louis)
Ms.  Rivlin

Messrs.  Boehne  (Philadelphia),  McTeer (Dallas),  and Stern

(Minneapolis),  Alternate Members  of the Federal  Open
Market  Committee

Messrs.  Guynn  (Atlanta),  and Parry (San  Francisco),  Presidents  of

the Federal  Reserve  Banks  of Atlanta,  and San  Francisco
respectively

Mr. Kohn,  Secretary  and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman,  Economist

Mr. Varvel  (Richmond) First Vice President, Federal  Reserve  Bank

of Richmond

Transcript  of Federal  Open Market Committee  Conference  Call  of
October  15,  1998

MR. BERNARD.  All  the Reserve  Banks  are on the  line, Mr. Chairman.  For those at the

Reserve Banks,  let me mention that all  the Board members  are present here at the Board.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Good  afternoon,  everyone.  This is first an  information

meeting, but it is  conceivable  that we  will  conclude the  meeting by taking  an  action,  depending

on what evolves  during our discussion.  Let me begin by calling on Mike Prell to bring us up to

date  on what  is going on in the economy.  Mike.

MR. PRELL.  Thank you.  There  have been  some significant developments  since we

prepared the  last forecast,  but what  we have  on balance  is more  a matter  of uncertainties  at this

point than  clear-cut  changes in  the outlook.  We  have  had some weaker  economic  indicators

at the margin  for the third quarter than  we  had anticipated.  The employment  report for

September  was on the  weak side.  We  have no special  story.  It may simply be  statistical  noise,

but employment  growth was discernibly weaker  than recent trends  and below  our expectations.

Tomorrow,  we will  be publishing industrial  production  for September.  We  anticipated some

modest growth in  production,  and instead  we will  report  a significant decline  for the month.

In  the consumer sector, this may be  too fine  a reading,  but around the edges the picture

looks  a little weaker  than we had anticipated.  Nonauto retail  sales  for August and September

were  quite  subdued.  Even  allowing for the  strength we  have  seen in the  sales of motor vehicles,

consumer expenditures  look to have been  marginally  weaker than the  3-1/2  percent growth rate that

we had in the  September  meeting Greenbook.  Of course,  we have  seen  some slippage in  the

indicators  for consumer  sentiment.  The  stock market  has  dropped even more  than we

10/15/98 

2

anticipated,  though  at this point I think it is  still much in  line  with the level  we had predicted  as

the average  for the  fourth quarter.  But to date the  market  has  had a more negative  tone and  that

may be taking some  toll  on sentiment.

On  the  inflation side,  the wage news  has  been good.  Average  hourly  earnings  in

September  are  giving us  still  greater confidence  that we  are  on the right track in our forecast  of a

leveling  out in wage  inflation and  possibly some  deceleration  in coming  months.  With regard  to

the price  news,  the PPI this  morning  was  much  worse  than we anticipated.  Basically,  the entire

surprise  was in the motor  vehicles  area, which  accounted  for almost  all  of the rise in  the  core PPI.

We have found it very  difficult to  guess what the changes  in motor  vehicle prices  will be in

September  when there  is  a model change  occurring.  I guess I would interpret  that figure as

suggesting a little less favorable  trend  in producer prices for finished goods  than we  had in mind

previously.  But basically  we  see that PPI number for finished  goods  and the fact that prices  of

crude  and intermediate materials  were  down  as not  calling for  any fundamental  change in  our

assessment  of the  underlying price  trends  in the economy.  Indeed, at this point a relatively  low

capacity  utilization rate  suggests that the  goods market  is quite  comfortable.

Looking ahead,  certainly we  have heard negative  reports  about the  manufacturing  sector

that  suggest  that there  is some greater  weakness  than  we might  have anticipated.  We  do not  hear

very much  yet that indicates that  there is  any greater  erosion  in capital  spending  plans than  we

had anticipated  would  be  occurring,  but that is clearly  a  question mark.  I think where  the greatest

uncertainty  arises and leads to a bias perhaps  in the risks to the economy  going forward is  that

private financing  conditions  have  deteriorated further, particularly  in the lower  quality area.  That

has  occurred despite  the easing of the funds  rate and  despite  the decline  in Treasury rates,  which

10/15/98

we had not  foreseen.  I think  our sense  is that  the tenor  of the markets  is much more  adverse  to

private borrowers  than  we had anticipated.  If this were  to persist for very much longer, I believe

there  would be  a risk  of undermining  the momentum  of private  demand beyond what we had

forecast previously,  and thus  a softer economic  outlook as  we  move into the  first half of  1999.

But  we were very uncertain  in our assessment  last time  of what  the dimensions  of the risk

spreads would  be, how soon  they would narrow,  how soon  access  to markets  would be restored,

and we are no less  uncertain  at this point.  Clearly,  that is a much more negative element  of the

economic  picture at this juncture.

Mr. Chairman,  I think  that is  about all  I can  contribute  at  this point unless  there  are any

questions.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Let us first  move to Ted Truman.  Do you  have  any

remarks you  wish  to make?

MR. TRUMAN.  I would note that, of course,  we  have no new  real  data on the external

sector.  New  trade  data are coming out next week for August, which  seems  like a long time  ago.

The dollar has  weakened, particularly  against  the  yen.  The  positive  news is that  the weakness

has also pulled up some  of the other Asian  currencies.  I do not have a ready explanation  for the

dollar's  weakness  against the  yen.  It has weakened  slightly against the  European  currencies.

With  regard to foreign economic  activity, I would say  that the information that has  come

in  over the last few  weeks has been  consistent with  what  we  were  saying.  That implies some

sense  of a catch-up, if I may put it that way,  with the  somewhat weaker  outlook that we had in

the  September Greenbook.  There  are  nonetheless  some small  positive  factors in  my view. The

fact that the IMF legislation  is likely to be  enacted means  that there is one  less  shoe to  drop.  We

10/15/98

got through  the Brazilian  elections.  The  Japanese have  passed some banking bills, but no one

knows quite  how they are  going to implement those bills.  And I think the recent  international

meetings  in  Washington  were  somewhat  of a reality check  for our European  friends.

On the other  hand, it  is pretty clear that globally there  is  an increase in financial  stresses.

When we  look at certain indicators  of the kind that we  look at for the U.S.  economy--they  are not

as available  abroad--they  all show  the same kinds  of effects.  Although  Brazil is  through  its

elections,  it is not through  the new economic program.  There is a question  about the implications

of the German  elections.  The international  policy complexion  of the new  government  leaves

some  big question  marks  at  this point.  But  I don't think anything  has  basically changed  in our

outlook.  We  had a weak  outlook,  and I  think the downside  risks are  still there.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Don Kohn,  would you like  to add anything?

MR. KOHN.  Just to say that I think Mike Prell  highlighted  the  key issue  here, namely

what is going on  in credit markets,  as I think President McDonough  will be commenting  on  in a

few minutes.  There  certainly has been  more volatility,  less  liquidity,  and less willingness  to take

risks  even since  the Committee  meeting  only 2-1/2  weeks ago.  The extent  of the  spillover into the

commercial  banking  sector is uncertain.  We  don't collect data often enough to know  whether

bank  spreads have  risen, but we have  had confirming  data from other  sources  of the tightening  of

lending  terms  and conditions.  Our  Senior Loan Officers  Survey for the period  through  the end of

September  provides  evidence that  some tightening has  occurred,  particularly  for loans  to larger

businesses.  I think what has  happened  here is that the banks  have become  increasingly  reliant on

the securities  markets to syndicate  their loans and to manage  their portfolios.  As deterioration

occurs  in securities markets,  it inevitably  spills over  into the banking sector, perhaps  even  more

quickly  than  it might have  10  or 20 years  ago.

10/15/98

In my  view it is reasonable  from a policy perspective  to  anticipate  that  financial

conditions  are likely to  settle  down  over time in  this country.  We have  seen  some rather extreme

movements in  financial  markets  and an  extreme  lack  of liquidity.  But after financial  conditions

settle down,  they are likely to  be noticeably tighter than  they were a month  or two  ago,  and

maybe even  tighter than  we thought they would be a week or two  ago.  Although they will  settle

down,  I'm reasonably  certain  that lending  terms and  financial conditions  will  look tighter to a lot

of borrowers,  at  least for a while.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Any questions for the three  gentlemen?

MR.  POOLE.  This is  Bill Poole.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Yes.

MR. POOLE.  I was  still on the  highway, so I did not hear the PPI report.  Can you  give

me  that number?

MR.  PRELL.  The  PPI for September  was  up  0.3 percent  and its core  component  was  up

0.4 percent.

MR. POOLE.  Thank  you.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Any further questions?  Let us move on  and I  would like to

call  on  the  Vice Chair to bring us  up to date  on  what  he sees in  the financial  markets  around  the

world  and especially in  New York, which  is  of particular  interest.  Bill.

VICE CHAIRMAN  MCDONOUGH.  Thank  you, Mr.  Chairman.  What we  are  seeing

here  in the financial  markets  in  the United  States,  which  certainly reflect financial  conditions

elsewhere,  is  a very dramatic  increase  in  risk spreads.  Let me  give you some  examples.

The spread between  the  on-the-run  30-year  Treasury bond  and the most recently issued

Treasury bond before it, which  normally runs  at about 4 or  5 basis  points,  moved up  after the

10/15/98

Russian  debacle to  about  12 basis points.  Then,  in  the middle of September  it moved up  some

more  and it is now  at  about  27 basis  points.  Again,  that compares  with the  usual  4 to 5 basis

points.  The interest rate  volatility  measures remain  unusually  high.  The  actual  volatility  on the

long bond has  moved up to  about  23 basis  points.  It usually  runs at  about  5.  The implied

volatility  has moved  up from  its usual  level  of about 8  to  14.

The quality spread  that we  tend to look at the most  is that between  U.S.  Treasuries  and

the fixed-interest  part  of a swap.  So it involves  looking  at  prime bank rates,  if you  will,

compared  to  U.S. Treasuries.  The  two-year,  which  normally runs  at  about 35 basis  points,  is now

over 70.  The  10-year,  which  is I think the  most significant,  normally runs  at about 50  basis

points  and is now  approximately  95.  The  spread between  Treasuries  and  10-year  investment

grade  securities--Ford Motor Company  would be a  typical example--usually  runs  at  about  75

basis  points; it is now  124.  If we look at the Merrill  Lynch bond index for BBB  securities,  which

is  an  indication  of the rate for medium-sized  companies  in the capital  markets,  the normal  spread

between  those BBBs  and Treasuries  is  usually  about  3.2 percentage  points  and it is now  at about

6.3  percentage  points.  This  is an  indication, I believe,  not  only that the spread  is very broad, but

that no financial  officer who is  not smoking  pot would actually  try to issue in this kind  of market.

We have  the very unusual  situation  of Treasuries  yielding more  than municipal  bonds.  So,  we

are  observing  a concern  for quality in the municipal  market  as well.

For the mortgage-backed  security spread,  which  of course has  a close  relationship  to the

construction  industry, especially the home  construction  sector, the normal relationship  with

Treasuries  is about  110 basis  points.  A week  ago it was  up to about  195,  and it has now  backed

off to about  170.

10/15/98

An indication  that financial  market participants  are particularly  concerned  about the

quality of financial  securities  firms  shows  up in  the relationship  between  the  S&P 500 and the

stock  indexes for money center  banks  and investment banks.  If we go  back to  the end of October

1997,  the  S&P 500  is up a little,  not  a whole  lot,  from its level  at that  time.  It is now  about  102

percent  of its level  then. The money center bank index has  declined to just under 80 percent  of its

year-ago  level,  and the number for investment  banks is  down  to about 75  percent.  We are  not, of

course,  in the business of having to worry about those  institutions and their shareholders  in the

management  of our affairs,  but this  is an  additional  indication  of the  run into quality and the

tremendous  risk aversion  we  are  seeing.

Just a  word about the clearing systems:  We have  had to keep fed  wire open  late for the

last several  days because  of requests  from the securities  firms  and the banks--Chase  and BONY--

that clear for them,  largely as hedge  fund positions  are unwound.  That is something  that is a

normal part  of our business, but I think  it is another  indication of some hiccups  in  financial

markets.  Depository Trust Corporation has been concerned  about the availability  of liquidity to

some of their participants,  especially the  smaller ones.  At the clearing  corporations,  the clearings

seem to have  been going reasonably  well, and CHIPS  has been functioning  quite  well.

Generally  speaking, Mr.  Chairman,  what we are  seeing in the financial  markets here  is a

very  significant run into high quality instruments  of the kind  that has not been  seen  for a very

long time even  by people  like me who have  been  around for a long while. Even  in the  most liquid

market of the world,  the U.S.  Treasury market,  there  is an  incredible broadening of spreads

between  on-the-run  securities  and the most recent off-the-run  securities,  and between  mortgage-

backed  obligations and Treasuries.  In  general,  we are  seeing a run to quality  and  a rather  serious

drying  up of liquidity.  Not to be an  alarmist, the important  thing I think  is that with the exception

10/15/98

of having to keep fed wire open,  the payments  and clearing  systems  seem to be functioning  okay.

Thank  you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Any other comments?

MR.  PARRY.  Mr. Chairman,  this is  Bob Parry.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Yes, Bob.

MR. PARRY.  Mr. Chairman,  I have two  questions.  One, we  have seen  some  spillover

from LTCM to  D.E. Shaw and others.  Bill, is there  anything else  related to that?  Secondly,  it is

my understanding  that  in  some instances  LTCM  has  been one to two  days  late on  margin calls

and this,  of course, would  raise the possibility that somebody would take legal  action  against

LTCM because  it was in default  on  a particular  loan.  Do you have  any comments  on  either of

these points?

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Bill McDonough.

VICE CHAIRMAN  MCDONOUGH.  The Ellington  Capital Management  firm was  late

on margin  calls  and  that is  one of  the reasons  that  its positions have  had to be  unwound.

MR.  PARRY.  I see.

VICE CHAIRMAN  MCDONOUGH.  The other firm  that Solomon Brothers cleared  out,

MKP Capital,  had also  been late on  some margin  calls.  We have  not been hearing  anything  on

LTCM.  There  was  a short  period,  a few  days  of teething  problems,  when  the five  firms

comprising  the oversight  committee  sent their people to LTCM to begin the process  of managing

the  firm rather  differently.  But there  does seem to have  been a greater relaxation  in the  market

about LTCM  and a feeling  that the firms that recapitalized  it have  the staying  power and the

willingness to unwind its positions  on an  orderly basis  so  they do not just move  the market

against themselves.

10/15/98

MR.  PARRY.  Thank you.  Do we know  anything  beyond either  the incident  involving

B&A  and Shaw  and what  I guess has affected  a couple  of other banks?  Is there  anything  else  in

that area?

VICE  CHAIRMAN  MCDONOUGH.  I believe  there  probably are some skeletons  still

rattling  around closets that have  not been  revealed yet.  We do not know. Even  the darkest

rumors  do not  suggest anything  of the  size  or shape  or potential magnitude  of LTCM.  I  think it is

a reasonable  assumption  that we would hear  about it if it were  there.  But that is an  assumption; it

is not a certainty.  I think we  can  safely assume  that there will be  some other banks  that will have

to report some losses based on dealing with  people who  with hindsight  they wish they had not

been  dealing  with.

MR.  PARRY.  Thank you.

MR.  HOENIG.  Bill, this is Tom Hoenig.  Just a clarification  on the spreads:  I realize

they have  widened  and I  understand that the junk bond side  of the  market has dried up.  The

spreads  on investment  grade corporates  have increased,  but it seems to me  that has not occurred

so much  because  corporate rates  have risen  as a result of perceived unusual  risks.  Rather,  the

reason  is  that the  flight  into Treasuries  has lowered rates  on Treasuries,  thus causing the  spreads

to  widen.  Is  there  a perception of unusual risks in  the  investment grade corporate  obligations?  I

know  there is  such a perception  with regard to junk bond  securities.

VICE CHAIRMAN  MCDONOUGH.  In  a run  to quality,  Tom, I think  we always  have  a

certain irrational  quotient  involved.  So,  if you  were to ask the people  racing  into Treasuries,  and

especially into on-the-run Treasuries,  whether they are more  worried  about the Ford Motor

Company  than they were  two months  ago, they  would say  "of course not."  On  the other hand,

their behavior suggests  that they have  that concern.  The other aspect to it, by the way, is that we

10/15/98

think the spreads  would probably  be  wider were it not for a general  view  in the market that the

high quality credits  will not be  issuing new  obligations.  So, if we look at the AAs,  their nominal

rates have  actually come  down  some.  It is the spread that has increased  substantially.  But the

view  in the  Street here  is  that the reason  the  nominal rates  have come down  is the expectation

that there  will be a reduction  in  supply,  if only in the absence  of new  issues reaching  the market.

Firms simply  will not be issuing new  obligations  and securities  that mature  will  not be  replaced.

MR. HOENIG.  Thank you.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  The  very  substantial reduction  in new  issuance,  which I

gather is  much across  the board, clearly  is  a crucial  factor.  Obviously,  the junk bond issuance

has  completely dried  up, but  even investment  grade issuance  has come  down  very markedly.

There  has  been a  fairly dramatic  shift  from the  securities  markets  into the commercial  banking

markets,  and that is an indication  that  the degree  of liquidity  in the overall  financial  system is

clearly under  stress.

MR. PRELL.  Mr. Chairman, if I might just  supplement that  with one other observation:

I  am told that to date  the rating agencies  have not put very many companies  on their watch  lists

for potential downgradings.  This  suggests that they have not at  least to this point perceived,

given  their economic  outlook, that the default risks for these firms have increased  greatly.

MS.  MINEHAN.  Could the  last speaker talk into the microphone  a little more  directly

because your voice  keeps  breaking  up?

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  That  was Mike Prell.

MS.  MINEHAN.  It was  Mike,  I am sorry.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Unless  you  are by  chance blocking  your microphone,  the

breakup in his voice may have  to do with the  transmission.

10/15/98

MS.  MINEHAN.  I can't  hear you clearly either, Mr. Chairman. Maybe  it's our

connection here  in Boston.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  I can  hear you perfectly  well.  Cathy, is my voice  still

breaking up?

MS.  MINEHAN.  Yes,  it is still  breaking  up.  Maybe  it's only our Bank.

MR.  PARRY.  That must be Boston  because I can  hear the  Chairman here  in San

Francisco.

MS.  MINEHAN.  Okay,  we  will  have to check our telephone  line.

VICE CHAIRMAN  MCDONOUGH.  Mr. Chairman,  this is Bill again, if I could

comment.  The rating  agencies have,  from what we are hearing  around town,  an extremely high

anxiety level  about the financial  services  firms.  I would not be surprised  if we  got some

additional  downgrades  or putting  on  watch of securities  firms  and perhaps  banks,  more  likely

securities firms.  Obviously,  the  rating agencies have  to do what they  have to do,  but in  an

already  very illiquid  market that would not be helpful.

MS.  MINEHAN.  Bill, could  I ask a question that is  a follow-on  to Bob Parry's?  We

have heard  a lot of nervous talk from people,  particularly toward the  end of last  week.  But this

morning I got a couple  of calls  that  suggested,  with the  Shaw  situation having been  more or less

taken care  of the way it was,  concerns  were easing  and that markets seem to have  been  a lot

quieter and more stable  over the  last  couple of days,  at  least to people directly in  the markets.

Have you  seen  that?

VICE CHAIRMAN  MCDONOUGH.  Sandy  Krieger and Dino Kos  are shaking  their

heads with  enormous  negative vigor.  I have  not seen  that nor  have they  and, of course,  they are

right on  the Desk all  day long.

10/15/98

MS.  MINEHAN.  Okay.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  But in  fact there  has been  a slight  narrowing in  some  of the

spreads,  even though that is grasping  for straws  I must admit.  Other comments  from Presidents

or  Governors?

MR.  BOEHNE.  Mr. Chairman, this  is Ed Boehne.  I would like to shift the focus  of the

discussion  from  the financial  sector to  what is going on in  the real economy,  at least what I have

been  able to pick  up in this District.  I have made  several  forays  into the District since  the last

Committee  meeting  and  have taken  a lot of phone  calls  and attended  other meetings  here  in

Philadelphia.  My sense  is that business  sentiment  is  eroding.  I do  not see  a dramatic  erosion  at

this point, but I think  it is a  clear erosion  and it shows  up in a greater sense  of uncertainty  about

the future on  the part of business  people.  That uncertainty  gets  translated  at a minimum into

caution  and,  in a number of cases,  also  apprehension  about  the future.  I have a sense  that

sentiment  in  the  nonfinancial  business  sector,  while it is holding  up reasonably  well  compared  to

that  in the financial  sector, nonetheless  is vulnerable  to fairly  significant  deterioration.  I have  the

sense  that people  are  watching  and wondering  if this unsettlement is going to pass  or whether it is

going to get worse,  and there's a feeling  that it might go either way.  But I think the tilt is more

that conditions  could deteriorate,  and I believe  business  sentiment  could  shift fairly noticeably.

Contrary  to what I  was picking  up  before the  last FOMC meeting,  I also have  been

hearing  that some  of the mid-size  and smaller banks  in  the District  are  beginning  and in some

cases more than  beginning--they  are  well along--the  process  of reviewing  their credits  and their

lending standards.  I'm told  that there  has been  some tightening  up.  I had not picked up  much  of

that earlier  among the  smaller and medium  size  banks.  I'm also  hearing  stories  that some of the

middle  size business  firms in the  District that previously had access  to the capital  markets  no

10/15/98

longer have  such access  and  are turning  to the  banks.  While  the  banks certainly like  to have

them as customers,  they are beginning  to wonder  whether they should want them now  if the

capital  markets  do not.

Some businesses  are also telling me,  and these  are relatively new  comments,  that they are

falling  short of their budgeted  sales,  though  they are  still  making money.  How that is translating

into  capital  spending  is difficult  to quantify.  The  sense that I'm getting  is that, while  there  has

not been  a wholesale  or even  something  approaching  a wholesale cancellation  of capital projects,

the  decisionmaking  process  may be stretched  out  some.  In other words,  if people have  not made

a final  decision  or they  have not made a final  commitment,  there is a tendency to  wait and see.  I

talked  to a person  this morning who  is heavily  into  real estate,  and he says  the  same kind of thing

is happening  in his business--industrial  parks  and that sort  of thing.  Where there has not  been a

signing  on the bottom line  there is  some tendency  to  delay, to wait and  see for a few  weeks.

My sense is  that some  precariousness  is  developing.  While  business is still good,  while

sentiment is still  at high levels,  there  clearly is a  vulnerability to the  downside  that could escalate

and move fairly quickly.  Perhaps  getting ahead  of myself, I think we have  a window  of

opportunity here with monetary policy  to take  some action  that I think could  keep us  on the

curve.  If we do  not do  something  promptly, I think we're going to slip behind  the curve,  and I

don't  think we  will  get the  same bang for an  action  taken  later that we  would get for taking it

fairly promptly.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Other  comments?

MR. STERN.  Mr. Chairman,  this  is Gary Stern.  Just as a coincidence, we had a meeting

of our Advisory Council  on  Small Business,  Agriculture,  and Labor yesterday and  a directors'

meeting this  morning.  I think much  of what  we have  been  discussing was  evident at those

10/15/98

meetings in the sense that there  clearly is  some  anxiety  about the  overall  situation including  a

good  deal of concern about  consumer  confidence,  given  the developments  in  financial  markets.

It would  be remarkable  if that  were not  the case!  I do not sense that  these anxieties  have  changed

much in the two and a half weeks  since  the FOMC  meeting.  I can't be  very precise  about the

level  of these  anxieties, but they certainly have been  around for  some time.

What has  been  a  bit surprising to  me is that there do not  seem to be  any changes  in the

economic fundamentals  that people have reported.  I'm not  referring only  to  the persistence  of

tight labor markets  and squeezes  on earnings,  but a number  of people  in construction,  for

example,  commented  that they are booked  up through  1999.  Obviously,  they are  confident  and

optimistic  at the moment,  but the clear implication  was  that they did not seem  to  think that

cancellations  were  likely or that material  adverse  changes  were just  around the  corner.  So,

despite  some well recognized concerns  and  anxieties, the fundamentals,  at  least  around  here,

seem to be  pretty much in place.  That  is not to  say,  obviously,  that things can't change,  but I was

struck if anything by  what I took to be less concern  among  our contacts  about their own business

prospects  than  I might have expected.  At  the same time there was  a good  deal of concern  about

the global  situation, but that is a different  matter.

MR.  MCTEER.  Mr.  Chairman,  this is Bob McTeer.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Yes, Bob.

MR.  MCTEER.  Regarding the issue  of fundamentals  in the District, in the last two days I

made  a speech  in Austin  and two  in  Houston,  to different  kinds  of groups.  I also  attended  our

San Antonio and our Dallas  board meetings,  and I have  a report this morning  from our Houston

board  meeting.  In all cases people  are not interested  in  what is  going on in the real  economy

because  everybody  assumes,  and I think  probably correctly,  that what  is going on  in financial

10/15/98

markets is going to break the link between  our recent  and present  situation in  the real  economy

and that in  the future.  There  is a great  increase  of anxiety  and pessimism  in our region.  I don't

think  that just  looking at the fundamentals  gets  at  the problem.  It is all  about troubled  financial

markets right now.

MR. HOENIG.  Mr.  Chairman,  this is Tom Hoenig.  We  had a board meeting and I have

done  some  traveling  throughout  the District recently.  I don't have much that is different  to add to

our discussion,  maybe just something  on  the  edges.  Basically,  people in  this region  are aware  of

the  turmoil  in the financial  markets,  and there  is a sense  of concern  about what  it might imply  for

the future.  I  did get a  sense and  specific comments  to the  effect  that, as things have  settled down

and  the fundamentals  have  remained  reasonably  good  in the District, people  were  more

concerned  in  August  and early  September than  they are today.  Things have not fallen  apart on

them thus  far, and they tend to the  view  that that  does not necessarily  have to happen.

The outlook for regional  investments  is  a mixed bag, and  it does  not provide  a lot of help

for the analysis  of national  trends.  Our contacts  in the  energy  sector and  in  some  areas  of

manufacturing  are saying that they are  pulling  back on their investment plans.  If the  cash flows

on  the energy side remain  weak  or weaken  further this quarter,  they indicate that there  will be

some additional  pullback. There  are  a couple  of areas  of strength, though.  One is heavy

construction--road  construction  and so  forth--where  there is  a tremendous  backlog because  of

large fiscal  expenditures  on highways  and  other public projects.  In  some of the  service

industries,  it is full  speed  ahead even  with the  current uncertainties.

I want  to share one anecdote.  It involves  a major firm  that is constructing  an  office

building, partly  for its own use.  They  were working  with a  major investment banking  firm to

arrange  the  financing, and they had  secured a pricing  that was  100 basis  points  over  some

10/15/98

base rate.  Because  of this financial  turmoil  the investment  bankers  came  back and said  the

interest  cost would be  300 basis points above  the base rate.  In the meantime  the base  rate  went

down  100 basis  points, so the net interest cost was  up by 200 basis  points.  But that still  worked

out to  a rate of 7-1/2  percent  and  the rate  on  their old mortgage  was  8-1/2  percent.  So they decided to

go ahead  full speed on that  project.  We have these  widening  spreads, but the  question  is what

kind  of impact  they are having  on  the real economy.  I would not draw  a conclusion  necessarily

from that anecdote  other than to  give it to you.

As far as consumers  go, a  lot of consumer lending  is still  going on,  and our area lenders

are  very  much involved with  equity lending  at an  equity  to debt ratio of up to  130 percent.

In sum,  there is  concern  about the  future in our region,  and we  sense a great  deal  of the

uncertainty  that others  here  have talked  about.  However,  the fundamentals  remain  reasonably

good.  The  outlook  is prospectively  somewhat mixed  in  our region, but still  generally favorable

on balance.

MS.  MINEHAN.  This is  Cathy Minehan,  Mr. Chairman.  Let me just  follow  up  on Tom

Hoenig's  comments  because, as  we  see  things  here in the First District,  there  is some similarity.

On  the downside, our large  manufacturers--Gillette,  Polaroid, and Raytheon--are  all issuing

negative  notices about  their current quarter  earnings  and planned  layoffs.  In  the financial

services  industry, we  have  reports  of some  layoffs  and branch  closings, in Asia  largely,  by the

Bank of Boston  and of some  small layoffs  by Fidelity.  There is an enormous  amount  of fear,

obviously  reflecting  the Wall  Street related  concerns  here  in the  financial community.  That kind

of fear tends to  build on itself and it seems  to be spreading beyond  the  financial  sector,  certainly

through  the media locally.  So we  are  beginning to hear increasingly  from  nonfinancial

companies  about their  concerns  over, not just the present, but the future as  well.

10/15/98

On the  other hand, just looking  at the  financial  markets  and talking to  a couple  of our

directors, for those organizations  that have  cash from whatever  sources,  business is  very good

this year.  A large  insurance company, for example,  is finding not only that the  life  insurance

business  remains very  good but that opportunities  for investment  abound.  They have  some

internal cash  generation,  and do not  have to finance  themselves  heavily  in outside markets.  So

they are finding  the  spreads  currently on  corporate  bonds and  mortgages  to be great  bargains,

bargains  that they have  not run into  in a long time.

We  are seeing  a very strong  residential real  estate market here.  To be sure, confidence  is

down,  at least  according  to our early Beigebook calls,  and conditions  in the  mortgage-backed

securities  market certainly  will  affect housing  activity eventually.  But we have  not seen  it

happen  yet.  We  do have indications  that whatever  speculative  commercial  construction  was

being contemplated  likely has  been set  aside, but the  overall  economics of commercial  real  estate

remain  very  good.  With  no new construction  coming  on  line  and with low  vacancy rates and

high rents,  we  are  seeing a good deal  of support for that sector  as  an  ongoing business.

In  sum, I would echo  what Tom  Hoenig is saying.  There  is a lot  of fear and uncertainty,

but there  is some  strength in  our regional  economy  as  well.  We  are not seeing  a feedback  from

the financial  markets;  in fact,  we  are seeing  some reasons  why there might be a bit of impetus  to

growth from some  of the current developments.

MR.  GUYNN.  Mr. Chairman,  this  is Jack Guynn.  My own  regional evaluation  is

probably closest to Gary  Stem's than  to that of others who  have spoken  so far.  I, too,  do not see

and do not sense  any fundamental  change  in  our regional  economy since the  last FOMC meeting.

We  had  a directors'  meeting  and  we made a number of special inquiries  on a couple of subjects

that we all agree, I think, may be pivotal  to developments  in the period ahead.  Clearly, there  is

10/15/98

enormous  uncertainty  and uneasiness.  I get the impression  that that it is fed more by  the steady

drumbeat  of negative  commentary  than  by any deterioration  in  fundamentals.

When  we ask  about investment  spending  plans--and  we've  made  calls  to a number  of our

key contacts  over the last week--not  surprisingly what we find is  that there  has been  a fairly

decided  pullback in export-sensitive  industries  and companies.  The pulp paper division  of

Georgia  Pacific  has  scaled back  and is  now probably going to  cancel  a  major project.  Steel

producers clearly  have no plans  to expand.

On  the other hand,  a major  company here  in  Atlanta, Lucent  Technology,  is going full

speed  ahead with  a $350 million expenditure  for a plant north  of Atlanta. That investment  is

driven by  the same fundamental  that  we have been  hearing  about for several  years.  That  is,

Lucent  has  been  subject  to a strike  threat  and wants to substitute  capital  for labor.

We  also  talked to some bankers  in  the region  in an  effort to get some sense  of the

availability  of credit.  Our supervision  and regulation  people  talked to five  or six  of the major

banks  that lend  in Latin  America, and the latter  confirm the story that we  all have been  hearing,

namely that there  has  been a  substantial  pullback in credit even  to the most  creditworthy

borrowers  in Latin America.  Bill Estes  was  telling  me this morning  that some of the top tier

borrowers  are paying  double and triple  the rates that they were  paying before everything  began  to

come  unglued.  There  is even  some  pullback in  trade  lines to Latin America.

By way of contrast, calls to the  major regional banks in the Southeast  suggest that they

clearly  are  looking much  more carefully  at their  lending.  We would characterize  what  we  see

happening as  a responsible  slowdown in lending to  some borrowers  where  the lending  standards

may have  been overly complacent.  It's the  kind of responsible  behavior  that  one would expect

given  the turn of events.  It  means  some additional  stress-testing, looking ahead  to an economic

10/15/98

situation  that might not be  so favorable, but  certainly nothing close to  any rationing  of credit to

legitimate borrowers.

Finally, I should  add that the  manufacturing  survey we just released  yesterday, which

involves investment  spending reports  that we  collected in  September, shows  no clear new

pattern.  Such  spending  has  been very  heady in this region for several  years.  We saw some

slowing early on,  but compared  to a month  or two ago, there is no apparent new  trend toward any

reduction  in investment spending  plans.  So again, we do not see a lot of change other than  the

continuing uneasiness  and uncertainty  that we've  all been talking  about and that certainly

continues  to be true here in our region.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Thank you.  Anybody  else?

MR. PARRY.  Mr. Chairman,  this is Bob Parry.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Yes,  Bob.

MR.  PARRY.  We recently  have had  an  advisory council  meeting  and a meeting of our

board of directors,  and I would  have to say that, as  I see  them,  the numbers  relating to  the

performance  of the District economy have  not changed  at all.  However, there has been  a definite

increase  in uncertainty  and concern, particularly about  financial prospects.  We  also heard reports

that, for example, in the  commercial  real  estate  area some deals  were  being delayed  but

eventually  getting done.  I guess at  this point I can not point to  any specific  changes  that would

indicate  that economic  prospects  have  weakened,  although  with all  of the concerns  expressed

about financial  developments,  I would have  to believe  that there's going to be  an impact on

investment decisions.

10/15/98

MR.  VARVEL.  Mr. Chairman,  this is Walter  Varvel  in Richmond.  Al Broaddus  could

not participate  on this call, but I visited  with  him this  morning,  so  my comments  will reflect  his

views.

We had  a joint board meeting last  week  of our Richmond  and Baltimore  directors.  I think

it would be fair to say that  our situation  is  very  similar to that of several  who have  commented

previously, Bob Parry's  and Jack Guynn's  comments  in particular.  We don't see  a significant

change  in  fundamental  economic  conditions within  the District.  However,  there is  increased

uneasiness  being reported  by some  of our directors.  Others  remain  very  optimistic  and upbeat.

One of our economists  participated in a  meeting  yesterday  of the Virginia  Governor's  Advisory

Board,  and we did pick up  some information  about reductions  in capital  spending plans.  The

chief economist  for Mobile  noted that they have  cut their spending  plans for next  year, and they

expect that to be  the case  throughout  the  oil industry.  Also,  a  spokesman for Norfolk  & Southern

Railroad  said that they have cut their  capital  budget,  and their spending  plans are  now based  on

an assumption  of zero  growth in GDP over  the next two to three  years.  Finally, we just

completed  a  survey of  our manufacturing  and service  sectors,  and it provides  some indications  of

a  weakening in business  sentiment  and modest reductions  in  capital  spending  plans.  Thank you.

MR.  MOSKOW.  Mr. Chairman,  I have just a couple  of things  to add;  my comments  are

very  similar to those of my colleagues.  There  is no real  sense  of a fundamental  change  in

business  conditions in  our District, but there  is  clearly a lot of increased  concern,  a lot of

increased  uncertainty.

Looking  at some District industries,  the automobile  industry  still seems  to  be  going

strong,  although operating  with  very high  sales  incentives.  GM  seemed  to recover better than

expected  from  its strike.  The  steel industry  is in the  doldrums  at this point.  We just published

10/15/98

our survey of Midwest  manufacturers,  which  covered  developments  in August.  We found

strength  in the  auto and steel  industries,  but we  think that mostly reflects  recovery from the  GM

strike.  On the  other hand, the  machinery  and natural  resources  areas  showed some  slowing in

August.

Business  people we've been  talking to are starting to  focus  on their budgets for next year.

The general  comment is that they are all  planning lower levels  of capital  spending, hiring,  and

expenses  for  1999  than they had for  1998.  In  other words,  they went into  1998  with  the view  that

it would be  a very bullish year,  whereas  they are approaching  1999 with  a lot more  concern.

While  we  are seeing  a lot of concern,  the  labor markets  are still  very tight  and  there are  still many

areas  of strength  in our District  economy.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Any Board members  want to comment?

MS.  RIVLIN.  This is Alice. I would certainly  concur with most of what I have  heard

around  this table.

MR.  GUYNN.  We can  not hear you,  Alice!

MS.  RIVLIN.  I will get closer to the  mike  and shout!  Everything I have  heard around

this table, if it can be  called a table, confirms  what  I thought I knew,  namely that the  world is

very  weak and getting weaker.  We  see  enormous risk aversion  in financial  markets  all  over the

world.  But here  in the United States  we have general  strength in the  domestic  economy,

especially  in the consumer  sector.  At the  same time, there is a great  deal  of anxiety and some

evidence  of a pullback  from  economic  activities  that  were  going on  or were  expected  to be going

on  in the next  few months.

It  seems  to me that  these developments  give  us  an  enormous  chance  to get ahead  of the

curve,  as Ed Boehne suggested early in the conversation,  and to do what we can to keep  a good

10/15/98

thing going in this country.  What worries me  most  and I think worries  other people most is that

the real  weakness  in the world  economy is eventually  going  to affect our own economy.  I think

we  should  get ahead  of that by taking  action  as  expeditiously  as we can to make sure  that the

U.S.  economy  stays  strong.  Now, we can  wait  until  our next  meeting,  but that would involve  a

long  wait.  The risk of waiting  in my view  is that  we may be  forced into  a reactive  position.  The

beauty of doing  something  right now is that  nothing much  is  happening.  We can  look ahead  as

we did before  to see likely weakening  in the U.S.  economy and decide  what  to  do  about it later,

but I think we  should make a  prompt downward  rate  move.  If we wait  to see what is  going to

happen  in  the next  week or two,  we might  find ourselves  reacting  to  either a  sharp  drop in the

stock market  as earnings  come in more  gloomy  or to a catastrophe  on the  international  scene if

Brazil  or something else  goes  wrong.  So this  seems  to me a good moment  to make  our move.

MR.  KELLEY.  Mr. Chairman,  this is Mike  Kelley.  I  agree with a great deal  but perhaps

not everything  that Alice Rivlin just said.  Her analysis  of the situation  and that of others  who

have  spoken  all seem  to go  in  the same direction.  That  is,  as  each  day passes  the economy is

slowing a little more.  It certainly  seems  more and more  likely that our policy is on  an easing  path

and that we  have further  to  go.  But I have a concern  in  that we eased just  16  days  ago and  that

was  the first move  we made  in a very  long time.  To move  again  so soon would very  clearly not

be a  business-as-usual  thing to do.  If we  do it, I think we  are  going to have to very careful  about

the message  that  we  send.  We  have discussed the  economy, so I will  not go over that again.  We

have three  vectors  here,  two of which  look pretty much  the  same  as they did two weeks  ago.  The

latter are  the real economy in the United  States  and the real  economy around  the world.  Some

weakening clearly is occurring.  The  delta, to the extent that there  has  been one in the  last two

weeks,  is clearly  downward.  The  dynamics  are  in the  credit and capital  markets.  As Alice Rivlin

10/15/98

and others have  suggested,  if those markets  should implode--maybe  that is too dramatic  a word,

but if they  should deteriorate  badly--they  could very  easily  and promptly  take the real economy

with them,  and we could find  ourselves  very quickly behind  the curve.

If the Committee judges  that a substantial  deterioration  of that kind is a  strong  or

imminent  possibility, then I think we  should act, and I would  certainly support  that  action  even

though  it obviously  is not business-as-usual.  But if this  situation  does not reach  that level  of

urgency, then  I think we should  be  very careful  about  our timing.  I would be  concerned that  if it

is not  a situation  of substantial  deterioration  or perhaps does  not  appear to be,  then  a move right

now  would run the  risk of making it seem as if the Fed believes  that it  got it wrong  the first  time

and we  feel  the need  to act  very quickly to  correct  our error.  If that were  the perception,  I

think the  market could rightly conclude  that the situation  as  seen  by the Fed must be far  worse

than  we  thought it was  in  late September  and that there is some kind  of policy panic  or disarray  at

the Fed.

I see two major problems  if that  should be  what is perceived.  Number  one, I do not

believe  we  got it wrong the  first time,  and I think it would be very destructive  and quite

unnecessary  to convey  that impression  today.  Secondly, I would be concerned  that such  a

perception  could induce  the  very type  of financial  market  panic  that we  are  seeking to  prevent in

the first  place.  If we do  make a judgment  that the  credit and financial  markets  are  such that  the

situation  is dangerous  and action  is required,  I will  support that judgment.  Under those

circumstances,  if that is  where  we  are, I think  we probably  should consider moving  more  strongly

than  our usual 25  basis  points in  the federal  funds rate.  I also think we  should give  very careful

consideration to  what we  say in  our press  release. We should basically  acknowledge  the risks that

10/15/98

we  see  for the economy  and make  sure that  those  risks  are  what the market  sees  us  acting  upon

and not  those that I mentioned  a minute  ago.  Thank  you.

MR.  MEYER.  This is  Larry Meyer.  Let me reinforce  two themes  that I think we have

heard mentioned  several  times.  While  there may  be  some erosion on  the margin in  terms of the

very near-term  outlook,  there is not very  much  change  in  terms of the traditional  ingredients  that

go into  our forecast, say  for  1999,  and no basis  there  for a material  change  in  policy.  On  the

other  hand,  we  have to  contrast  developments  in the  real economy  and  those in the financial

markets.  There  is  a tension  between  them.  It may be  that recent  developments  have  increased

our perception  of a wider  deterioration  in the  functioning  in  the financial  markets  that goes

beyond  simply the  widening  of risk spreads  but now  includes  indications  of illiquidity--market

participants  not  standing behind  the bid-ask spreads  as  wide  as they are.  It is very  difficult  to

translate  all  that into  a revised  forecast,  but it adds a higher  degree of uncertainty and  reinforces

the  sense of downside risks.

With reference  to  other forecasts, I must say that for the first time I  see  a meaningful  shift

in forecasts  for  1999  after  a long period of little change.  I think we  are  going  to see those

forecasts  converge  down to  something closer  to the  Greenbook,  not to the  Greenbook  level  but

toward  it.

My sense  is  that one  of the problems  is  that  we may not have conveyed  as  well  as  we

might  have liked the message  that  we wanted  to send  at the last meeting.  That message  I thought

was  that we had  a flexible policy, we  recognized  a  significant  change  in  the economic  outlook,

and  we responded  accordingly.  I think our action  was taken  as something  done grudgingly,  and I

believe  we might reduce  some  of that  uncertainty  in  the markets  by taking a further  action  at this

point.  Were we  to do  so,  and since  it would involve an  intermeeting  move,  I would think that  25

10/15/98

basis points  would  be the right way to  do  it.  To  me, if the  story is that we  feel  we  need to have  a

lower federal  funds rate  in the first half of next  year, it probably  would be  good to get  there  a

little faster  than on  the pace  we might  otherwise  be  on.  In addition,  given the  downside risks,  I

would  say that if I picked  a  number that I  would like  for the  GDP growth rate next  year, I  would

snug it up a little  closer to trend than  I otherwise  would  because  of the prevailing  sense of

downside  risks  and discontinuities.

MR.  FERGUSON.  This is Roger Ferguson  speaking.  I  would like to echo  and respond

to some  of what  I have  heard on the  policy issue.  Mike  Kelley is concerned  about  sending  a

message of panic  or disarray in  policymaking.  On the other hand,  I am actually  more concerned

about being perceived  as being inactive  in the  face  of what I think are going  to be  potentially

rapidly  moving changes  going forward.  I have  been  struck by  some of what  Bill McDonough

had to  say and what  Larry Meyer had  to say  as well.  The  financial  markets  do seem  to be

showing  signs of a  great deal  of fear and uncertainty.  They  seem actually to  have gone  beyond  a

state  of concern  and  uncertainty  and to have  seized up  in  important  ways.  There  are

counterparties  that  no longer seem to be  standing  on the other  side of important  trades.  I am

fairly  certain  that the result  will inevitably  be  some impact  on  the real  economy.  The  sense  of

financial  foreboding  that I have heard,  while  it has  not yet  translated into  an  impact  on the real

economy, will  in  my view  have such  an  impact  at some  point, perhaps  not in the  next  week or

two  but certainly  in the  next quarter  or two.  We  all  know  that the  policy  actions that we  take

require  some  time to  work their way through  the economy.  Additionally,  in  a period of great

uncertainty,  I think  it is  important  for us to be  shown in  a leadership role  and one in  which  we  are

prepared  to be  as flexible  and as  vigilant  as the markets  and circumstances  in the  real economy

require.  Therefore,  in  terms of what  has  brought  us  here today  and what is  different,  I conclude

10/15/98

that what  is different  is that  the markets  have  not moved  to  support  the kind  of investment  or the

kind  of consumption  expenditure  that we need to  maintain  growth  as  close  as possible to trend.  I

think it is our obligation  to be  pushing publicly against  the significant  downside risk that  I

believe  we face.

I am mindful,  as Mike Kelley  indicated, that we  are involved  in an  intermeeting

discussion.  Therefore,  any action  that we may take  should  in my view  be  on the order  a 25  basis

point move.  It  should  not be  larger because  we will  get more impact  out of 25  basis points  in  my

opinion  than from anything  else.  So, having heard  where  we are  now and  sharing the sense  that

adverse  financial  conditions  have not yet hit the real  economy  but are  likely to  do so,  my

inclination  would be to take advantage  of this period of quiescence  to indicate  that we are

vigilant, forward-looking,  and responsible.

MR.  GRAMLICH.  This is Ned  Gramlich.  First on  the real economy,  let  me focus  on  the

Greenbook forecast.  You will  recall  that  two weeks  ago it was  already weak,  and that was

despite  the assumption  of a  75 basis point reduction  in the federal  funds rate.  Now,  according to

Mike Prell,  whose  view  is supported by  other comments  we have heard,  it is weaker still.  So, I

think  that  we could easily justify  a 50  basis point reduction  in the funds rate.  The next  question

is  whether we  should reduce  the rate  at  the next meeting  or now.  I guess I agree  with a  lot of

others,  why not now?  From the  standpoint of the real economy,  it probably  doesn't  matter too

much;  four weeks  is not that long  a period when we  consider all  the lags in the real  economy.

But for the financial  markets,  four weeks  could be a long time,  especially for one key  currency

market, the real.  So I come  out in favor of doing  something now.  I  guess 25 basis  points is okay,

though I could also  defend 50.

10/15/98

There  are  two basic  arguments  against reducing  the rate.  One  is the uncertainty  argument

and  one  is the panic  argument.  With  regard to  the first, it seems  to me  that the  uncertainty  that

we  had even  two weeks  ago  is being  largely resolved  in the direction  we  did not  want it to be.  I

think  we are  lot more  certain,  maybe  sadder but wiser, about the  outlook now  than  we were  two

weeks  ago.  On the panic  argument,  frankly there  is panic  already.

I think Larry Meyer  is right that  our message  was  a bit misinterpreted  and that some

reinforcement  of that message  may be  a good  idea.  If we move  the rate down  today my guess  is

that our action  would be calming,  not panic-inducing.  Thank you.

MR. POOLE.  Mr.  Chairman,  this is Bill Poole.  As I read the discussion,  everybody  has

a sense  of concern  about current  conditions.  Personally, I  would feel  a lot better about moving

between  meetings,  given past practice,  if there were  a sense  of urgency that was  a step up  from a

sense  of concern.  We  are  going to  be sending  a message by acting  between  meetings,  and I  am a

little concerned  about how that message  is  going to be interpreted.

I have two questions  and would appreciate  some comments  on both.  First,  do we want  to

ease  policy on  a day when  we have received  bad PPI news?  Secondly, is there  any chance  that

action today  could be viewed,  by some anyway,  as an  effort to  help bail  out the  hedge funds?

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Let me respond to that, Bill.  First  of all,  the latest  PPI

number is clearly a significant  aberration,  and I think the markets  understood  that.  When  the

number first  came  out  at 8:30 this  morning,  the bond market dropped 1/2 point.  As  soon  as it

became clear  what was causing  the PPI to rise,  the  market came  all the way back.  I don't  think

the PPI  is an  issue.  Indeed, there is  a certain  perversely  positive benefit  to responding  when  the

numbers  do not  appear to be immediately supportive  of a policy change because  that does  imply

10/15/98

that  we are  looking at a broader, more  forward-looking  picture.  So today's  PPI number is not

something I  would be particularly concerned  about.

What I  think we have to  focus  on here  is  the issue  of where  we think the funds  rate should

be  at this point, knowing what we know  about the future  and disregarding  the fact  that we  are  at

5-1/4 percent,  if I  may put  it that way.  I think  it is probably too  soon for the type  of financial

constrictions  that have been  occurring  in quite  a  virulent manner in the  last couple  of weeks  to

have  worked their way through balance  sheets  and into capital  investment  decisions.  I have  been

trying to  get a  sense from  a number of different  contacts  regarding  what is going  on in the real

economy.  The judgments  that I am  hearing from most  of you  that nothing  much has  changed  in

the economy strikes me as  about right.  That is,  there  is very  little evidence  that I can  detect  of an

underlying  deterioration  in the economy,  and indeed  were  we to see  that, I would suggest  that we

are  right on  the edge of a recession.  When we  see developments  of that nature,  it usually  is a

signal that the system  is  breaking down. That  is  one of the reasons  why we  often have  difficulty

forecasting recessions.  I do not  sense  anything out  there that  reminds me of that, and I do  think

that  the perception  of a continuing reasonably  good economy is a  fairly objective observation.

However, if we  look at past history and at what happens  when  profit margins  are under

some  pressure and financing conditions  deteriorate  even half as  much  as they have  so far, the

presumption  that the capital  goods markets  can  hold strikes  me as rather  unlikely.  We have

maintained a somewhat higher federal  funds  rate  than we  otherwise  would have in the last year or

two, largely  I suspect because  we  were  seeing a quite pronounced  stock market  wealth effect  on

the economy.  Because  of that effect,  we  felt the need  for a tighter policy than  would ordinarily

have been  the case.  We  purposely allowed the real  federal  funds  rate  to rise as  inflation

expectations  fell largely because  that seemed  to be the  appropriate  policy posture to take.  But if

10/15/98

we start  where  we are now  and look forward,  taking  account of current financial  conditions  and

the developing  weakening  in profit  margins, a funds  rate in the area  of 4-1/2  to  5  percent  seems

close  to  where we want  it to be  at this  stage.  But clearly,  to start  moving at a  more dramatic  pace

than  we need to raises the risk, I think, that  Mike  Kelley quite appropriately  brought up.

My own impression  at  this stage is pretty  much what Ed Boehne and Alice  Rivlin

mentioned,  namely  that we  have a  window in  which  to adjust the  funds rate downward without

being perceived as  moving  in response to very strong pressures  that are working  against us in the

economy.  If we  move the funds  rate lower, and frankly  I would  be inclined  to lower it today, that

does not put  us in a position  where,  if the  move proves  wrong, there  is something  that would

prevent  us from moving back.  If in  what I would at this point  consider to be  a relatively  low

probability the financial  markets were  to  return to  what  we perceived  of as normal  two months

ago,  and if the  economy  started to  strengthen  again and the  stock market to move  higher, there is

nothing  that would prevent  us from reversing  our move.  At 5 percent,  for example, if we were to

move  the funds  rate 1/4 percentage  point lower today,  we  would not be  that far out of position  in

terms  of a real  funds rate  to address the  low  probability of an  upturn  in the economy.

At this stage,  after 50 years of looking at  the  economy on almost  a daily basis, I must say

that I have never  seen anything  like the  current  situation.  Certainly, based on  all the  historic

annals I have read,  and I have  done  a good  deal of reading  in economic  history, it would be an

extremely rare event  for this type of financial  environment  to emerge  and eventually  to recede

without  having any  impact on the economy.  Indeed,  I do not remember any  occasion  when  that

occurred  in the  past.

In  conclusion, I would be inclined  at this  stage to  move the funds rate down by  25 basis

points.  There  is an  inclination  on the part of a number of Board members  to accept  the

10/15/98

outstanding  requests of Reserve  Banks that want  to reduce  the discount rate  by 50  basis points.

As you  know, at least  those of you who  have  been  around  for  a while,  the convention  in this

Committee  is  not to vote on policy  adjustments  during intermeeting  periods.  The  reason is that

our directives in  essence  give the Chairman  of the  Committee,  in consultation  when feasible  with

the Committee  members,  the authority to request  the Desk to move  the federal  funds rate.  I

would  be  inclined  to reduce  the rate  by 25  basis points  and would  like to  put such  an action  on

the table, not for a vote but to hear whatever  objections  there may be  against it.  Unless I hear

strong  objections, I  would request  the  Desk to  move the rate  down  25 basis  points,  and having

done  that I would  call  a meeting  of the  Federal  Reserve  Board to request  approval  of a reduction

of 50 basis  point in the discount  rate.  So, I  very much  would  like to hear responses  to that funds

rate  proposal if I may.

MR. BOEHNE.  Mr. Chairman,  this is Ed Boehne.  I  agree  with  your recommendation  to

lower the funds rate  by 25  basis points.  I think  that the risks  are  on the downside  and that we

need to stay on  or ahead  of the curve.  I also think that our last  move was  misinterpreted.

Therefore, I think  your proposal is  a good idea.

Although  it is not something  for the Federal  Open  Market  Committee  to decide, I  would

like to express the  view  that a  50 basis  point reduction  of the discount  rate  in conjunction  with  a

25  basis point  drop in  the funds rate  is extraordinarily  unusual.  I do not recall that happening

before.  It may be confusing to the public.  I guess I would  ask the Board  to reconsider.  I agree

that we should  move the discount  rate down.  It just seems  to me  that it might  make  more sense

to  reduce it by the same  amount as the  funds rate because  the message  we  are  sending is  that we

are  open  to further declines.

10/15/98

In sum,  I  am for the 25  basis  point drop  in  the funds  rate,  and it seems  to me  that a 25

basis  point drop  in the discount  rate  would be  more consistent  with that.  I would just  ask the

Board to take  that  into account.

MR. MCTEER.  Mr.  Chairman,  Bob  McTeer.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Please  hold for a moment,  Bob.  Don  Kohn wants  to

respond to Ed Boehne's  comments.

MR. KOHN.  President Boehne,  you are correct  in  that most of the time the  discount rate

and the  funds rate are moved  by the  same  amount.  But  actually  in  1990  and  1991  there  were  five

instances  in which  the funds  rate  was  moved down  by  25 basis points  and the discount  rate by  50

basis  points.  So in that easing  environment such  a disparity  was not unusual.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Bob McTeer  is next.

MR. MCTEER.  Thank you.  As you  might  expect,  I would prefer  50 basis  points today

rather  than 25  on  the fed  funds  rate.  We  have a Texas  country  swing band down here  whose

name  is  "Asleep  at the Wheel."  I would hate  for the financial  markets to  give us that label  as

well.  I realize that I am in the  minority, but  I thought  I should  express  that view.

On  the question  of the discount  rate,  I think it is easily explained that we  did 25  basis

points  on  the fed funds rate  last time, 25  basis points  more  this time,  and 50 basis  points  on the

discount rate is  simply a  catch-up.  I would strongly  agree  with your 50 basis points  on  the

discount  rate.

VICE CHAIRMAN  MCDONOUGH.  Mr. Chairman,  Bill McDonough  here.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Yes, Bill.

VICE  CHAIRMAN  MCDONOUGH.  I noticed that you  really  asked  only if people

strongly disagreed  with  what  you  plan to  do.  I do not  strongly disagree  at  all.  I think  it would be

10/15/98

a great  idea if  we just told you that  we think that,  as usual,  you  are  doing  a fabulous job  and

allow  you and  the  other Board members  to  meet promptly to  approve  a reduction  in  the discount

rate.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  You  have  rendered the rest of your colleagues  to  silence!

[Laughter]

MS.  MINEHAN.  Mr. Chairman,  I don't have  any objection  to  the 25 basis  point

reduction  in  the  fed funds rate.  I do think that  Governor Kelley's  cautionary  comments  apply

with particular  force if we move both the discount rate  and the fed funds  rate on the same  day

just  a couple  of weeks  after our earlier action  and in  the face of a lot  of panic  in the financial

markets but evidently not much  change in  the real  economy.  While it may not happen,  I think

the combined  moves  have the potential  of feeding  rather than  assuaging  the panic  in  financial

markets.  I realize  that it is not my job to make  a  decision  on the  discount  rate, but I am

concerned  about  the proposal.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Are  you saying  that you  think the discount rate  should not

be  changed at all?

MS. MINEHAN.  I could  agree with not changing it at all because  we have  had discount

rates and fed funds rates  at the  same level  many times in the past.  I could  support reducing  the

discount rate by the  same amount  as the fed funds  rate.

MR.  PARRY.  Mr.  Chairman,  this is  Bob  Parry.  I would  not object to your

recommendation  with regard to the funds  rate.  With regard to the  discount rate,  we  at our Bank

have  been recommending  to our directors  that  they request  a reduction  in  the  discount  rate, which

as  you know  they have done.  So I could not  very well  object to a cut  in the discount  rate  either.

10/15/98

MR.  POOLE.  Mr. Chairman,  this is  Bill Poole.  I  would like to  associate myself with

Cathy Minehan's  position.  Thank  you.

MR.  GUYNN.  Mr.  Chairman, this  is Jack Guynn.  I would as  well.  If I had a vote  and if

the  Committee  were voting,  I certainly  would not dissent.  But  as Mike Kelley  suggested I  would

prefer to hold  off taking  action until  the next FOMC  meeting.  As  other presidents have  noted,

we do not have  an  official  say in  setting the discount rate.  Nevertheless,  I think a 50 basis point

reduction  in that rate  on top of the  25  basis  point cut in the  fed funds rate  clearly would be  a

terribly  strong intermeeting  action--and  one that I would prefer  not to  see us do.  Thank you.

MR.  STERN.  Mr.  Chairman,  this is Gary  Stern.  I think we have an  opportunity to reduce

the  funds rate and we  should  do so.  It is possible that the  move could  be misconstrued  by the

market,  but  it is also  possible  that we would be perceived as  moving  decisively.  I  am willing to

take  the  risk that the  market  will get it right.

As far as  the discount  rate is concerned,  for what it is worth  I would prefer  a  1/4 point

reduction,  but this is not a big issue  with me.

MR.  MOSKOW.  Mr. Chairman,  this is Mike Moskow.  I, too, would prefer the 25  basis

point reduction  in the  discount rate.  I would support  the proposed reduction  in the  fed funds  rate.

MR. HOENIG.  Mr.  Chairman,  this  is  Tom Hoenig.  I would not  object to the  25  basis

point reduction  in the fed funds  rate.  I am uneasy about  making this  move  this soon  after our late

September  action.  I  don't think there has been  enough  change  since the  September meeting to

warrant  the  rate cut, but  I certainly  understand  that it  is in some ways  an  insurance  action  and I

would  not object.

If I may express an  opinion  on the  discount  rate,  I would much  prefer a 1/4  point reduction

so that it comes  in the  same as  the reduction  in  the funds  rate.  That combination  does not sound

10/15/98

quite  as alarmist as one  involving  a  larger  discount rate.  With  reference  to the  earlier period  that

you  mentioned,  Don, I think  those  actions  might  have  been justified  during a  more difficult

period for the economy.  In any event,  the discount rate  is  someone else's  call  to make.

MR.  VARVEL.  Mr.  Chairman, this is  Walter Varvel  in  Richmond. We  have  similar

views.  We  would prefer to  see a reduction  at the  next regular meeting.  Taking the  unusual

action  in  an  intermeeting  period might  send the message  of a sense  of urgency  that could cause

the  markets  to  expect  further  or greater rate  reductions  in  the near term  than  we might

contemplate  at this point.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Others?

MR. JORDAN.  Mr. Chairman,  this is Jerry  Jordan.  I think most people know  my

position  on policy, namely that it is  too expansionary  at this point.  With regard to the  discount

rate,  its only economic  significance  is the message.  So  the question is  what message  we want to

send with  the  discount rate.  There  is real  significance  to what  we  do on the  funds rate.  I don't

think  a 1/4  point reduction  is  going to  do a  lot of damage  or help  a lot either.  But I  think the real

question  that must be  carefully  considered  about the discount  rate,  whether the change  is 1/4 or 1/2

point, is  the statement  that is made  about  policy now  and  the statement  that  will  have to  be  made

in  a subsequent  period  when the rate  has to be raised again.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Do any  of the Board members  have comments?  Governor

Rivlin.

MS.  RIVLIN.  I would agree  with  the Chairman.  I believe  we  want  to  send a strong

signal.  I don't think we should worry  about  the panic  factor.  I  suggested 50  basis points  on the

discount rate  because  I thought it would  give a stronger  signal.  Indeed,  if we  were only going to

do  25  on  the discount  rate, I  would be  inclined to move  the fed funds rate by perhaps  50 basis

10/15/98

points  because  I think  the point is to communicate  the  message  that  we are in  the action  here,  and

we  are doing  something major.

VICE CHAIRMAN  MCDONOUGH.  Mr. Chairman, Bill McDonough.  I fully agree

with Alice.

MR.  KELLEY.  Mr. Chairman,  this is  Mike Kelley.  After the  discussion that we have

had here  this  afternoon, I concur with the recommendation  of a 25  basis point reduction  in  the

funds rate today.  I also  think that  we  should lower the discount  rate  and that the  Board members

should discuss  a little further whether the  reduction  should be 25  or 50  basis points.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  We will  do that later.  Governor  Meyer.

MR. MEYER.  I agree  with the  25  basis  point move  in the  funds  rate.  In  general I think

the discount rate should be moved  in line with the funds rate.  I do not think of the  discount  rate

as  anything  other than complementing  policy.  And since we recently narrowed  the  spread

between the two rates to 25  basis points  from  50 basis  points, it is very  easy to justify a  50 basis

point  move on  the discount  rate. I guess that's where  I would  be.

MR. FERGUSON.  Mr. Chairman,  I concur  with your  recommendation  of a 25  basis

point reduction  in the funds rate.  I think we  are  being preemptive  and forward-looking  here.  I

believe we  should  take advantage  of this window  of opportunity to make  that change  so that we

do not  appear to be in  a panic  and reactive.  It will take  some time before  we  see  the effect in  the

real economy.

With respect to the  discount rate,  I think we should try to keep  it at a certain  level  below

the current funds rate.  Therefore,  I think a 50 basis point move  would be  appropriate,  but I will

suspend judgment and participate  in the further discussion  of that issue  by the Board.

10/15/98

MR. GRAMLICH.  I think a 25 basis point cut in the funds rate is fine.  I have this quaint

notion that the discount  rate  should be  above the funds  rate, so my  position on that  is the  smaller

the change  in the discount  rate the better.  So I prefer  0, 25,  and  50 in that order for the  discount

rate.

VICE  CHAIRMAN  MCDONOUGH.  Mr. Chairman,  could I take  the liberty  as Vice

Chairman  of the Committee  to thank you for the courtesy  that you have shown  your fellow

members of the FOMC  and the other Reserve  Bank presidents  by having  this meeting.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Thank  you.

MR. MOSKOW.  Mr. Chairman, just one  question.  Could you  give us some idea  as  to

what the  timing would be on an  announcement  of all this?

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Yes.  I think we  should just read the  proposed statement

first, just as it  relates to the federal  funds rate.  Don Kohn, would you read this  and then tell us

what you recommend  on  the timing?  We have to  go into  a Board Meeting to discuss the  discount

rate.  I don't  want to presume  where  we  will  come  out.  We will  obviously make  the

announcement  after the Board meeting.

MR.  KOHN.  This is a  draft, Mr. Chairman.  Obviously we  can  fine-tune it  after the

discussion,  but the heart  of it would be "The Federal  Reserve today  announced the following

policy actions:  The Board  of Governors  approved  a reduction  in the  discount rate from  5 to

either 4-3/4 or 4-1/2 percent,  depending  on what the  Board  decides. The federal  funds  rate is expected

to fall  25 basis  points from  around  5-1/4 percent to  around  5  percent."  There are  then two

explanatory  sentences:  "Growing  caution by lenders  and unsettled  conditions  in financial  markets

more  generally  are likely to be  restraining  spending  and damping  inflation  pressures  in the  future.

10/15/98

Against this  backdrop,  prompt  easing of the  stance of monetary  policy  was judged to be

warranted  to  sustain economic  growth in  the context  of continued  low inflation."

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  We  can close  the FOMC  meeting  with a decision  that the

Desk  will be requested  to lower  the funds rate by 25  basis points.  We  will immediately  go into  a

Board meeting  and hopefully  make  a reasonably  quick decision.  Don Kohn,  what  is the

appropriate  time for release?

MR.  KOHN.  I think for  the discount rate there is  no  set time.  I believe  we should get the

announcement  out as quickly  as possible  once  there  is  agreement  on the action and the wording.

So  I think perhaps  an hour from now  is feasible  or even  less if possible. We  are not constrained

by the practice  followed  after regularly  scheduled  FOMC  meetings  where the release  time is  set

for 2:15 p.m.  We will  try to move  through  the process  of preparing  the press release  as rapidly  as

possible.  I would  expect it to be out  within  the  hour.

CHAIRMAN  GREENSPAN.  Thank  you  very much,  everybody.  We  will get to work as

quickly  as  we can on  the discount rate issue.

END  OF SESSION

Secretary's  Note:  The Board of Governors  voted  to approve a 1/4  percentage  point

reduction  in the  discount rate,  and the statement  announcing  both  actions  was released to the

press at  about  3:15 p.m.  on the date  of this  conference  call  meeting.




==== GREENBOOK | 1998-09-29_fomc19980929gbpt119980923.txt ====

Prefatory Note 

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 

available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain. 

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 

gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.    

1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Strictly Confidential  (FR)  Class II FOMC

Part  1

September 23,  1998

CURRENT  ECONOMIC
AND  FINANCIAL CONDITIONS

Summary  and  Outlook

Prepared for the  Federal Open Market  Committee
by the  staff of the  Board of Governors of the  Federal  Reserve System

Strictly Confidential  (FR)  Class  II FOMC

September 23,  1998

SUMMARY  AND  OUTLOOK

Prepared for the  Federal Open  Market Committee
by the staff of the Board  of Governors of the Federal  Reserve System

Domestic  Developments

Overview
The  recent  performance  of the  U.S.  economy  has  not  differed  greatly  from  what  we
anticipated  in the  August  Greenbook.  Real  GDP has  evidently  risen moderately  in the
third  quarter.  Domestic  final  demand  appears still  to be  relatively  robust,  but
manufacturing  activity  continues  to  be restrained  by  a  deteriorating  trade  balance  and
by  efforts  to curb  non-motor  vehicle  inventory  accumulation.  Labor markets  have
remained  extremely  tight  overall,  while  indicators  of inflation  trends  continue  to  be
mixed.

But this  has been  a  far  from  placid  time.  Indeed,  the  intermeeting  period  has

been  marked by  financial tumult  of such  a  magnitude  as  to significantly  alter  the
outlook  for the  economy.  Given  the  lags  in  the  response  of domestic  demand  to  these
shocks,  the effects  are  not  really  apparent  in the  very  near term  path for real  GDP,  but
they  leave  a  considerable  mark  on the  projected  strength  of activity  in  1999.  A  deeper
retrenchment  in U.S.  stock markets,  more  cautious  credit  provision,  and  more  serious
disruptions  to  economic  growth  abroad  are  now  expected  to  combine  to produce  a
sharper  deceleration  in  output  than  we  predicted  in August:  After  rising  at  an  annual
rate  of about  2-1/2  percent  on average  in  the  current  half-year,  real  GDP  is projected
to increase  just  1-1/4  percent  over  the  four quarters  of  1999.  This  pushes  the
unemployment  rate  up about  3/4  percentage  point  by the end  of next  year.

The  outlook  for aggregate  demand  would  be  still  weaker  had  we not  changed

our monetary  policy  assumption.  We  have  set  aside  our  previous  assumption  of a
stable  federal  funds rate  and  have  instead  anticipated  that the  System  will  ease  money
market  conditions  appreciably  between  now  and next  spring.  The  lower  path  for the
federal  funds  rate  exerts  a  significant  influence  on  the trajectory  of the  economy  in the
latter  half of  1999  and  in 2000.  With  this  Greenbook,  we  have  extended  our forecast
through  2000  for  the first time.  The  Fed easing,  along with  a  diminishing  drag  from
the  external  sector,  helps  to restore  real  GDP  growth  by  the  second  half of  2000  to
around  the  assumed  2-3/4  percent  trend  of potential  output,  stabilizing  the jobless rate
a  touch  below  5-1/2  percent.

The  incoming  information  on  labor  cost trends  has  been  ambiguous.  However,
we  continue  to think that  compensation  increases  probably  are  flattening  this year  and
will  fall  off some  in  1999--reflecting  not  only  the  effects  of weaker profits  and  of
slower  business  expansion  on  commissions  and  bonuses but,  more  generally,  the
favorable  trend  of price  expectations.  Consumer  prices  have been  held  down  this year

Part 1:  Summary and Outlook, September 23,  1998

by  the  declining  costs  of oil  and other  materials,  but  in coming  months,  energy  prices
should  turn  up a  bit, and  the  softening  of the  dollar  on  foreign  exchange  markets
should  lead to  the firming  of import  prices.  Thus,  we  continue  to project  a  pickup in
overall  CPI  inflation  from just  over  1-1/2  percent  in the  twelve  months that  ended  in
August  to  around  2  percent  during  1999  and 2000.

Key  Background  Factors
As  noted  above,  we  have  changed  our  monetary  policy  assumption  this  round,  in
anticipation  of an  appreciable  decline  in the  federal  funds  rate  between  now  and  next

spring.  We  chose  the timing  and dimension  of the  easing  steps  with an  eye  to
bolstering  demand  enough  that  real  GDP  would  again  be  rising  at  a  moderate  rate
toward  the  end of the projection  period and  to  preventing  the unemployment  rate  from
moving  above  our  notional  NAIRU.  The  assumed  decline  in the funds  rate  appears  to
be  in  the  vicinity  of what  the  market  currently  is anticipating.

In  the  August Greenbook,  we  indicated  that the  prevailing  5-1/2  percent  funds

rate  would  have  been thought  to be fairly  restrictive  were  it not  for the  financial
stimulus  associated with  a high  stock market  and  aggressive  lending.  Those  conditions
have  clearly  changed  in the  intervening  period.  Even  with  monetary  policy  easing, we
do  not  see  financial  markets  returning  to  their previous  accommodative  state.  Market
participants  will  likely  be  licking  their  wounds  for  a  while,  and they  will  have  to
contend  with  an ongoing  flow  of sour  economic  news  over  the  coming  months.

That  news  will no  doubt  include  negative  reports  on corporate  profitability  that
should  weigh  on  the  stock market,  where  current  expectations  of  earnings  and  notions
of  "normal"  investment  returns  still seem  out  of touch with reality.  Under  the
circumstances,  we  expect  that major  share  price  averages  will  slip back to the  recent
lows before  staging  a  minimal recovery  that  begins  next  spring.  This  may  still  be  a
conservative  prediction:  In our  projection,  corporate  profits  decline  5-1/2  percent  over
1999  before  rebounding  4  percent  in 2000.  Consequently,  price-earnings  multiples
will  remain high  by historical  standards,  leaving  the market  vulnerable  to  a
considerably  greater  correction.  As  in the  last  Greenbook,  we  have  chosen  to address
that  downside  risk through  an alternative  scenario  using  a  model  simulation  described
at  the  end of  this section.

The  shakiness  of business  conditions  over the  next  several  quarters  is  likely to

affect  credit  markets  along  with  the  equity  sector.  Risk  spreads  on  corporate  bonds

have  widened  dramatically  in recent  weeks--indeed,  by  more  than  would  seem
explicable  by  a reasoned  reassessment  of default  risks  per  se.  Rather,  hit by  losses

Domestic Developments

initially  on  "submerging"  market  investments  and  on  other  leveraged  trading  strategies,
many  of  the players  have  sought  to reduce  their  risk exposures;  in the  process,  the
corporate  sector has  been  the  victim  of collateral  damage,  so  to speak  We foresee
some  narrowing  of corporate  bond  spreads  as  market  participants  regain  their  footing,
but  we  do not  expect  them to  approach  the negligible  risk premiums  that  prevailed
before.  On  balance,  given the  greater  economic  adversities  in this  forecast  and  the
renewed  awareness  of risk,  we  are  anticipating  a  greater  degree  of  restraint  in private
credit  supplies  than  was  built into  our  previous  forecast--not  only  in the  corporate
bond markets  but  also  in  bank  lending  to  businesses  and,  to  a  much  lesser degree,  to
consumers.

We  are  assuming  that  after  next  spring,  the  federal  funds  rate will  be  steady
through  2000.  Given  that  the expectation  of Fed  easing  is  now  so  strongly  held,  we
do  not  foresee  much,  if any,  further  decline  in  Treasury  yields  beyond  the  very  short
end.  The  yield  curve  should  steepen  as  prospects  for  a pickup  in  economic  activity
are  seen  to  improve  and  expectations  regarding  subsequent  Fed  action  become  neutral.
On  balance,  we  do  not  expect,  over  the  next  couple  of  years,  to  see  any  major
departures  in  longer-term  Treasury  interest rates  from  the  range  established  in the
intermeeting  period--but  yields  on higher-risk  private  bonds  should  come  down  a  little
as risk  spreads  narrow.

The  dollar has  depreciated  substantially  against  the yen  and  key  Continental

currencies  since  the  last FOMC  meeting,  but  it  has  declined  less  in  real  terms  as
measured  by  our broad  index  of 29  foreign  currencies.  On this broader  basis,  we  are
projecting  a  1 percent  decline  on the  dollar  in  the  fourth  quarter  as the  Federal
Reserve  eases  monetary  policy.  Thereafter,  the  broad  real  dollar  index  trends
gradually  lower--roughly  1 percent  per  year--over  the  remainder  of the  projection
period.

Weighing  heavily  on  financial  markets  in recent  weeks  has  been  renewed

concern  about  the  outlook for  economic  stability  and  growth  in several  parts  of the
world.  Relative  to  our previous  forecast,  the largest  changes  in  the  outlook for
foreign  economic  growth  are  in Latin  America.  However,  we  have  also  marked  down
our  projections  for growth  in  other  areas.  Overall,  we  now  expect  a  slight  contraction
in  foreign  economic  output  over  the  second  half of this  year.  We  anticipate  that,  in
1999,  continued  weakness  in output  in  Asia  and  in  South  America  will  hold  growth  of

foreign  real  GDP  to less  than  1-1/2  percent--around  3/4  percentage  point below  our

assumption  in  the  August  projection.  We  are  expecting  that,  by  2000,  foreign
economic  growth  will  pick  up to  2-1/2  percent.

Part 1: Summary and Outlook  September 23,  1998

Over  the past few  months,  OPEC  and  its  allies  appear  to  have  been  largely
successful  in achieving  the production  cuts that  they  pledged  to  implement  in late
June.  As  a  result,  progress  has  been made  in reducing  excess  inventories  of crude  oil,
and world  oil  prices have  firmed.  The  spot  price  of WTI  crude  should  average  about
$14.50  per  barrel  for  September,  and we  expect  it to  climb  somewhat  above  $16  per
barrel  by  the  first quarter  of next  year--a  little  higher than  at the beginning  of this
year.  Given  prospects  for world  economic  growth  at  the time  of the  August
Greenbook,  we  projected  that  oil  prices  would  continue  to  move up  a  bit  further  over
the  course  of  1999.  The  current  projection,  however, embodies  weaker  world  demand
next  year,  and  in that  context,  we  now  think it  more  likely that  prices  of crude  oil  will
average  $16  per barrel  in  1999.  We have  assumed  that oil  prices  will  tick up to
$16.50  per  barrel  in  2000  because  of the  continued  weakening  of the  dollar.

Although  the  President's predicament  has introduced  some  new  political
dynamics  into the  situation, the  fiscal  policy  assumptions  underlying  our  forecast  have
not  changed.  We  have  assumed  that there  will  be no  government  shutdown  and that
efforts  to  push through  some  tax  cuts  or  to raise  spending  above  the  caps  will  be
rebuffed.'  The  changed  economic  projection  and stock  market  path have  led  us  to
mark  down  our  prediction  for  the  federal  budget surplus  a  bit.  After  reaching  roughly
$68  billion  in the fiscal  year now  ending,  the  surplus  is expected  to shrink  to  around
$56  billion  in fiscal  1999,  about  $6 billion  less  than  our  August  projection.  For  fiscal
2000,  we  expect  the  surplus  to fall  slightly,  to $52  billion.  This trajectory  is  less
favorable  than that described  by  the  CBO  of late,  and  it  may alter  the  rhetoric  next
year  regarding  the  use  of future  government  surpluses.

Recent  Developments  and  the Near-Term  Outlook
We  now  expect  that real  GDP  will  increase  at  an  annual  rate  of around  2-1/2 percent
in both  the third  and the  fourth  quarters--a  projection  marginally  above  that  in the  last
Greenbook.  As  before,  domestic  final  demand  is projected  to remain  relatively
strong--although  not  so  strong  as  in  the  first half of the  year:  Domestic  final  sales  are
expected  to  be  up  at  an annual  rate  of 3-3/4  percent,  on  average,  this  quarter  and  next,
versus  6-3/4  percent  during  the  first  two  quarters  of the  year.  At the  same time,  we

1. A  temporary  extension  of funding for  government  operations,  through  October  9, was  passed  by
the Congress  last  week.  We  assume  that  it  will be  signed  and  then  followed by  either  another  extension
or,  eventually,  a resolution  of  1999  appropriations.

2.  The surplus  now  reported for fiscal  1998  is  lower  than  we had  expected  because  recent  figures
from  OMB  for  September  revealed  losses  from  spectrum  loans and  higher  expenditures  for agricultural
programs  as  a  result of low  commodity  prices.

Domestic Developments

Summary  of  the  Near-Term  Outlook
(Percent  change  at annual  rate  except  as  noted)

Measure 

Real GDP 

Private  domestic  final purchases 

Personal  consumption 
Residential  investment 
Business  fixed  investment 

Government  outlays  for

1998:Q2 

1998:Q3 

1998:Q4

BEA 
prel. 

1.6 
7.6 
5.8 
14.8 
12.6 

Sept. 
GB 

Aug. 
GB 

Sept. 
GB 

Aug. 
GB 

1.9 
7.4 
5.9 
15.5 
12.7 

2.2 
3.3 
3.6 
8.5 
-.6 

2.6 
3.4 
3.5 
10.9 
.3 

2.5 
4.2 
3.1 
2.7 
12.2 

Sept.
GB

2.6
4.9
3.4
5.3
14.2

consumption  and  investment 

3.6 

3.6 

1.4 

2.1 

2.7 

1.5

- Inventory  investment 

Net  exports 

-52.3 
-47.8 

-51.6 
-45.9 

7.6 
-26.1 

6.7 
-20.7 

-8.2 
-26.0 

-7.9
-30.2

Change,  billions of
chained  (1992)  dollars

anticipate  a  further  drag  from net  exports,  although  it  is  only  half as  large  as  during
the  first  two  quarters  of the  year.  We  continue  to  anticipate  that, while  auto  dealers
will  be  restocking,  other nonfarm  businesses  will be  offsetting  that  impulse  to  produce
by  slowing  their inventory  investment  from the  unsustainable  pace  of the  first half.

Real  PCE  is projected  to  rise  at an  annual  rate of  3-1/2  percent  in the  third  and

fourth  quarters,  versus  6  percent  in the  first  half.  For the  current  quarter,  the  story  is
basically  the  drop-off  in  sales  of new  light motor  vehicles  owing  to  tight supplies  and
a  payback  after  the spring  incentive  programs  ended;  retail  trade figures  through
August  point to  another  large  increase  in  spending  on  other  goods,  and outlays  for
services  have  likely  remained  on  a  strong  uptrend.  Although  anecdotes  of individuals
backing  away  from  some  discretionary  purchases  have  already  surfaced,  we  doubt  that
the  turmoil  in  financial markets  and the  apparent  ebbing  in  consumer  confidence  have
much  affected  consumer  demand  in the aggregate  to date.  As  we  move  through  the
next few  months,  however,  the  decline  in household  wealth  and the deterioration  in
sentiment  will  likely hold  spending  in  closer  alignment  with  income  trends  than was
the  case  earlier this year.

Housing  demand--buoyed  by  gains  in employment,  income,  and  wealth and  by

the  lowest  interest  rates  on  fixed-rate  mortgages  since  1993--also  was  robust this
summer.  Housing  starts  jumped  in July,  as  single-family  starts  climbed  to  an annual
rate  of  1.30  million  units  and multifamily  starts  surged  to more  than  400,000 units.

Part 1:  Summary and Outlook, September 23, 1998

Even  given the  favorable  underlying  conditions,  the  July  figures  looked  a  bit  high,  and
we  were  not surprised  to see  starts  drop  back  in  August  to  1.25  million  units for
singles  and  370,000  for multis.  We  are  looking  for  only  a  mild  slackening  in the  pace
of starts  in the  near term.  Shortages  of  construction  workers  in  a  number  of localities,
along  with  the  usual  difficulties  in obtaining  building  sites  and regulatory  clearances,
probably  have  led to  a  backlog  of  deferred  starts;  at  the  same  time,  demand  indicators
have  shown no  significant  softening  yet, despite  reports  that  some  potential  buyers
have  backed  off from  purchases  because  of stock  market  losses.  Applications  for
loans  for  home  purchase  were  still setting  new  highs through  mid-September,  and
mortgage  rates  have  come  down  considerably  over  the  past  few  weeks.  A  further
sharp  increase  in  real  residential  investment  expenditures  is baked  in  the  cake  for  the
third quarter  (our  estimate  is about  11  percent,  annual  rate);  given  lags  from starts to
construction,  outlays  will  likely  post a  substantial,  though smaller,  advance  in  the  fall
quarter.

The  quarterly  pattern  of increases  in  business  fixed  investment  is expected  to
be uneven  in the  second  half of the  year.  On  average,  the  rise  should  be slower  than
it was  over  the  first half--owing  in  part to  decelerating  output  and weakening  cash
flow  (especially in  manufacturing).  The  flattening  in BFI  this  quarter  can be  traced
partly  to a  drop-off  in business  purchases  of light motor  vehicles  as a  result  of the  GM
strikes;  that drag  should  be  reversed  in the  fourth  quarter  as  supplies  expand.  Another
negative  this  quarter  is the expected  decline  in deliveries  of aircraft  to  domestic
buyers--a  downswing  that  is mirrored  in a  pickup  in  aircraft  exports.  Otherwise,
domestic  purchases  of business  equipment,  at  present,  still  appear  to  be growing
relatively  rapidly,  on balance.  For nonresidential  construction,  we  are  projecting  little
change  in  outlays  during  the  second half of this year.  Further work  on  office  and
commercial  projects  should be  a  plus,  but  industrial  building  is  falling,  and  the  recent
firming  in  oil prices  does not  appear  to have  been  sufficient  to stem  a  slide in  outlays
for  domestic  drilling structures.

July  data  on  inventory  investment  in manufacturing  and trade  suggest  that  we

were  on  the  right  track in  expecting  that firms--apart  from  motor  vehicle
distributors--would  be  trimming  their  rate  of stock accumulation  in the  current  quarter.
At the  same  time,  the  sharp  step-up  in  production  after  the  GM strikes  appears  likely
to yield  a  slight  rise  in vehicle  inventories.  On  balance,  the rate  of nonfarm  inventory
investment  may  be  a  little  higher in this  quarter  than in  the  last, contributing
fractionally  to  the  rise  in real  GDP.  We expect  a  reversal  of that contribution  in the

Domestic Developments

fourth  quarter,  as  a  further  slowing  in  non-vehicle  inventory  accumulation  will bring
the  rate  of increase  in total  nonfarm  stocks down  to  around  2-1/2  percent.

The  decline  in real  net  exports  over the  second  half of  this  year is  expected  to

continue  to  be sizable,  albeit  about half as  steep  as  in the  first two  quarters  of the
year.  Nonagricultural  exports  held up  surprisingly  well  in  July,  but  we  expect  them  to
be  falling  for the remainder  of the  year.  Net exports  are  projected  to hold  down  the
increase  in real  GDP  almost  1 percentage  point  in  the  third  quarter  and  then  around
1-1/4  percentage  points  in the  fourth  quarter.

After  having  posted  an  outsized  increase  in the  second  quarter,  real  federal

purchases  should  drop back  a  bit, on  balance,  during  the  second  half of the  year.  Last
quarter's  figures  were  boosted  by  a  surge  in  defense  expenditures,  which  made  up  for
the large  decline  that  occurred  in the  first  quarter.  Real  nondefense  expenditures  are
projected  to  remain  flat.  At  the  same  time,  we  are  anticipating  a pickup  in  spending  at
the  state  and  local  levels during  the  second  half;  preliminary  numbers  on  construction
in July  were  weak,  but we  expect  that,  especially  given  the financial  health  of these
jurisdictions,  expenditures  will  rise in  coming  months.

For a  change,  the  incoming  information  from  the  labor  market  appears  to  line

up  reasonably  well  with  our  reading  of the  spending  indicators.  Hiring  has  slowed
somewhat  in  recent  months;  private  payroll  gains  averaged  180,000  per  month in  July
and  August,  down  from more than 220,000  per  month  during  the  first  half of the  year.
The  deceleration  can be  traced  mainly to  deeper  cutbacks  in  manufacturing  jobs.
However,  the  recent  low level  of claims  for  unemployment  benefits  suggests  that  labor
demand  is hardly  crumbling,  and we  are  projecting  only  a  gradual  moderation  in
payroll  growth  over the  remainder  of the  year.

Firms  still have  a good number  of unfilled  positions  that they  may  seek to  fill
despite  increased  concerns  about  the business  outlook.  Complaints  about  shortages  of
workers  remain  numerous,  and firms  may not  want  to pass  up opportunities  to hire
until  activity  deteriorates  convincingly.  If anything,  the  reports  in  the  latest  Beige
Book suggest  that  more  firms  may  be  hiking  pay  substantially  to  attract  or  to retain
workers.  However,  whether  what is  happening  to pay  is anything beyond the
acceleration  over  the past  year that  has  already  been  captured  in the published
aggregate  wage  statistics  is difficult  to judge.  The  only  new  data  we  have  received
since  the  last  Greenbook  are  those  for average  hourly  earnings  in  August;  while wages
by this  measure  were  up  1/2 percent  last month,  the  rise  followed  a  couple  of  small
increases  and  left  the  trend in  wage  inflation  ambiguous.  We  are  sticking  with  our

forecast  that ECI  compensation  will  increase  at  a  3-3/4  percent  rate  in  the  third  and

Part 1:  Summary and Outlook, September 23,  1998

fourth  quarters,  holding  the  year-over-year  change  at  about  3-1/2  percent,  where  it  has
been since  last fall.

Our projection  for the  CPI over  the  second  half  of the  year also  is  virtually

unchanged,  on balance,  from  the  August  Greenbook--with  the  core  index  rising at  an
annual  rate  of 2.1  percent  and the overall  index  a  couple  of tenths  less than  that.  We
had expected  that  the  decline  in  retail  energy  prices  would  extend  into  the  current
quarter,  but it  appears  to  have  been  steeper  than  we  anticipated.  And  despite  the
recent  upturn  in  the  price  of crude  oil, we  now  expect  that retail  energy  prices  will
rise  only  a  little,  on  average,  during  the  fourth quarter.  On the  other hand,  our  near-
term  projections  for food  prices  are  now  a  shade  higher.  For the  core  CPI, the  August
increase of  0.2  percent  appears  to have  been  influenced  appreciably  by  increases  for a
couple  of items  that  likely  will not be  repeated  in  September:  A  late Labor  Day
evidently  delayed  the usual  back-to-school  discounts  on apparel,  and  the  bimonthly
sampling  in some  cities  spread  the backup  in  prices  of motor  vehicles  after  the
expiration  of the substantial  June  incentives  into  August.

The  Outlook  for the  Economy  in  1999  and  2000
The more  adverse  shocks to  demand  in  this  Greenbook have  given  our
longer-term  outlook  a more  cyclical  cast--although  that change  has  been  considerably
tempered  by  the  revised  policy  assumption.  We  are  now  assuming  a  sharp  step-down
in  the  rate  of increase  in final  sales  early  next  year that  engenders  a  very  mild
inventory  imbalance.  Real  GDP  is  projected to  increase  at an  annual  rate  of  but
1 percent  during  the first  half of  1999  and at just  over  a  1-1/2  percent  pace  in the
second half.  The  effect  of the slackening  in resource  utilization  over  the year  on  core
inflation  largely  offsets  the firming  in  non-oil  import  prices.  The  CPI  is  projected  to

rise  2.1  percent  over  the four quarters  of the  year,  whereas  the  PCE chain-weighted
price  index  should  rise just  over  1-1/2 percent.

The  monetary  easing  that we  have  incorporated  in  the projection  is expected  to

help boost  the  increase  in real  GDP  in  2000 to  an  annual  rate  of around  2 percent  in
the first  half of the year  and  to a  rate  of about  2-3/4 percent  in  the second  half.3
However,  factoring  in a  rebound  in growth  of labor  productivity,  the unemployment
rate  is  expected  still  to be  almost  1 percentage  point  above  its  current  level  in  2000,

3.  We  built  a  Year  2000 wrinkle  into  our  forecast.  At the  end  of  1999, we expect  to  see  some
precautionary  inventory  accumulation  in advance  of potential  production  disruptions.  Those  additional
stocks  are  drawn  down  in the  first  quarter  of 2000.  At the  same  time,  we  also  allowed  for some
disruption  of  activity in  the  first  quarter  of 2000.  Together, these  two  effects  hold  down  the increase  in
real  GDP  in  the first  quarter  of 2000,  and  output bounces  back in  the  second quarter.

Domestic  Developments

Summary  of  Staff Projections
(Percent  change,  compound  annual  rate)

Measure 

1998:H2 

1999:H1 

1999:H2 

Real  GDP 

Previous 

Final  sales 

Previous 

PCE 

Previous 

Residential  investment 

Previous 

BFI 

Previous 

Government  purchases 

Previous 

Exports 

Previous 

Imports 

Previous 

Inventory  change 
Previous 

Net  exports 
Previous 

.

. Not  applicable.

2.6 
2.3 

2.7 
2.4 

3.4 
3.3 

8.0 
5.5 

7.0 
5.6 

1.8 
2.0 

-2.3 
-1.4 

6.6 
7.5 

.9 
1.3 

1.2 
1.5 

2.5 
2.5 

-6.1 
-4.1 

4.3 
4.9 

1.0 
1.0 

.1 
1.9 

6.8 
7.3 

1.6 
2.0

1.6 
2.1

2.2 
2.6

-1.5 
-3.2

3.0 
4.8

1.3 
1.3

2.6 
4.1

5.3 
5.7

2000

2.4

2.2

2.4

1.4

5.4

1.5

4.7

6.6

Change,  billions  of chained  (1992)  dollars

-1.2 
-.6 

-50.9 
-52.1 

-14.9 
-10.0 

-41.9 
-36.2 

.3 
-3.9

-21.7 
-17.0 

14.8

-41.7
.

and  despite  sharply  reduced  expansion  of manufacturing  capacity,  the utilization  rate  is
anticipated  to  be noticeably  below  where  it  is now.  In  that  environment,  inflation  in
2000  is  expected to be  unchanged  from  its  pace  in  1999.

Consumer  spending.  Clearly,  one  of the  key  elements  in the  outlook  is our

assessment  of the prospects  for the  stock market  and  of the  impact  of declining  share
values  on  household  spending  patterns.  We  continue  to  believe  that the  outsized
increase  in consumer  demand  relative  to  income  over  the past few  years was  largely  a
result  of the  rise in  household  net  worth,  in which  the stunning  rise  of share  prices

was  the  major  driver.  With the  recent sharp  decline  in those  prices,  the  ratio  of net
worth to  income  has  dropped  appreciably,  and the  additional  stimulus  from  the  "wealth

I-10

Part 1:  Summary and Outlook, September 23,  1998

effect"  should  fade  over  the next  few  quarters.  For this  reason,  our  forecast  shows the
personal  saving  rate  essentially  stabilizing--at  a  very low  level--as  spending  increases
roughly  in line  with  disposable  income.

Given the  increased  and more  direct  role  of  equities  in  the  finances  of
households  (especially  with  so many  individuals  seemingly  banking  on  their  IRAs  and
401(k) accounts  for  retirement  security),  one  might  wonder  whether  the  market
reversal  could  precipitate  a  more  radical  shift  in  savings  propensities  in  the  present
case.  The jury  is  still  out  on  that question.  The  preliminary  Michigan  SRC  survey  for
September  did  reveal  some  concern  among  households  about  the  decline  in the market
and  its  consequences,  but  it  provided  no sign  that  respondents  were  alarmed  enough  to
alter  their  spending  habits  radically.  One  reason  may  be  that  individuals  seem  to have
retained  their  faith  in  the  longer-term  profitability  of the  stock  market  investments:
Mutual  fund  customers  have  redeemed  only  modest  portions  of their equity  fund
holdings,  and  surveys  indicate  that  they have  maintained  optimistic  views  of the
longer-term  returns  on equity  investments.  The  further  slippage  in  the  markets
anticipated  in  this forecast  should  do  little  to  alter this thinking--although  a  more
sizable  decline  might  exact  a  greater toll  of confidence,  possibly  exaggerating  the
normal  wealth  effects  on spending.

Be  that as  it  may,  we  are projecting  that  real  PCE  will  rise  2.4  percent  in  1999.

We are  looking  for a  decided  deceleration  of spending  on  discretionary  items  in the
nondurables  and services  categories.  However,  we  also  expect  that  demand  for
durable  goods  will  moderate.  Notably,  purchases  of motor  vehicles,  which  have  been
strong  for several  years  now,  should  slip, and  a  slackening  of housing  activity  should
take  some  of the steam  out  of the demand  for  furniture  and  appliances.  The rise  in
PCE is projected to be moderate  again  in 2000;  given  our  expectation  that share  prices
will  remained  subdued,  spending  will  do  well  to keep up with  gains  in  income.

Housing.  Starts  of new homes  are  projected  to  fall back noticeably  during

1999.  Single-family  starts  are  expected  to  drop  to  1.18  million units next year  after
having  averaged  1.25  million units  in  1998.  The  negative  effects  of the  drop  in  wealth
and  of slower  employment  and income  gains  will  tend  to  outweigh  the  stimulus from
lower  mortgage  interest  rates.  However,  because  the  level  of home  construction  would
remain  quite  high,  additions  to  supply  would  still be  ample.  Given  the lack  of pent-up
demand,  we  are  projecting  single-family  starts  to  be unchanged  in  2000,  despite

improving  job growth.

We  also  anticipate  a  weakening  in  the  market  for apartment  units  next  year.

This  year has  been another  relatively  strong  one  for multifamily  starts,  and those  units

Domestic Developments

1-11

will  be  coming  on  the market  at  a time  when  demand  from  potential  buyers  and
renters  is  easing.  The  effect  of a  backup  in vacancy  rates  could  be reinforced  by  a
more  cautious  attitude  among  lenders.  The  flow  of capital  from  REITs  already  has
slackened  as the  equity  market  has  turned  negative  on these  entities  this  year.  As  a
result,  after  having  stayed  at  around  340,000  units  for  two  consecutive  years,
multifamily  starts  probably  will  drop  back to  around  300,000  units  next  year before
firming  a  bit  in 2000.

Business  fixed  investment.  Real  business  fixed  investment  is  projected to

decelerate  further  next  year,  rising 3-1/2  percent  over  the  four  quarters  of  1999  after
having  increased  at  an  average  annual  rate  of 7  percent  during  the  second  half of
1998.  The  step-down  occurs  entirely  in spending  for  producers'  durable  equipment.
Underlying  that  deceleration  is the  slower  trend in  sales,  a  marked  deterioration  in
corporate  cash  flow  next year,  and  a  less  favorable  external  financing  environment.
The  slowing  in real  outlays  for producers'  durables  is  expected to  be

widespread  by  type  of equipment.  Even  spending  on  computing  equipment,  which  we
expect  will rise  more  than  60  percent  in  real  terms  in  1998,  is  not  expected  to  be
immune  from  prospective  cutbacks  in capital  budgets.  However,  steeply  falling  prices
along  with  a  desire  to take  advantage  of newly  available  features  and to resolve  Year
2000  problems  should  prop  up  spending  somewhat--especially  early  in  the  year,  before
some  firms  suspend  major  system  upgrades  so  that  they  can  focus  on  final  software
fixes  and  testing.  In nominal  terms,  we  are  projecting  that  outlays  for  computers  will
rise  only  a  few percent  next year,  which  when  deflated  translates  into  more  than  a
30  percent  gain  in real,  quality-adjusted  terms.  Outlays  for  communications  equipment
also  should  post  another  sizable  real  increase  in  1999,  supported  by  the rapidly
growing  demand  for  the  widening  array  of telecommunications  services  that  are  being
offered  at  attractive  prices.  However,  we  expect  to  see  cutbacks  over  the  course  of the
year in  deliveries  of aircraft  and motor  vehicles  to  domestic  firms  and  only  a  small
increase  in  outlays  for  other  types of  equipment  overall.  Concerns  in  some
manufacturing  industries  are  expected  to  lead to  a  considerable  reduction  in their
purchases  of new  equipment  to  curb  the growth  of excess,  unprofitable  capacity.

Nonresidential  construction  is expected  to  change  little,  on  balance,  over the

projection  period.  Financing  conditions  have  deteriorated  considerably  in the
commercial  sector.  During  1999,  the  weaker  rise  in  sales  will put  a  damper  on  the
desire to  undertake  new  office  and  commercial  projects,  which  have been  this  year's
bright  spots.  However,  with  oil prices  firming,  we  expect  the recent  sharp  drop  in

1-12

Part 1: Summary and Outlook, September 23,  1998

outlays  for  drilling  and  mining  structures to  stop.  Industrial  building,  which  has
already  fallen  considerably  this  year,  is  projected  to  continue  declining.

Business  inventories.  We  are  assuming  that,  by the  end  of this year,
businesses  (other  than  GM  dealers,  who  are  now  restocking)  will  have  significantly
moderated  the  expansion  of  their  inventories,  leaving  few,  if any,  noticeable
imbalances  as  the new  year begins.  However,  the marked  deceleration  of  sales  in
1999  will  call  for a  further  diminution  in the  pace  of  inventory  accumulation.  We
would  not be  surprised  to  see  some  increase  in  inventory-sales  ratios  in the early  part
of the year,  when  final  demand  is particularly  weak,  but  we  are  expecting  the

adjustments  to occur  quite quickly  and have  not  anticipated  any  dramatic  inventory

dynamics.  On net, the  expected  down-shifting  in the rate  of nonfarm  inventory
investment  is projected  to  be a  slight  drag  on  real  GDP  next  year.  In  2000,
inventories  are  assumed  to  rise roughly  in  line  with  sales  and to  make  a  marginally
positive  contribution  to  the increase  in real  GDP.

Farm  inventories  are  expected  to  accumulate  at  a  slower  pace  in  1999  as
producers  curb  output  in response  to  the  lower prices  that  they have  experienced  this
year  and export  demand  stabilizes.

Government  spending.  Real  federal  purchases  are  projected  to decline  at an

annual  rate  of  1-1/4 percent  over the  forecast  period.  This trajectory  is  consistent  with
the  1997  budget  agreement,  which  set limits  on discretionary  spending  and  required
that  any  changes  to  tax  or mandatory  outlay  programs  be deficit-neutral.  Although
nominal  nondefense  spending  should  increase  a  little,  it  is projected  to  slip  gradually
in real  terms.  Real  defense  spending  is  expected  to  fall  at  a  rate  of around
1-1/2  percent,  on  average,  although  the  quarterly  pattern  likely  will  continue  to be
lumpy.

In  the  state  and local  sector,  real  purchases  are  projected  to  rise  at  a  moderate,
2-3/4 percent,  annual  rate  through  2000.  These jurisdictions  have  seen  their revenues
outpace  their  expectations  recently,  but  they  have  remained  cautious  about  making
major  changes  in  their  budget  policies.  Some  politicians  may  yet  succumb to  the
temptation  to  dip into  mounting  cash  balances,  but their  appetite  for cutting  taxes  or
boosting  spending  should  be  lessened  next year  as  they recognize  that  a  weakening
economy  is cutting  into  revenues.

Net exports.  With the  revision  to prospects  for  foreign  GDP,  we  have  marked
down  our expectations  for  real  exports  of goods  and services;  that  increase  is now just
1-1/4  percent  next year.  Export  demand  is expected  to recover  in 2000,  pushing  the
volume up  about  4-3/4  percent  as  foreign  growth picks up  and the real  depreciation  of

Domestic Developments

the  dollar  enhances  U.S.  competitiveness.  Demand  for  imports  is now  expected  to  be
weaker  in  1999  in  light  of the  slower projected  growth  of  domestic  activity.  On net,
the decline  in real  net exports  next  year is  anticipated  to  subtract  almost
3/4 percentage  point  from the  increase  in real  GDP,  less  than  half of  its negative
contribution  this year.  In  2000,  the  drag  diminishes  to  less  than  1/2  percentage  point.
(A more  detailed  discussion  is  contained  in  the  International Developments section.)

Labor markets.  Firms,  confronted  with pressures  on  their profit  margins,

undoubtedly  are  continuing  to push  for  gains in  efficiency,  and we  continue  to believe
that  the underlying  trend  in  labor  productivity  will  be growing  1-3/4  percent  a  year
over the  projection  period.  However,  as noted  above,  many  businesses  have been
scrambling  for workers,  and they may  continue  to hire  even  as  increases  in  output  tail
off  in the  period  ahead.  Consequently,  we  expect  that  labor productivity  will  rise  at
something  less than  the  underlying  trend  pace  during the  current half-year  and then  lag
still  more  during  much  of  1999,  when  economic  activity  turns distinctly  subpar.  In
2000,  as  output picks  up  and  Year 2000  fixes  are  less  of  a  drain,  productivity  should
accelerate  considerably;  that  year's  gain is  projected to  be  2 percent.

The  Outlook  for the Labor Market
(Percent  change,  Q4 to  Q4,  except  as  noted)

Measure 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000

Output  per  hour, nonfarm  business 

Previous 

Nonfarm  payroll  employment 

Previous 

Household  employment  survey 

Previous 

Labor force  participation rate1 

Previous 

Civilian  unemployment  rate' 

Previous 

1.7 
1.7 

2.7 
2.7 

2.1 
2.1 

67.1 
67.1 

4.7 
4.7 

1.5 
1.1 

2.3 
2.2 

.9 
.9 

66.9 
67.0 

4.5 
4.6 

1.0 
1.3 

.7 
.8

.3 
.4 

66.8 
66.9 

5.2 
5.1 

2.0
...

.9

.6

...

66.8
.

5.4
.
.

1. Percent, average  for the  fourth  quarter.
..  . Not  applicable.

This  pattern  of labor  productivity  implies  that variations  in the  growth  of labor

demand  will  be  more  muted  than  those  in the  growth  of  output.  Nonetheless,  net
hiring  is  projected to  be  meager  by the middle  of next  year before  picking  up as

I-14

Part 1:  Summary and Outlook, September 23,  1998

activity  accelerates  later in  1999  and 2000.  By  the  spring  of 2000,  however,  the
unemployment  rate  is expected  to have  risen  to  5.4  percent,  where  we  have  it
stabilizing.

Some side  notes  on the  quite  irregular  quarterly  pattern  of labor  market  activity

in 2000:  Output  per hour will  mirror  the  temporary  hesitation  in the  growth  of real
GDP resulting  from  the  small,  brief disruption  of  activity that  we  believe  will
accompany  problems  associated  with  the  Millennium  Bug in  the  first quarter  of 2000;
a  rebound  is expected  in  the subsequent  quarter.  And  public  payrolls  will  experience
a  bulge  in the  second  quarter  of 2000  when  temporary  workers  are  hired  to conduct
the  decennial  2000  census.

Wages  and prices.  Given  the  easing  of labor  market pressures  and the pricing

environment  that  we  are  forecasting,  we  continue  to  expect  that  increases  in  labor
compensation  will  level  off in  the near  term  and  diminish  over the next  two years.
The  year-over-year  change  in ECI  compensation  is projected  to  remain  around
3-1/2  percent  during  the  next  several  quarters,  3.2  percent  next year,  and 2.9  percent  in
2000.  Over  time,  rising joblessness  should  restrain  the  size  of pay  increases.  The
deceleration  in  labor compensation  is  expected  to  occur  in the  wage  and salary
component  of the  index.  In  the nearer  term,  one  factor  is that the  rising  commissions
of recent  times--most notably  in the  finance  and real  estate  sectors--will  not  be
sustained.  However,  a  noticeable  step-up  in the  rate  of  increase  in overall  benefit  costs
is likely  in  1999,  largely  because  of the  rising  cost  of health  insurance.  The  large
increases  in premiums  recently  announced  in the  Federal  Employee  and CalPERS
insurance  programs  underscore  the  pressures  facing  the health  care  industry:  rapid
increases  in the  costs  of prescription  drugs  and  the need  simply  to  correct  the
underpricing  of benefits  that  accompanied  the  earlier  all-out  competition  for market
share.  In addition,  lower  stock values  are  likely to  boost  employer  costs  for defined
benefit  retirement  plans.  Some  offset  to these  higher  costs  should  come  from  smaller
"nonproduction"  bonus  payments  over  the  next  several  years.  Indeed,  businesses  may
benefit  from  a  cooler  labor market  in  ways that  are  not so  obvious  in the published
data  as  the  need  to  offer  hiring  bonuses  and other  costly  inducements  lessens.
Although  the  recent  slump  in  the  stock  market  raises  the risk  that  companies  may  not
be  able to  get  so  much  mileage  from  granting  options,  we  are  not  anticipating  that this
will have  much  impact  on  aggregate  wages  and benefits--especially  because  many
firms  will  respond by  simply  cutting  strike  prices  or  issuing  more  options.

We  are  projecting  that  core  CPI  inflation  will  drop to  2.1  percent  in  1999,  with

the  shift to  "geo-means"  in January  accounting  for  all  of the  deceleration  from  the

Domestic Developments 

I-15

Staff  Inflation  Projections
(Percent  change,  Q4  to  Q4,  except  as  noted)

Measure 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000

Consumer  price  index 

Previous 

Food 

Previous 

Energy 

Previous 

Excluding  food  and energy 

Previous 

PCE  chain-weighted  price  index 

Previous 

Excluding  food  and energy 

Previous 

GDP  chain-weighted  price  index 

Previous 

ECI  for  compensation  of private

industry  workers' 
Previous 

Prices  of core  non-oil

merchandise  imports 

Previous 

MEMO:  Adjustments for technical

changes to  the  CPI2

Core  CPI 

1.9 
1.9 

1.7 
1.7 

-1.0 
-1.0 

2.2 
2.2 

1.5 
1.5 

1.6 
1.6 

1.7 
1.7 

3.4 
3.4 

-.7 
-.7 

1.6 
1.5 

1.8 
1.7 

-8.0 
-7.2 

2.3 
2.3 

.9 
.9 

1.3 
1.3 

1.0 
1.1 

3.4 
3.4 

-2.7 
-2.9 

2.1 
2.1

1.3 
1.3

4.1 
3.9 

2.1 
2.1 

1.6 
1.6

1.5 
1.5

1.5 
1.5

3.2 
3.2

.6 
1.1

2.0

1.5

1.6

.

2.1
.

1.5

1.5

1.5

2.9

1.4

Percentage  points

.2 

.4 

.6 

.6

1. December  to  December.
2.  Adjustments  are  calculated  relative  to  the  methodological  structure  of  the  CPI

in  1994.

..  Not  applicable.

2.3  percent  rate  we  expect  will  be  recorded  this year.  The  overall  CPI  is  forecast  to

accelerate  next  year.  Energy  prices  increase  4  percent,  after  having  fallen  8  percent

this year,  and  prices  of non-oil  imports  turn upward.  On  a  reported  basis,  the  CPI

inflation  rate  for  1999  is projected  to  be  2.1  percent,  1/2  percentage  point  more  than

this  year,  despite  the  technical  changes  in  the  index.  We  are  also  looking  for  pickups

in  inflation  as measured  by  GDP-related  indexes  from  current  rates,  but  with numbers

in those  cases  generally  being  in  the  lower,  1 to  1-1/2  percent,  range.

1-16

Part 1:  Summary and Outlook, September 23,  1998

The  projected  inflation  rates  for  1999  appear  to be  on  the  low side  of
prevailing  expectations--at  least  as  suggested  by  survey  readings,  if not  by  the  spreads
between  nominal  Treasuries  and  TIPS.  The  more  favorable  outcome  should  encourage
a  further  decline  in those  expectations  and help  to  mute  inflationary  tendencies  in
2000.  This  factor,  along  with  the  reduced  pressures  on  resources, should  offset  any
impulse  to U.S.  inflation  that  might  come  from  the  effects  of a  modestly  declining
dollar  on  import  prices.  Consequently,  we  are  projecting  that prices  overall  will
increase  at  about  the  same  rate  in  2000  as  in  1999.

Money  and  Credit Flows
The  expansion  of  the debt  of the  nonfinancial  sectors  this year, at  5-3/4  percent,  is
anticipated  to  outstrip  the  growth  of nominal  GDP,  owing  mainly to  increased

borrowing  by the  business  and  household  sectors.  However,  over the  next  two  years,

growth  of the  debt  aggregate  should  be  reduced  significantly  as those  sectors  pull  back
somewhat  in the  face  of weaker  income  growth  and  a  slightly  more  restrictive  credit
supply environment.  The slowdown  is a  bit more  pronounced  than  projected in  the
previous  Greenbook.

Borrowing  by nonfinancial  businesses  is anticipated  to slow  substantially  in

coming  quarters.  As  we  move  into  1999  and  2000,  merger  and  acquisition  activity  is
likely  to tail  off  appreciably,  and  firms will  be  more  cautious  in  their investment
outlays,  so  that debt  growth  is expected  to  slow  somewhat  even  as the  generation  of
internal  funds remains  subdued.  Less-receptive  credit  markets  probably  will  play  a
role  in encouraging  this falloff in borrowing;  the  wider bond market  spreads  of late  are
expected  to persist  at  least  for  a  while  before  retracing  a  portion  of their  recent
increases,  and  banks  should  follow  suit  by  tightening  standards  and  terms  on  business
lending.  Indeed,  the  results  of the special  survey  of senior  loan  officers  conducted  this
month  suggests that  process  of bank  tightening  may already  have  begun.  (The details
of the  survey  results  will  be  reported  in the  Greenbook  Supplement on  Friday.)

Household  debt  is expected  to  grow  8  percent  this year.  Attractive  interest

rates  have  spurred  an  increase  in  mortgage  borrowing  beyond  that  which  is  attributable
to home  purchases  alone.  The  encouragement  potential  borrowers  have had  from
lenders  (and  the tax  code)  to  substitute home  equity  loans  for  consumer  credit  is only
a  part of that story.  Possibly,  optimistic  views  about  prospective  returns  on  stock
market  investments  have  fostered  a tendency  to borrow  more heavily  to  cover

expenditures;  if so,  recent  and prospective  equity  price  developments  should  lessen
this enthusiasm  for  leverage.  But  the  more  important  drag  on household  borrowing

Domestic Developments

1-17

growth  over  the  next two  years  will  be  a  moderation  in  the  growth of spending.
Although  demand-side  developments  will  be  the  dominant  influence  slowing  debt
growth,  the  weakening  in the  economy  and  rising  unemployment  may  prompt  lenders
to tighten  their underwriting  standards.  Investors  in  asset-backed  securities  are  likely
to continue  to  exhibit  greater  caution,  which  may  leave  an  imprint  on  the  pricing  of
consumer  loans  and subprime  mortgages.  On net, the  increase  in household  debt  over
the next  two years  is  expected  to be  down  around  2-1/2  to  3  percentage  points  from  its
1998  pace.

In the  state  and local  government  sector,  the  rise in  debt  should  slow

somewhat.  Capital  spending  is projected  to  remain  on  a  moderate  track,  but  the
opportunities  to  pre-refund  debt  are  now more  limited  because  of  the  large  amount  of
activity  that  has  already  occurred  (repeat  advance  refundings  typically  are  not
permitted).  The  continued  federal  surpluses  mean  that the  Treasury  will  be  retiring
debt  on  balance,  with nominal  marketable  securities  running  off at  a  pretty  fast clip.
We  are  inclined  to  attribute  a  noticeable  portion  of the  recent  rapid  growth  of
the  monetary  aggregates  to  redirection by households  from the  capital market  toward
safer  and  more  liquid  instruments.  Supporting  this  notion, about  two-thirds  of the  net
increase  in M2  over  August  and  September  was  recorded  in money  market  mutual
funds,  which mirrored  a  drying up  of  inflows  to  equity  market  funds.  This
reassessment  of capital  risk and  increased  risk aversion  should  continue  in  the  months
ahead  and  be sufficient  to pull  up M2  growth  over the  four  quarters  of  1998  to
8  percent,  considerably  faster than  was  expected  at the time  of the  August FOMC
meeting.  However,  given our  working  assumption  of no large  changes  in  stock prices
in  1999  and  2000,  those  safe-haven  inflows  should  abate.  As  a  result, growth  of M2
should  step  down  over the  next two years.  M3  is anticipated  to  move  in tandem,
expanding  at  a  10  percent  rate  this  year  before  decelerating  considerably  in  1999  and
2000,  consistent  with its  longer-run  tendency  to expand  faster  than  both  M2  and
nominal  GDP.

Alternative  Simulations
Our alternative  model-based  simulations  present  the  implications,  first, of  unchanged
System  policy  and,  then, of two  different  scenarios  for  the stock  market.  In  the  first
alternative,  the  federal  funds  rate remains  constant  at  5-1/2  percent  through  2000,
instead  of declining  over  the  next  few  quarters.  In  this scenario,  the  increase  in real
GDP  is  1/2  percentage  point  below  the baseline  case  next  year and  3/4  percentage

1-18

Part 1:  Summary and Outlook, September 23,  1998

Alternative  Federal Funds Rate
and  Stock  Market  Assumptions
(Percent change,  Q4  to  Q4,  except  as noted)

Measure 

1998 

1999 

2000

Real GDP
Baseline 
Unchanged  funds  rate 
Weaker  stock prices 
Constant  stock market wealth-

to-income  ratio 

Civilian unemployment rate'
Baseline 
Unchanged  funds  rate 
Weaker  stock  prices 
Constant  stock  market  wealth-

3.2 
3.2 
3.2 

3.2 

4.5 
4.5 
4.5 

1.3 
.8 
1.0 

1.7 

5.2 
5.4 
5.3 

2.4
1.6
2.0

2.9

5.4
5.9
5.6

to-income  ratio 

4.5 

5.1 

5.1

CPI excluding food and energy
Baseline 
Unchanged  funds  rate 
Weaker  stock prices 
Constant stock  market  wealth-

to-income  ratio 

1. Average  for  the  fourth  quarter.

2.3 
2.3 
2.3 

2.3 

2.1 
2.0 
2.1 

2.1 

2.1
1.6
2.0

2.2

point  lower  in 2000--enough  so that  the unemployment  rate  would  be  approaching
6  percent  by  the  end  of the  projection  period.  Inflation  would be  considerably
lower--turning  back downward  in  2000--with  the  effects  of the  added  slack  being
reinforced  by  a  firmer  dollar  and a  perception  on  the  part  of the  public  that  the Federal
Reserve  was  emphasizing  the  pursuit  of price  stability.

The second  and third  alternatives  consider  different  paths  for the  stock market.

The  baseline  for this Greenbook  assumes  that after  having  dropped  a  bit below  the
recent  lows  in  the  near term,  share  prices  recover about  5  percent  by  early  2000.  The
second  alternative  takes the  more  pessimistic  view  that  stock values  drop  about
10  percent  below the  recent  low by  the  second  quarter  of next year  and then  move  up
only slightly  in 2000  (essentially  paralleling the  baseline  path).  In  this  scenario,  which
we  believe  is  quite  plausible,  sticking  with the baseline  interest  rate  path  would  result
in  1/4  percentage  point slower  real  GDP  growth  in  1999;  the shortfall  widens  to
almost  1/2 percentage  point  in 2000.  The  payoff in the  form  of lower  inflation  is
relatively  modest  because,  in the  model's  view, the  public's  perceptions  of Federal
Reserve  objectives  for inflation  are  little  altered.

Domestic Developments 

I-19

The  third  alternative  assumes  that  the  ratio  of stock market  wealth to  income

holds  steady  at  its third-quarter  average,  rather  than falling  over  the  projection  period.
This  avoids  the  negative  wealth  effect  that  is  weighing  on  consumption  in  the  baseline
forecast  and  provides  a  lower  cost  of equity  capital  for  businesses.  The resultant
difference  in the pace  of  activity  is significant,  amounting  to about  1/2  percentage
point  more  in  1999  and  again  in 2000.  The  unemployment  rate  is  around  5  percent  in
2000,  and  inflation  is  a  bit  higher  than  in the  baseline.

(Two  additional  alternative  scenarios  that  consider  risks  in the  global  economy

are  presented  at  the  end  of the International Developments section.)

Strictly Confidential  <FR>
Class II  FOMC

STAFF  PROJECTIONS  OF  CHANGES  IN  GDP,  PRICES,  AND  UNEMPLOYMENT
(Percent,  annual  rate)

September  23,  1998

ANNUAL

1996
1997
1998
1999
2000

QUARTERLY

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

01
Q2
Q3
04

01
Q2
Q3
04

01
Q2
Q3
Q4

Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4

TWO-QUARTER

3

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

Q2
04

Q2
Q4

02
Q4

Q2

FOUR-QUATER4

1996 
1997 
1998 
1999 
2000 

Q4
04
Q4
Q4
Q4

6.4 
4.8 

4.5 
3.9 

2.5 
3.0 

3.6 
4.2 

5.8 
5.6 
4.2 
2.8 
3.9 

4.1 
3.6 

3.4 
2.3 

1.3 
2.0 

3.9 
3.8 
2.9 
1.7 

4.1 
3.6 

3.7 
2.6 

0.9 
1.6 

2.1 
2.7 

3.9 
3.8 
3.2 
1.3 
2.4 

2.2 
1.2 

0.9 
1.4 

1.6 
1.4 

1.8 
1.7 
1.1 
1.5 

2.2 
1.2 

0.8 
1.3 

1.6 
1.4 

1.5 
1.4 

1.8 
1.7 
1.0 
1.5 
1.5 

1.8 
2.0 

1.2 
1.9 

2.2 
2.0 

3.2 
1.9 
1.5 
2.1 

1.8 
2.0 

1.2 
1.9 

2.2 
2.0 

2.0 
2.0 

3.2 
1.9 
1.6 
2.1 
2.0 

-0.4 
-0.2 

-0.3 
0.3 

0.3 
0.3 

-0.3 
-0.6 
-0.1 
0.5 

-0.4
-0.2

-0.3
0.1

0.3
0.3

0.2
0.1

-0.3
-0.6
-0.2
0.6
0.3

1.  For  all  urban  consumers.
2.  Level,  except  as  noted.
3.  Percent  change  from  two  quarters earlier; 
4.  Percent  change  from four  quarters earlier; 

for  unemployment  rate,  change  in  percentage  points.

for  unemployment  rate,  change  in  percentage  points.

Strictly Confidential <FR> 
Class II  FOMC 

REAL  GROSS DOMESTIC  PRODUCT  AND RELATED  ITEMS, ANNUAL VALUES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rate)

September 23,  1998

Item 

Units l 

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000

- - - Projected - - -

Bill. $
Bill.  Ch. $

%  change

EXPENDITURES

Nominal  GDP
Real  GDP

Real  GDP
Gross domestic purchases
Final  sales
Priv. dam. final purchases

Personal  cons.  expenditures

Durables
Nondurables
Services

Business  fixed  investment

Producers'  dur.  equipment
Nonres. 

structures

Residential  structures

Exports
Imports

Gov't.  cons.  a  investment

Federal

Defense

State & local

Change  in bus. inventories

Bill. Ch. $

6244.4 
6244.4 

6558.1 
6389.6 

6947.0 
6610.7 

7269.6  7661.6 
6994.8 
6761.7 

8110.9 
7269.8 

8488.1 
7527.5 

8743.6 
7648.7 

9043.2
7797.4

3.6 
4.0 
3.9 
4.9 

4.2 
9.4 
3.4 
3.6 

5.5 
9.6 
-3.4 
16.9 

4.1 
7.4 

1.7 
1.3 
-1.3 
2.0 

2.4 
3.0 
2.1 
3.7 

2.7 
7.4 
1.6 
2.3 

9.9 
12.2 
4.5 
7.8 

4.6 
10.2 

-1.4 
-6.1 
-6.9 
2.0 

3.3 
3.6 
2.7 
3.7 

3.1 
6.3 
3.0 
2.5 

7.6 
10.2 
1.1 
4.2 

10.0 
12.3 

0.1 
-3.9 
-6.0 
2.7 

2.1 
1.6 
2.7 
2.9 

2.6 
4.5 
1.7 
2.6 

7.3 
9.1 
2.7 
-1.4 

10.5 
5.6 

-0.9 
-5.6 
-5.0 
2.1 

3.9 
4.2 
3.7 
4.4 

3.3 
5.8 
2.8 
3.0 

11.7 
11.8 
11.6 
5.4 

10.3 
11.8 

2.1 
1.1 
-0.1 
2.8 

3.8 
4.4 
3.4 
4.5 

3.7 
7.4 
2.0 
3.8 

9.8 
12.7 
2.5 
4.2 

9.6 
14.0 

1.4 
-0.6 
-1.4 
2.6 

3.2 
4.8 
3.5 
6.0 

4.7 
7.5 
4.6 
4.2 

12.1 
17.6 
-1.8 
11.7 

-3.8 
9.5 

1.3 
-1.1 
-3.5 
2.6 

1.3 
1.9 
1.4 
2.2 

2.4 
3.2 
1.7 
2.5 

3.6 
5.1 
-0.3 
-3.8 

1.3 
6.1 

1.2 
-1.7 
-2.1 
2.7 

2.4
2.7
2.2
2.7

2.4
4.5
1.8
2.3

5.4
7.3
0.0
1.4

4.7
6.6

1.5
-0.8
-0.7
2.6

7.0 
2.0 
-29.5 

22.1 
29.5 
-70.2 

60.6 
49.0 
-104.6 

27.7 
37.7 
-96.5 

30.0 
23.2 
-111.2 

63.2 
58.8 
-136.1 

54.1 
46.2 
-250.9 

24.8 
19.8 
-341.2 

33.2
30.5
-386.0

Nonfarm
Net exports

Nominal GDP

EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION

Nonfarm  payroll  employment
Unemployment  rate

Industrial  prod.  index
Capacity util. rate - mfg.

Housing  starts
Light motor vehicle sales
North  Amer.  produced
Other

INCOME  AND  SAVING

Nominal  GHP
Nominal GNP
Nominal  personal  income
Real  disposable  income
Personal  saving  rate

Corp. profits,  VA & CCAdj.

Profit share of  GNP
Excluding  FR  Banks

Federal  surpl./deficit
State  &  local  surpl./def.

Ex. social ins.  funds

Gross natl. saving rate
Net  natl.  saving rate

PRICES AND COSTS

GDP chn.-wt. price index
Gross Domestic  Purchases
chn.-wt. price index

CPI

Ex. food  and  energy

ECI,  hourly  compensatio

2

Nonfara  business  sector

Output  per  hour
Compensation  per  Hour
Unit  labor cost

%  change

6.3 

5.0 

5.8 

4.2 

5.8 

5.6 

4.2 

2.8 

3.9

Millions

4  change

Millions

Bill.  $
s  change

s  change

Bill.  $

4  change

108.6 
7.5 

110.7 
6.9 

114.1 
6.1 

117.2 
5.6 

119.6 
5.4 

122.7 
4.9 

125.8 
4.5 

127.3 
4.9 

128.4
5.4

3.7 
79.4 

3.3 
80.5 

6.5 
82.5 

3.3 
82.8 

4.2 
81.4 

5.8 
81.7 

1.9 
80.5 

0.4 
78.6 

2.8
78.7

1.20 
12.85 
10.51 
2.34 

1.29 
13.86 
11.71 
2.15 

1.46 
15.01 
12.88 
2.13 

1.35 
14.72 
12.82 
1.90 

1.48 
15.05 
13.35 
1.70 

1.47 
15.03 
13.11 
1.92 

1.59 
15.13 
13.14 
1.99 

1.48 
14.55 
12.66 
1.89 

1.50
14.41
12.58
1.83

6255.5 
6.2 
7.2 
4.0 
5.7 

6576.8 
5.1 
4.0 
1.2 
4.4 

6955.2 
5.7 
5.2 
2.5 
3.5 

7287.1  7674.0 
5.6 
5.9 
2.7 
2.9 

4.4 
4.6 
2.1 
3.4 

8102.9 
5.2 
5.4 
2.9 
2.1 

8465.2 
4.1 
4.9 
3.3 
0.7 

8704.1 
2.6 
3.1 
2.2 
0.5 

8993.1
3.8
3.7
2.3
0.5

11.3 
6.8 
6.6 

19.0 
7.5 
7.2 

14.1 
8.2 
7.9 

14.6 
9.2 
8.9 

7.7 
9.8 
9.5 

7.7 
10.1 
9.8 

-1.7 
9.7 
9.4 

-5.5 
8.9 
8.6 

-280.9 
86.3 
18.3 

-250.7 
87.4 
19.7 

-186.7 
96.8 
27.9 

-174.4 
111.7 
37.0 

-110.3 
122.6 
52.2 

-21.1 
134.1 
66.0 

71.3 
143.7 
76.1 

45.7 
149.0 
81.3 

14.5 
3.7 

14.4 
3.7 

15.5 
4.7 

16.3 
5.8 

16.6 
6.3 

17.4 
7.3 

17.3 
7.3 

16.3 
6.2 

4.0
8.6
8.3

50.0
145.9
78.2

16.0
5.9

2.6 

2.3 
2.7 
3.1 

3.6 

3.5 
4.5 
1.0 

-0.4 
1.6 
2.0 

2.5

2.5
2.7
2.8

3.1

0.1
2.1
2.0

2.1 

2.0 
2.6 
3.1 

2.6 

1.2 
2.8 
1.6 

1.8 

1.8 
3.2 
2.6 

3.1 

2.1 
3.7 
1.6 

1.7

1.3
1.9
2.2

3.4

1.7
3.9
2.1

1.0 

0.5 
1.6 
2.3 

1.5 

1.4 
2.1 
2.1 

1.5

1.4
2.0
2.1

3.4 

3.2 

2.9

1.5 
4.0 
2.5 

1.0 
3.2 
2.2 

2.0
2.9
0.9

1.  Changes  are  from  fourth  quarter  to  fourth  quarter.
2.  Private-industry  workers.

Strictly 
Class  II  FOMC 

Confidential  <FR> 

REAL GROSS  DOMESTIC  PRODUCT  AND  RELATED  ITEMS,  QUARTERLY  VALUES

September  23,  1998

(Seasonally  adjusted,  annual  rate 

except  as  noted)

Item 

EXPENDITURES

Nominal  GDP
Real  GDP

Real  GDP
Gross  domestic purchases
Final  sales
Priv.  don.  final purchases

Personal  cons.  expenditures

Durables
Nondurables
Services

Business  fixed  investment

Producers'  dur.  equipment
Nonres. 

structures

Residential  structures

Exports
Imports

Gov't.  cons.  &  investment

Federal

Defense

State  &  local

Units 

1996 
01 

1996 
Q2 

1996 
Q3 

1996 
Q4 

1997 
01 

1997 
Q2 

1997 
Q3 

1997 
Q4 

1998 
01 

1998
Q2

Bill.  $
Bill.  Ch. $

% change

7495.3  7629.2  7703.4  7818.4  7955.0  8063.4  8170.8  8254.5  8384.2  8439.6
6882.0  6983.9  7020.0  7093.1  7166.7  7236.5  7311.2  7364.6  7464.7  7499.6

3.3 
4.5 
3.6 
5.1 

3.7 
5.8 
2.2 
4.0 

13.1 
15.7 
6.4 
9.3 

3.7 
13.1 

3.2 
8.0 
7.2 
0.5 

6.1 
7.0 
5.4 
6.1 

4.7 
12.7 
4.8 
3.0 

11.0 
12.3 
7.4 
19.5 

5.8 
13.5 

7.1 
8.1 
8.1 
6.5 

2.1 
3.4 
0.9 
3.1 

1.8 
-1.9 
1.2 
3.0 

14.2 
16.2 
8.9 
-1.7 

2.1 
13.6 

-1.6 
-4.7 
-6.3 
0.3 

4.2 
1.8 
5.1 
3.3 

2.9 
7.2 
2.9 
2.0 

8.8 
3.2 
24.5 
-3.9 

32.0 
7.0 

0.0 
-6.3 
-8.3 
3.8 

4.2 
5.5 
2.9 
4.6 

4.3 
12.3 
3.6 
3.1 

7.0 
8.3 
3.9 
3.1 

8.3 
18.6 

2.1 
-2.7 
-9.9 
4.9 

4.0 
4.4 
2.7 
3.3 

1.6 
-1.5 
-0.2 
3.2 

14.0 
22.8 
-6.2 
6.1 

15.5 
17.9 

2.1 
3.6 
9.1 
1.3 

4.2 
4.6 
5.8 
7.2 

6.2 
16.8 
5.1 
4.7 

17.0 
18.8 
12.4 
-0.4 

10.6 
13.5 

1.4 
-1.2 
-1.8 
2.9 

3.0 
3.2 
2.1 
2.9 

2.8 
3.1 
-0.4 
4.3 

1.8 
2.2 
0.9 
8.2 

4.4 
6.3 

5.5 
7.8 
4.3 
8.5 

6.1 
15.8 
7.4 
3.5 

22.2 
34.3 
-4.9 
15.6 

-2.8 
15.7 

0.1 
-2.1 
-2.0 
1.3 

-1.9 
-8.8 
-18.5 
2.1 

1.9
4.0
4.5
7.4

5.9
11.2
5.2
5.2

12.7
18.2
-1.1
15.5

-7.6
9.2

3.6
6.7
9.5
2.1

Change in bus.  inventories

Bill. Ch. $

14.4 
10.4 

47.5 
26.1 
38.6 
15.2 
-95.5  -113.5  -140.1 

39.8
51.0 
32.1 
28.7 
31.3
44.0 
-95.9  -121.5  -131.6  -142.4  -149.0  -198.5  -244.4

79.0 
72.1 

91.4 
85.9 

66.5 
62.7 

56.3 
56.2 

%  change

5.7 

7.3 

3.9 

6.1 

7.2 

5.6 

5.4 

4.2 

6.4 

2.7

Nonfazrm
Net  exports

Nominal  GDP

EMPLOYMENT AN 

PRODUCTION

Nonfarm  payroll  employment
Unemployment 

rate

Industrial 
Capacity  util. 

prod.  index
rate 

- mfg.

Rousing  starts
Light  motor  vehicle  sales
North  Amer.  produced
Other

INCOME AND SAVING

Nominal  GNP
Nominal  GNP
Nominal  personal  income
Real  disposable  income
Personal  saving  rate

Profit share of GNP

Excluding  PR Banks

Federal  surpl./deficit
State  a  local  surpl./def.
Ex. social  ins.  funds

Gross  natl.  saving  rate
Net  natl.  saving  rate

PRICES  JND COSTS

GDP  chn.-wt.  price  index
Gross Domestic  Purchases
chn.-wt.  price  index

CPI

Ex. food  and  energy

ECI,  hourly  compensation

1

Nonfarm  business  sector

Output  per hour
Compensation  per hour
Unit labor cost

1.  Private-industry  workers.

Corp.  profits, 

IV  &  CCAdj.

i  change

Millions
St

%  change

Millions

Bill. $
%  change

118.5 
5.6 

119.3 
5.4 

120.0 
5.3 

120.7 
5.3 

121.5 
5.3 

122.3 
4.9 

123.0 
4.9 

123.9 
4.7 

124.8 
4.7 

125.5
4.4

2.0 
81.0 

7.5 
81.6 

3.6 
81.5 

3.8 
81.4 

5.2 
81.6 

4.6 
81.5 

6.0 
81.6 

7.2 
82.2 

1.2 
81.6 

1.47 
15.10 
13.44 
1.66 

1.49 
15.18 
13.46 
1.72 

1.49 
15.00 
13.33 
1.68 

1.42 
14.91 
13.16 
1.76 

1.47 
15.32 
13.41 
1.92 

1.46 
14.54 
12.68 
1.86 

1.45 
15.19 
13.20 
1.99 

1.53 
15.07 
13.13 
1.94 

1.58 
15.02 
13.07 
1.95 

1.7
80.8

1.57
16.08
14.09
1.99

7515.0  7643.3  7708.6  7829.0  7952.4  8062.3  8162.0  8234.9  8369.4  8421.0
2.5
4.5
2.9
0.5

6.7 
5.9 
4.0 
1.2 

5.0 
4.7 
2.4 
1.7 

3.6 
5.0 
2.9 
1.7 

6.5 
7.3 
3.3 
2.4 

3.5 
5.5 
4.4 
3.1 

5.6 
4.7 
2.9 
2.6 

7.0 
6.9 
2.1 
2.6 

6.4 
4.6 
1.3 
2.6 

5.6 
6.6 
2.9 
3.2 

16.9 
9.8 
9.5 

6.9 
9.8 
9.5 

3.8 
9.8 
9.5 

3.5 
9.7 
9.5 

18.1 
10.0 
9.7 

11.1 
10.1 
9.8 

13.1 
10.3 
10.0 

-9.2 
10.0 
9.7 

4.2 
9.9 
9.6 

-3.5
9.8
9.5

Bill. $

-150.1  -112.6  -100.1 
122.3 
129.1 
52.5 
58.2 

117.3 
45.3 

-78.3 
121.7 
52.9 

-51.2 
128.4 
59.8 

-34.8 
130.1 
61.6 

-0.3 
136.6 
68.7 

2.2 
141.4 
73.8 

58.8 
140.2 
72.7 

73.3
135.0
67.3

16.4 
6.0 

16.4 
6.2 

16.8 
6.6 

16.7 
6.5 

17.0 
7.0 

17.6 
7.6 

17.5 
7.5 

17.3 
7.3 

17.7 
7.8 

17.2
7.2

% change

2.2

2.1
3.2
2.5

2.5

4.1 
2.6 
-1.5 

3.0
5.2
2.2

1.1 

0.9

1.0 
2.3 
2.1 

-0.2
0.5
2.4

4.3 

2.7

Strictly Confidential  <FR> 
Class  II FOMC 

REAL  GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT  AND RELATED  ITEMS,  QUARTERLY  VALUES
(Seasonally adjusted, annual rate except as  noted)

September 23,  1998

Ttem 

EXPENDITURES

Nominal  GDP
Real GDP

Real  GDP
Gross domestic purchases
Final sales
Priv.  dam. final  purchases

Personal  cons.  expenditures

Durables
Nondurables
Services

Business fixed investment

Producers'  dur.  equipment
Nonres.  structures
Residential  structures

Exports
Imports

Gov't.  cons.  &  investment

Federal

Defense
State  & local

-------------- 

-

Projected--------- 

---------

Units 

1998 
Q3 

1998 
04 

1999 
Q1 

1999 
Q2 

1999 
Q3 

1999 
Q4 

2000 
Q1 

2000 
Q2 

2000 
Q3 

2000
Q4

Bill.  $
Bill. Ch. $

8526.0  8602.3 
7597.2 
7548.4 

8659.1  8708.2 
7614.1  7630.6 

8768.2 
7657.1  7693.0 

8839.0  8903.3 
7717.7 

8997.6 
7772.7 

9089.5 
7823.9 

9182.5
7875.5

s  change

2.6 
3.5 
2.3 
3.4 

3.5 
-3.7 
3.6 
5.0 

0.3 
0.8 
-1.2 
10.9 

-1.7 
5.5 

2.1 
-0.2 
-0.7 
3.2 

2.6 
3.9 
3.0 
4.9 

3.4 
7.7 
2.2 
3.1 

14.2 
19.7 
-0.1 
5.3 

-2.8 
7.7 

1.5 
-1.7 
-2.0 
3.3 

0.9 
1.8 
1.3 
2.7 

2.7 
3.6 
1.8 
3.0 

5.1 
7.3 
-0.9 
-3.9 

-0.8 
6.8 

0.2 
-4.6 
-6.5 
2.8 

0.9 
1.6 
1.2 
2.0 

2.4 
3.3 
1.7 
2.6 

3.4 
4.7 
-0.1 
-8.2 

0.9 
6.9 

1.9 
0.3 
0.5 
2.7 

1.4 
1.9 
1.5 
2.1 

2.2 
2.7 
1.8 
2.4 

3.4 
4.6 
-0.1 
-3.1 

2.3 
5.9 

1.6 
-0.7 
-1.0 
2.7 

1.9 
2.2 
1.7 
2.2 

2.2 
3.2 
1.7 
2.3 

2.7 
3.7 
-0.1 
0.1 

2.9 
4.7 

1.1 
-1.9 
-1.5 
2.7 

1.3 
1.6 
1.4 
2.0 

1.8 
3.2 
1.7 
1.6 

3.7 
5.3 
-0.7 
1.2 

3.8 
5.5 

0.2 
-4.4 
-6.3 
2.6 

2.9 
3.3 
2.3 
3.0 

2.8 
5.5 
1.7 
2.8 

5.1 
6.9 
-0.0 
1.3 

4.6 
7.6 

1.7 
-0.1 
0.4 
2.6 

2.7 
3.1 
2.3 
3.0 

2.5 
4.6 
1.9 
2.3 

6.7 
9.0 
0.4 
1.6 

5.0 
7.6 

1.4 
-1.0 
-1.1 
2.6 

2.7
2.8
2.7
2.9

2.5
4.8
1.9
2.3

6.1
8.2
0.4
1.6

5.3
5.6

2.6
2.4
4.3
2.6

Change  in  bus. inventories

Bill. Ch. $

46.5 
37.5 

38.9
36.3
-265.1  -295.3  -318.0  -337.2  -350.5  -358.9  -367.7  -381.4  -394.5  -400.6

30.4 
23.1 

40.1 
37.4 

21.2 
18.5 

20.9 
16.7 

23.7 
18.1 

32.4 
29.7 

38.6 
29.9 

24.0 
21.1 

Nonfarm
Net  exports

Nominal  GDP

EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION

Nonfarm  payroll  employment
Unemployment  rate

Industrial prod. index
Capacity util. rate  - mfg.

Housing starts
Light motor vehicle sales
North  Amer.  produced
Other

NCOME AND SAVING

Nominal GNP
Nominal  GNP
Nominal  personal  income
Real  disposable  income
Personal  saving  rate

Corp. profits,  IVA a  CCAdj.

Profit share  of GNP
Excluding  FR  Banks

Federal  surpl./deficit
State  &  local  surpl./def.
Ex.  social  ins.  funds

Gross natl.  saving rate
Net natl. saving rate

PRICES  AND  COSTS

GDP  chn.-wt.  price  index
Gross  Domestic Purchases
chn.-wt. price  index

CPI

Ex.  food  and  energy

ECI, hourly  compensation

1

Nonfarm  business  sector

Output per  hour
Compensation  per  hour
Unit  labor  cost

1.  Private-indutry 

workers.

%  change

4.2 

3.6 

2.7 

2.3 

2.8 

3.3 

2.9 

4.3 

4.1 

4.2

Millions

t  change

Millions

Bill.  $
%  change

%  change

Bill. $

126.1 
4.5 

126.7 
4.5 

126.9 
4.7 

127.2 
4.8 

127.4 
5.0 

127.6 
5.2 

127.9 
5.3 

128.5 
5.4 

128.5 
5.4 

128.8
5.4

1.0 
79.9 

3.6 
79.8 

-0.6 
79.1 

-0.7 
78.6 

0.8 
78.3 

2.3 
78.4 

1.0 
78.2 

3.5 
78.6 

3.4 
78.9 

3.2
79.1

1.63 
14.37 
12.34 
2.04 

1.57 
15.04 
13.07 
1.97 

1.50 
14.76 
12.85 
1.91 

1.46 
14.63 
12.72 
1.91 

1.47 
14.45 
12.57 
1.88 

1.48 
14.34 
12.50 
1.84 

1.50 
14.20 
12.41 
1.79 

1.50 
14.41 
12.58 
1.83 

1.50 
14.46 
12.61 
1.85 

1.50
14.55
12.70
1.85

8497.6  8573.0  8625.8  8671.2  8726.2  8793.4  8857.1  8949.3  9037.1  9128.7
4.1
3.5
1.7
0.2

3.6 
4.1 
2.5 
0.4 

2.5 
2.7 
4.1 
0.8 

3.1 
3.2 
1.5 
0.2 

2.9 
4.5 
4.2 
0.8 

4.0 
3.5 
1.7 
0.4 

2.6 
3.4 
1.7 
0.4 

3.7 
5.1 
3.7 
0.6 

2.1 
3.0 
1.3 
0.5 

4.2 
3.4 
1.6 
0.5 

-5.6 
9.5 
9.3 

-1.6 
9.4 
9.2 

-7.8 
9.2 
8.9 

-7.7 
8.9 
8.7 

-5.2 
8.8 
8.5 

-1.0 
8.7 
8.4 

-9.8 
8.4 
8.1 

10.6 
8.5 
8.3 

8.1 
8.6 
8.4 

8.5
8.7
8.4

80.5 
146.5 
78.9 

72.5 
153.2 
85.5 

44.6 
152.6 
84.9 

44.7 
149.5 
81.8 

48.1 
146.3 
78.6 

45.4 
147.7 
80.0 

36.3 
145.2 
77.5 

48.2 
145.9 
78.2 

59.0 
146.0 
78.3 

56.7
146.5
78.8

17.3 
7.3 

17.0 
7.0 

16.7 
6.7 

16.4 
6.3 

16.2 
6.0 

15.9 
5.8 

16.0 
5.8 

16.0 
5.9 

16.0 
5.9 

15.9
5.8

% change

1.5 

1.0 

1.8 

1.4 

1.4 

1.4 

1.6 

1.4 

1.4 

0.8 
1.9 
2.1 

1.0 
1.9 
2.1 

1.6 
2.4 
2.1 

1.3 
2.1 
2.1 

1.2 
2.0 
2.1 

1.3 
2.0 
2.1 

1.6 
2.0 
2.1 

1.4 
2.0 
2.1 

1.4 
2.0 
2.1 

3.7 

3.7 

3.2 

3.2 

3.1 

3.1 

2.9 

2.9 

2.9 

0.8 
3.8 
3.0 

1.4 
3.7 
2.3 

1.0 
3.6 
2.6 

0.8 
3.2 
2.4 

0.9 
3.1 
2.2 

1.5 
3.1 
1.6 

1.1 
3.3 
2.2 

2.7 
2.8 
0.1 

2.2 
2.8 
0.6 

1.5

1.4
2.0
2.1

2.9

2.0
2.8
0.8

Strictly Confidential  <FR>
Class II  FOMC

Item

Real ODP

Gross dom. purchases

Final  sales

Priv. dom.  final purchases

Personal  cons. eupenditures

Durables
Nondurables
Services

Business  fixed inveatment
Producers' dur. equip.
Nonres. structures
Residential structures

Net exports
Exports
Imports

Government  cons. &  invest.

Federal

Defense
Nondefense
State  and local

Change in  bus. inventories

Nonfarm
Farm

CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  GROWTH 

IN  REAL  GROSS  DOMESTIC  PRODUCT  AND  RELATED  ITEMS

epteamber  23,  1998

1996 
Q3 

1996 
04 

1997 
01 

1997 
02 

1997 
Q3 

1997 
Q4 

1998 
01 

1998 
Q2 

1998 
03 

9604/ 
9504 

97Q4/ 
9604 

9804/
97Q4

2.1 
3.5 

0.9 
2.5 

4.2 
1.9 

5.1 
2.7 

1.4 
1.1 
0.2 
-0.1 

-1.3 
0.2 
-1.6 

-0.3 
-0.3 
-0.3 
0.0 
0.0 

1.2 
1.3 
-0.1 

0.9
0.2
0.6
-0.2

2.4 
3.2 
-0.9 

0.0 
-0.4 
-0.4 
0.0 
0.4 

-0.8 
-0.5 
-0.3 

4.2 
5.5 

2.9 
3.8 

2.9 
1.0 
0.7 
1.2 

0.7 
0.6 
0.1 
0.1 

-1.2 
1.0 
-2.2 

0.4 
-0.2 
-0.5 
0.3 
0.6 

1.3
1.5
-0.2

4.0 
4.4 

2.7 
2.7 

1.1
-0.1
0.0
1.3

1.4
1.6

-0.2
0.2

-0.5 
1.8 
-2.2 

0.4 
0.2 
0.4 
-0.2 
0.2 

1.3 
0.9 
0.4 

4.2 
4.7 

5.7 
5.9 

4.2 
1.3 
1.0 
1.9 

-0.5 
1.2 
-1.7 

0.3 
-0.1 
-0.1 
0.0 
0.3 

-1.4 
-1.5 
0.1 

3.0 
3.2 

2.1 
2.4 

1.9
0.3

-0.1
1.7

0.2 
0.1 
0.0 
0.3 

-0.3 
0.5 
-0.8 

0.0 
-0.1 
-0.1 
-0.1 
0.2 

0.9
1.0
-0.1

5.5 
7.9 

4.3 
7.0 

2.2 
2.4 
-0.2 
0.6 

-2.2 
-0.3 
-1.9 

-0.3
-0.6
-0.8
0.3
0.2

1.2 
1.2 
0.0 

1.9 
4.1 

4.5 
6.1 

4.0 
0.9 
1.0 
2.0 

1.3 
1.4 
-0.0 
0.6 

-2.1 
-0.9 
-1.2 

0.6 
0.4 
0.4 
0.0 
0.2 

-2.5
-2.7
0.2

2.6
3.6

2.3
2.9

2.4

-0.3
0.7
2.0

0.0
0.1
-0.0
0.5

-0.9
-0.2
-0.7

0.4
-0.0
-0.0
0.0
0.4

3.9 
4.2 

3.7 
3.6 

3.8 
4.4 

3.3 
3.7 

3.2
4.8

3.5
5.0

0.4 
0.1 
-0.0 
0.1 
0.3 

0.3
-0.0
-0.1
0.0
0.3

Note.  Components may not sum  to totals because of rounding.

Strictly Confidential  <FR>
Class II  FOMC

CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  GROWTH  IN REAL  GROSS  DOMESTIC  PRODUCT  AND  RPbATD  ITEMS

September  23,  1998

Item

Real  GDP

Gross  dom. purchases

Final  sales

Priv. dom.  final purchases

Personal  cons. expenditures

Durables
Nondurables
Services

Business  fixed investment
Producers'  dur. equip.
Nonrem.  structures
Residential  structures

Net  exports
Exports
Imports

Government  cons. a  invest.

Federal

Defense
Nondefense
State  and local

Change in bus..  nventories

Nonfarm
Farm

1998 
04 

1999 
01 

1999 
02 

1999 
03 

1999 
Q4 

2000 
01 

2000 
Q2 

2000 
Q3 

2000 
04 

98Q4/ 
9704 

9904/ 
9804 

OQ4/
99Q4

2.6 
3.9 

3.0 
4.1 

2.3 
0.6 
0.4 
1.3 

1.5 
1.5 
-0.0 
0.2 

-1.3 
-0.3 
-1.0 

0.3 
-0.1 
-0.1 
-0.0 
0.4 

-0.4 
-0.4 
0.0 

0.9 
1.9 

1.3 
2.2 

1.8 
0.3 
0.3 
1.2 

0.6 
0.6 
-0.0 
-0.2 

-1.0 
-0.1 
-0.9 

0.0
-0.3
-0.3
-0.0

0.3

-0.4 
-0.3 
-0.1 

0.9 
1.7 

1.2 
1.7 

1.7 
0.3 
0.3 
1.0 

0.4 
0.4 
-0.0 
-0.4 

-0.8 
0.1 
-0.9 

0.3 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.3 

-0.3 
-0.2 
-0.1 

1.4 
1.9 

1.5 
1.8 

1.5 
0.2 
0.4 
1.0 

0.4 
0.4 
-0.0 
-0.1 

-0.5 
0.2 
-0.8 

0.3 
-0.0 
-0.0 
0.0 
0.3 

-0.1 
-0.1 
-0.1 

1.9 
2.2 

1.7 
1.9 

1.6 
0.3 
0.3 
0.9 

0.3 
0.3 
-0.0 
0.0 

-0.3 
0.3 
-0.6 

0.2 
-0.1 
-0.1 
-0.1 
0.3 

0.2 
0.2 
-0.1 

1.3 
1.6 

1.4 
1.7 

1.2 
0.3 
0.3 
0.6 

0.4 
0.4 
-0.0 
0.1 

-0.3 
0.4 
-0.7 

0.0 
-0.3 
-0.2 
-0.0 
0.3 

-0.1 
-0.1 
-0.0 

2.9 
3.4 

2.3 
2.5 

1.9 
0.4 
0.3 
1.1 

0.6 
0.6 
-0.0 
0.1 

-0.5 
0.5 
-1.0 

0.3 
-0.0 
0.0 
-0.0 
0.3 

0.5 
0.5 
-0.0 

2.7 
3.1 

2.3 
2.5 

1.7 
0.4 
0.4 
1.0 

0.7 
0.7 
0.0 
0.1 

-0.5 
0.5 
-1.0 

0.2 
-0.1 
-0.0 
-0.0 
0.3 

0.4 
0.4 
-0.0 

2.7 
2.9 

2.7 
2.5 

1.7 
0.4 
0.4 
1.0 

0.7 
0.7 
0.0 
0.1 

-0.2
0.6
-0.8

0.4
0.1
0.2
-0.0
0.3

-0.1
-0.1
-0.0

3.2 
4.8 

3.5 
5.0 

3.2 
0.6 
0.9 
1.7 

1.3 
1.3 
-0.1 
0.5 

1.3 
1.9 

1.4 
1.9 

1.6 
0.3 
0.3 
1.0 

0.4 
0.4 
-0.0 
-0.2 

-0.6 

0.1 
-0.8 

0.2 

-0.1 
-0.1 
-0.0 
0.3 

-0.2 
-0.1 
-0.1 

2.4
2.7

2.2
2.3

1.7
0.4
0.4
0.9

0.6
0.6
0.0
0.1

-0.4
0.5
-0.9

0.3
-0.0
-0.0
-0.0

0.3

0.2
0.2
-0.0

Note.  Components  may  not  sum  to 

totals 

because  of  rounding.

Strictly Confidential  (FR)
Class  II  FOMC

STAFF  PROJECTIONS  OF  FEDERAL  SECTOR ACCOUNTS AND RELATED ITEMS
(Billions of dollars  except as  noted)

September  23,  1998

Item 

1997 a  

1998 

1999 

2000 

Qla  

Q2 a  

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4

Fiscal year 5  

1998 

1999 

2000

UNIFIED BUDGET 

Receiptsl 
Outlays1  
Surplus/deficit 1  

On-budget 
Off-budget 

Surplus  excluding

deposit  insurance 2  

Means of  financing
Borrowing 
Cash decrease 
Other 3  

Cash operating balance,

end of  period 

NIPA FEDERAL SECTOR 

Receipts 
Expenditures 

Consumption expend. 

Defense 
Nondefense 

Other expenditures 
Current  account surplus 
Gross  investment 
Current  and capital
account surplus 

FISCAL  INDICATORS 4

High-employment  (HEB)

surplus/deficit 

Change  in HEB, percent

of  potential  GDP 

Fiscal  impetus  (FI),

percent, cal.  year 

1579 
1601 
-22 
-103 
81 

-36 

38 
1 
-17 

1721 
1653 
68 
-37 
105 

63 

-54 
12 
-25 

1770 
1714 
56 
-62 
119 

52 

-36 
-8 
-12 

Not  seasonally adjusted

1806 
1754 
52 
-74 
126 

378 
409 
-30 
-51 
21 

544 
407 
137 
87 
50 

412 
411 
1 
-7 
8 

411 
472 
-61 
-60 
-1 

388 
397 
-8 
-62 
54 

541 
421 
120 
66 
53 

431 
425 
6 
-6 
12 

412 
443 
-30 
-65 
35 

407 
448 
-41 
-64 
23 

549 
432 
117 
60 
56 

438 
431 
7 
-5 
11 

419
453
-34
-69
34

48 

-31 

136 

-1 

-62 

-9 

119 

5 

-31 

-42 

116 

6 

-35

-56 
0 
4 

26 
4 
0 

-82 
-45 
-10 

-32 
40 
-9 

42 
11 
8 

25 
-4 
-13 

-105 
-10 
-5 

2 
-5 
-3 

20 
10 
1 

31 
10 
1 

-89 
-25 
-3 

-17 
5 
6 

19
20
-5

44 

32 

40 

40 

28 

72 

32 

21 

25 

35 

40 

30 

20 

45 

40 

20

Seasonally adjusted annual  rate

1687 
1728 
458 
306 
152 
1270 
-41 
61 

-102 

1820 
1767 
459 
301 
158 
1308 
54 
59 

1869 
1816 
464 
301 
163 
1353 
52 
59 

1899 
1852 
468 
302 
166 
1384 
47 
57 

1809 
1750 
451 
293 
158 
1299 
59 
61 

1837 
1764 
464 
303 
161 
1300 
73 
56 

1870 
1789 
461 
301 
160 
1328 
80 
60 

1886 
1814 
461 
301 
160 
1353 
72 
60 

1854 
1809 
463 
301 
163 
1346 
45 
59 

1862 
1817 
465 
302 
163 
1352 
45 
59 

1873 
1825 
466 
302 
164 
1359 
48 
59 

1884 
1839 
465 
301 
164 
1374 
45 
58 

1883 
1847 
468 
301 
166 
1380 
36 
57 

1904 
1856 
469 
302 
167 
1387 
48 
57 

1924 
1865 
469 
302 
167 
1396 
59 
57 

1942
1885
473
306
167
1412
57
58

-6 

-6 

-10 

-2 

17 

20 

13 

-14 

-14 

-10 

-13 

-21 

-9 

2 

-1

-163 

-103 

-.8 

-.8 

-90 

-.2 

-55 

-.4 

-102 

-87 

-83 

-91 

-103 

-90 

-75 

-68 

-65 

-50 

-37 

-39

-.5 

-.2 

0 

.1 

.1 

-.1 

-.2 

-.1 

0 

-.2 

-.2 

-2.1 

-1.8 

.2 

-2.3 

-2.1 

1 

1.7 

-1.5 

1 

-.2 

-.5  -1.2 

-1.1 

0 

-.2 

0

.6

1. OMB's May 1998  surplus  estimates  (assuming the enactment of  the  President's proposals) are  $39  billion  in  FY98  and  $54  billion in  FY99.  CBO's

August  1998  baseline  surplus  estimates are  $63  billion  in FY98  and $80  billion in FY99.  Budget  receipts, outlays,  and  surplus/deficit include
corresponding social  security  (OASDI) categories.  The OASDI  surplus  is  excluded from the  on-budget deficit  and  shown separately as  off-budget,  as
classified under  current  law.  The Postal  Service deficit  is  included in off-budget  outlays beginning  in  FY90.

2. OMB's May 1998  surplus  estimates  (assuming the enactment of  the  President's proposals),  excluding  deposit  insurance  spending, are $35  billion

in FY98  and $51  billion in  FY99 and CBO's August  baseline estimates are  $59  billion in FY98  and $76  billion  in  FY99.

3. Other means  of  financing are checks  issued  less  checks paid,  accrued  items,  and changes  in other  financial assets  and  liabilities.
4. HEB is  the NIPA current and  capital  account surplus  in  current dollars, with  cyclically sensitive  receipts and  outlays  adjusted  to  the  level  of

potential  output  associated with  an unemployment rate of  6 percent.  Real  potential GDP  growth is  assumed  to be  2.8  percent  beginning  1995:Q3.
Quarterly  figures  for change  in HEB  and FI  are not  at  annual  rates.  Change  in HEB,  as a percent  of nominal  potential GDP,  is  reversed in  sign.  FI
is  the weighted difference of  discretionary changes  in  federal  spending and taxes  in chained  (1992)  dollars,  scaled  by  real  federal  consumption plus
investment.  For  change  in HEB  and FI,  negative  values  indicate  restraint.

5. Fiscal  year  data  for the  unified budget  come  from OMB;  quarterly  data come  from  the Monthly Treasury Statement  and may  not sum  to OMB  fiscal

year  totals.

a--Actual.
b--Preliminary.

Strictly  Confidential  Class II FOMC
September  23,  1998

Change in Debt of the Domestic  Nonfinancial  Sectors
(Percent)

Year
1990 
1991 
1992 
1993 

1994 
1995 
1996 
1997 

1998 
1999 
2000 

Quarter
1997:3 
4 
1998:1 
2 
3 
4 
1999:1 
2 
3 
4 

6.4 
4.3 
4.6 
5.0 

4.6 
5.4 
5.3 
5.3 

5.6 
3.6 
3.4 

5.6 
6.4 
6.0 
6.1 
4.6 
5.1 
4.1 
3.3 
3.5 
3.4 

11.0 
11.1 
10.9 
8.3 

4.7 
4.1 
4.0 
0.6 

-1.2 
-1.6 
-1.5 

0.8 
1.1 
-0.8 
-1.8 
-3.9 
1.8 
-1.3 
-2.8 
-1.2 
-0.9 

5.2 
2.3 
2.6 
3.8 

4.6 
5.9 
5.8 
7.0 

7.8 
5.2 
4.8 

7.3 
8.2 
8.3 
8.6 
7.3 
6.1 
5.7 
5.2 
4.9 
4.7 

7.5 
4.7 
4.3 
5.3 

7.5 
7.8 
7.8 
6.8 

8.0 
5.5 
4.9 

6.9 
7.3 
7.9 
8.5 
7.5 
7.0 
6.2 
5.6 
5.0 
4.8 

9.6 
6.4 
5.2 
4.3 

5.8 
5.5 
8.0 
7.5 

8.9 
6.3 
5.3 

9.1 
8.2 
8.6 
9.3 
8.7 
8.0 
7.1 
6.3 
5.7 
5.5 

1.5 
-1.3 
0.5 
7.6 

14.5 
14.1 
7.9 
4.3 

3.8 
1.8 
1.9 

4.1 
3.0 
4.1 
4.6 
3.1 
3.4 
2.3 
2.0 
1.5 
1.4 

3.1 
-1.7 
0.8 
1.6 

4.0 
6.6 
5.1 
7.6 

8.3 
5.1 
4.9 

7.8 
9.1 
8.8 
9.5 
8.1 
6.0 
5.3 
4.9 
4.9 
4.8 

5.0 
8.6 
2.2 
6.0 

-4.0 
-4.6 
-0.6 
5.3 

4.8 
4.3 
3.8 

6.7 
8.4 
8.4 
5.7 
2.5 
2.5 
4.6 
4.4 
4.1 
3.9 

4.4
3.8
6.3
5.0

5.8
4.2
5.8
5.6

4.2
2.8
3.9

5.4
4.2
6.4
2.7
4.2
3.6
2.7
2.3
2.8
3.3

Note. Quarterly  data are  at seasonally  adjusted annual  rates.
1. Data after  1998:Q2  are staff projections.  Changes are measured from  end of the preceding  period  to

end of period  indicated  except for annual  nominal  GDP growth,  which  is calculated  from  Q4 to Q4.

2. On a  monthly  average basis,  total debt is projected  to grow 5.7 percent  in  1998  and 3.8 percent  in  1999.
3. On  a monthly  average basis, federal  debt  is projected  to  grow -1.2  percent  in  1998 and -1.2  percent  in  1999.
4. On  a monthly  average basis, nonfederal  debt is projected  to grow  8.1  percent in  1998  and  5.4 percent  in  1999.

2.6.3  FOF

Strictly Confential  Class II FOMC
September  1998

Flow  of Funds Projections: Highlights
(Billions  of dollars except  as noted)

Category 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

QI 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4

Calendar  year 

1997 

1998 

1999

Seasonally  adjusted annual  rates

Net funds raised by  domestic
nonfinancial sectors

1  Total 
2  Net equity issuance 
3  Net debt issuance 

Borrowing sectors
Nonfinancial  business
4  Financing  gap 1  
5  Net equity issuance 
6  Credit market borrowing 

Households
7  Net borrowing 2  
8 
9 
10  Debt/DPI  (percent) 3  

Home  mortgages 
Consumer  credit 

State and local  governments
11  Net borrowing 
12  Current surplus 4  

Federal government
13  Net borrowing 
14  Net borrowing  (quarterly,  n.s.a.) 
15  Unified  deficit  (quarterly,  n.s.a.) 

Depository institutions
16  Funds supplied 

Memo (percentage  of GDP)
17  Domestic nonfinancial  debt 5  
18  Domestic  nonfinancial  borrowing 
Federal  government 6  
19 
Nonfederal 
20 

653.7 
-114.6 
768.4 

601.5 
-242.8 
844.3 

518.4 
-64.0 
582.4 

546.3 
-14.0 
560.3 

705.6 
-124.0 
829.6 

810.8 
-144.1 
954.9 

781.1 
-138.0 
919.1 

805.8 
-129.2 
935.0 

534.1 
-182.0 
716.1 

284.9 
-522.0 
806.9 

563.2 
-88.0 
651.2 

467.3 
-72.0 
539.3 

514.1 
-56.0 
570.1 

529.0
-40.0
569.0

73.8 
-114.6 
337.6 

111.0 
-242.8 
398.2 

351.6 
261.3 
52.5 
91.9 

437.8 
336.0 
48.7 
94.9 

136.7 
-64.0 
262.6 

327.5 
258.2 
23.7 
97.2 

163.3 
-14.0 
264.6 

305.4 
232.1 
25.9 
98.5 

50.8 
-124.0 
358.4 

82.8 
-144.1 
425.7 

118.5 
-138.0 
420.2 

103.0 
-129.2 
463.0 

98.4 
-182.0 
404.8 

124.3 
-522.0 
304.6 

368.3 
326.9 
50.3 
92.1 

396.2 
302.0 
37.8 
92.8 

435.9 
322.2 
51.7 
93.6 

476.7 
359.1 
58.6 
94.7 

431.2 
341.2 
40.1 
95.4 

407.7 
321.7 
44.2 
96.2 

127.8 
-88.0 
275.1 

371.4 
289.7 
30.6 
96.4 

133.1 
-72.0 
257.1 

336.5 
263.7 
26.9 
97.2 

139.5 
-56.0 
260.7 

306.1 
243.7 
19.3 
97.7 

146.6
-40.0
257.7

296.3
235.7
18.1
98.1

56.1 
135.6 

54.2 
181.8 

50.5 
185.0 

46.8 
186.9 

72.6 
117.6 

92.3 
171.5 

94.3 
179.1 

64.9 
175.1 

28.8 
182.9 

28.8 
190.1 

53.8 
190.2 

51.8 
177.6 

49.8 
185.0 

46.8
187.1

23.1 
23.1 
2.4 

-45.9 
-45.9 
-46.6 

-58.3 
-58.3 
-87.2 

-56.5 
-56.5 
-47.7 

30.3 
10.6 
10.9 

40.8 
33.7 
39.7 

-31.3 
25.6 
30.2 

-69.6 
-81.5 
-136.9 

-148.7 
-31.8 
-0.9 

65.8 
41.8 
61.1 

-49.0 
25.0 
8.3 

-106.0 
-104.6 
-119.6 

-46.4 
1.7 
-6.1 

-31.7
19.5
30.2

336.9 

259.3 

221.0 

230.7 

204.4 

472.9 

323.4 

160.9 

303.7 

249.3 

220.3 

211.9 

222.3 

229.5

182.8 
9.5 
0.3 
9.2 

184.2 
9.9 
-0.5 
10.5 

186.9 
6.7 
-0.7 
7.3 

187.1 
6.2 
-0.6 
6.8 

182.0 
10.2 
0.4 
9.8 

182.8 
11.6 
0.5 
11.1 

182.8 
11.0 
-0.4 
11.3 

184.3 
11.1 
-0.8 
11.9 

184.9 
8.4 
-1.7 
10.1 

185.4 
9.4 
0.8 
8.6 

186.3 
7.5 
-0.6 
8.1 

187.0 
6.2 
-1.2 
7.4 

187.3 
6.5 
-0.5 
7.0 

187.4
6.4
-0.4
6.8

Note. Data after  1998:Q2  are staff projections.
I.  For corporations:  Excess of capital  expenditures  over U.S.  internal  funds.
2. Includes  change in liabilities not shown  in lines  8 and 9.
3.  Average  debt levels in  the period  (computed  as the average  of period-end  debt positions) divided  by disposable  personal income.
4.  NIPA surplus  less changes in  retirement fund  assets  plus consumption  of fixed  capital.
5.  Average  debt levels in  the period (computed  as the average  of period-end debt  positions) divided by nominal  GDP.
6. Excludes  government-insured  mortgage  pool securities.

2.6.4  FOF

International Developments

Developments  in international  financial  markets  during the intermeeting  period have

confirmed  our concerns  that the actions  taken by Russia just before  the August FOMC

meeting,  to let the ruble depreciate  and effectively default  on its government  debt, could
have widespread  negative repercussions.  The reaction  on the part of investors has been a
general  withdrawal  from risk.  In Latin America  in particular, yield  spreads and domestic

interest  rates  soared, while  stock markets declined  sharply, with falling currencies  or
heavy outflows  of private capital,  especially from Brazil,  Venezuela,  and Mexico.  In
Europe, Japan,  and North America,  as  well, equity markets have dropped  substantially
while government  bond prices have jumped and  corporate bond spreads have  widened.
The turmoil  in financial markets  has led us  to revise  down  substantially  our outlook  for
GDP  growth  in Latin America--an  outlook that was  anemic to begin  with by recent
historical standards--and  moderately  elsewhere.  Everything  else being  equal, the
resultant  slowing of U.S.  export  growth in  1999 would have subtracted  more than  1/4

percentage  point from our previous projection  for U.S.  GDP  growth over the year  ahead.
However,  other factors,  including  a lower path of the dollar associated  with an assumed
cut in U.S.  interest  rates, have  a partly offsetting  positive effect  on the external sector.

Recent  Developments

International financial markets.  Financial  meltdown in Russia proceeded  fairly

quickly after the government's  actions on August  17,  once investors  realized fully that

further  international  financial  assistance for Russia would not be forthcoming  any time
soon.  The  ruble plunged  and has fluctuated in a wide range  between  8 and 22 per dollar
(relative to its starting  value of 6.2 rubles per dollar),  ending  the period  around  15 per
dollar.  Foreign  investors  in ruble-denominated  government  debt appear to be facing  very
large losses  on their holdings,  although in recent days there  have been hints  that the terms
of the forced restructuring  may be  amended.  After several  weeks  of political uncertainty,
a government  is beginning to emerge under Prime Minister  Primakov.  Early
pronouncements  by the new  (and former) head of the central bank, Viktor  Geraschenko,
suggest that the  new government will  depend heavily on the printing press both to finance

wage  arrears  and to run off its debt.

Brazil  was particularly vulnerable to the latest round of contagion,  given its very

large budget  and external  deficits  and short-term debt.  By early September,  Brady bond
spreads for Brazil had soared  above their levels  seen during the Mexican  crisis  in  1995,
and  domestic  short-term  interest rates were pushed  up to between  40 percent and 50

I-30

Part 1: Summary and Outlook, September 23, 1998

percent  in Brazil,  Mexico, and  Venezuela  and to  15  percent in Argentina.  The Mexican
peso fell as  much  as  13 percent, and Brazil ran  its reserves  down from $68  billion in mid-
August  to less than $50 billion  at present to maintain the real's crawling  peg. Pressure  on
these financial markets  has  eased  somewhat  over the past  week and  a half as  a result of

(1) a sharp  increase in  domestic  interest rates,  (2)  a growing  view in the market  that
international  financial  support would be made  available  to Brazil  and Argentina if

needed,  and (3)  talk of a cut in U.S. interest rates.

The events  in Latin America have been  accompanied  by significant developments

in international  financial markets  among the industrial countries.  Since the August

FOMC  meeting, the dollar has  depreciated sharply  against  the yen (6 1/2 percent),  the mark
and most  other continental  European  currencies  (6 percent),  and the pound  (4 percent).
Factors  weighing on the dollar include the  perception that the U.S.  economy is more
vulnerable  than  either Europe or Japan to a downturn  in Latin America, growing

expectations  of a U.S.  monetary  easing, and uncertainty  about the prospects  for the
Clinton  presidency.

The yen  strengthened  through most of the intermeeting  period despite further bad
news about the Japanese banking  system and economy, a cut in the Bank of Japan's  call
money rate from  a bit below 50 basis points  to 25 basis points,  and a  62 percent  drop in
the  stock market as the  Nikkei  fell to a  12-year  low.  The  yen's strength is puzzling.

Market participants  cited ongoing withdrawal  of Japanese  investments  from emerging

markets into  yen (and in time  for the September  30 end of the fiscal  mid-year),  as well as

growing concern  about U.S.  and Japanese  trade imbalances  as reasons for the yen's

appreciation.  After having been deadlocked  for most of the period, parties negotiating
Japanese  bank reform legislation  appeared  to reach an  agreement on  September  18,  but
disputes over the  details  arose  subsequently.  Reflecting  both a flight to quality and  a
gloomier outlook  for economic  activity, the long-term government  bond yield fell 40

basis  points, but corporate  bond  spreads and the premium  on interbank borrowing rates of
Japanese  banks widened  somewhat.

Stock markets in the major European countries  have fallen substantially  over the

intermeeting period and have lost 20 to 25 percent on balance  since their peaks  in July.
Government  bond yields have declined  25  to 55 basis points since mid-August and have
moved below 4 percent in  Germany for the first time in recent decades.

The dollar is little changed  on balance  against the Canadian  dollar, which

continued its recent downtrend early in the period but recovered  after the Bank of Canada

hiked its bank rate  100 basis points on August 27  in response to the currency's  slide.

International Developments

I-31

Canadian  stock  and bond markets have  moved much  the same as those in Europe  and  the

United States over the period.

Financial  markets in Asia, already having undergone  a major downturn,  were less
affected  by the developments  in Russia and Latin America.  Two  actions worthy  of note
were  massive intervention  in the  Hong Kong  stock market by the Hong Kong  Monetary

Authority  and the imposition  of exchange controls  in Malaysia.  The HKMA  spent  an
estimated  $12 1/2 billion in the stock market,  which ended the period up 4 percent.  With
the imposition  of exchange  controls  in Malaysia in early September, the currency was  set

at  a  10 percent higher level  than  had prevailed  in recent  months.  Malaysian  interest rates
have  declined,  and the stock market has  risen  on balance  since the controls were  imposed

and  banking supervision  and regulation  were relaxed.

On a trade-weighted  average  basis in  terms of the major currencies,  the dollar has

declined  about 4 percent  since the  August FOMC  meeting.  Against  a broad weighted
average  the  dollar is down  only 2 percent, however, reflecting  in large  part the dollar's

rise against the Mexican peso.

The  Desk did

not intervene.

Economic  activity abroad.  The  growth  of total  foreign real GDP (weighted  by

shares of  U.S.  nonagricultural  exports)  appears  to have  remained near zero  in the second
quarter, and  early indications  for the third  quarter point to continued sluggishness.
Japan's  GDP  showed another  substantial  decline, though  the rate  of descent  slowed
somewhat  in the  second quarter because of a steep drop in imports.  Domestic demand
fell  at an  annual  rate of 6.2 percent  in the second quarter, somewhat  more  than in the first
quarter.  A  drop in industrial production  and big  declines in housing starts  and machinery
orders in July point to negative GDP growth  for Japan  again in the third quarter.

Real  growth  in Europe  slowed in the second quarter  as German  GDP growth  fell

to only  0.4 percent  (SAAR) because  of the impact of a VAT increase  and unusual
weather.  Recent indicators  point to some rebound in the third  quarter.  Elsewhere  in
Europe,  early indications  are  generally for some  slowing  of growth  in the third quarter.

Canadian  growth should  recover somewhat  from a strike-depressed  second  quarter.
Industrial  countries  showed  a substantial  slowing  in growth of real exports  during the first
half of 1998  compared  with  1997,  and Japanese  and  U.K. exports  recorded significantly
negative  growth rates.  Twelve-month  CPI inflation  dipped to zero in Japan  in July and
to  1 1/2 percent  in continental Europe and
August,  was running  in the neighborhood  of 
Canada  and slowed  to the official  target of 2  1/2 percent  in the United Kingdom  in August.

I-32

Part 1:  Summary and Outlook, September 23,  1998

Real  output continued to  spiral downward  in  Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia,  and

Thailand in the second quarter, although  GDP in Korea  and Malaysia  appears  to  have

declined more  slowly  than  in the  first quarter.  The  decline in  the Philippines  steepened

from a moderate  rate in the first quarter, and growth in Singapore  turned negative.  The

countries  for which data on industrial  production  are available  through July  or August

(Korea, Malaysia,  and Singapore)  show continued weakness.  Hong Kong recorded  a

sharp  drop in real GDP in  the first  quarter;  China  and Taiwan  showed slowing positive

growth  through the second  quarter.  The growth of China's industrial production  held up

at  an  annual rate  of nearly  8 percent through August  (12-month  change),  while Taiwan's

continued at  around 4 percent.  The combined trade balance  of Korea,  Malaysia,

Philippines,  and Thailand  was  up $108  billion in the  second quarter from a year  earlier.

We estimate  that  $25  billion of the  adjustment  has been  in  trade  with the United  States,

primarily as a reduction in U.S.  nominal exports.'

Output growth  in Mexico  and Argentina has  slowed  in recent months  from last

year's robust pace.  In Mexico  declining  oil prices  have  forced  some fiscal  belt-

tightening,  and monetary  conditions  were tightened  in response  to increasing  financial

market turmoil  earlier this  year.  Growth in Brazil  is estimated to  have picked  up in the

second  quarter after  its first-quarter plunge  but  appears to  have turned  negative  again in

the third  quarter.  While most of the  Asian  emerging  market economies  have  moved

significantly into external  surplus  this year, the major Latin American  countries  were still

running relatively large  current account  deficits during  the second  quarter  and into the

third quarter.  Twelve-month  consumer price  inflation  remained high in  Mexico  through

August  (15  percent) but has declined in Brazil  (to 4 percent) and remains  around  1

percent in Argentina.

U.S.  net exports and prices.  The U.S. nominal trade deficit in  goods  and

services  narrowed  slightly in  July from the $174  billion  (annual rate) deficit recorded  in

the second quarter.  Both imports  and exports declined,  reflecting  in part the effects  of the

GM  strike on automotive  trade with Canada  and Mexico.  The current  account deficit

widened  to $226 billion,  or 2.9 percent of GDP, in the second  quarter.

U.S.  export prices  declined 3.1  percent  at an annual  rate in July-August relative  to

the second quarter, with declines concentrated  in  agricultural  commodities,  industrial

materials,  and  computers.  The price  of non-oil  imports  fell 4.1  percent  at an annual  rate

in  July-August  following  similar  declines  in the first two quarters.  These  declines  were

1. Given  sharp declines in the prices of U.S.  imports from key Asian countries,  it appears  that these

imports have been  rising significantly  in real terms.

International Developments

I-33

widespread  across  commodity  categories, particularly  industrial  supplies, computers  and
semiconductors.  Prices  of imports from  key Asian economies  (whose exports  are heavily
weighted  towards  computers  and semiconductors)  declined  while those  from Europe and
Canada  were little changed. 2  The average  price of imported oil  dropped  further in July-
August.  Unexpectedly  large shipments  from Iraq,  market disappointment  over the pace
of production  cutbacks  from  other OPEC producers,  and weak oil demand  -- especially  in
Asia -- all contributed  to the  decline  in prices  below  $13.00  (WTI) in mid-August.  Spot
prices  have rebounded since  then largely because  OPEC  has intensified efforts  to restrain
production  and because  Iraq has announced  that it will  not be able to maintain its August
export  rates  through the  remainder of the year.  Spot WTI is currently  trading  near $15.50

per barrel.

Outlook

The  staff projects  that foreign  GDP (weighted by U.S.  nonagricultural  export

shares),  which  declined  slightly during the first half of this year, will  decline further in
the  second half.  Over the  next two years,  we see growth  resuming with a gradual pickup
to about 2 1/2 percent  by 2000,  still well below the average  rate during  1992-96.  The
projected  growth performance  for 1998-99  is easily the slowest two-year  growth  in the
past three decades.  Relative  to the August  forecast,  we have  subtracted  about
1 percentage  point from the growth  of foreign GDP through the end of  1999 because of
deep cuts in Latin  American growth  and smaller  downward revisions  elsewhere.  We  also
see  the risks  surrounding  this forecast  as having  widened  further, and we outline  those
risks in more detail  at the end of this  outlook section.

We project the dollar to  decline moderately  in real terms against  a broad  set of

currencies.  This outlook is little changed from that in the August  forecast  as downward
revisions  in the path for the  dollar in terms  of major  currencies  is offset by upward
revisions  in terms  of Latin American  currencies.  We  now see real net exports  subtracting
about  1 percentage  point from U.S.  real  GDP growth  in the second  half of  1998 and about
1/2 percentage  point in1999  and 2000 somewhat more than in the August  forecast.  The
lower foreign GDP  growth reduces  our projection for U.S. export growth enough to
subtract 0.2 percentage  point from U.S.  GDP growth  over the year ahead.  In  addition,
U.S.  import growth has been  weakened  slightly in light of the lower trajectory  for U.S.

GDP growth.

2.  The  Asian economies  covered  by these data include Hong Kong, Korea,  Singapore,  and Taiwan.

I-34

Part 1: Summary and Outlook, September 23,  1998

Summary of Staff Projections
(Percentage  change  from end  of previous  period)

Measure 

1997 

Projection

1998
19981999 
Q4

H1 ____ Q3 

Foreign output 
August 

Real  exports 
August 

4.0 
3.9 

9.6 
9.6 

Real  imports 
August 

14.0 
14.0 

.2 
-0.1 

-5.2 
-5.8 

12.4 
13.9 

-.4 
.5 

-1.7 
-2.3 

5.5 
6.9 

-.1 
1.1 

-2.8 
-.5 

7.7 
8.2 

1.4 
2.1

1.3 
3.0

6.1 
6.5

2000

2.5

4.7

6.6

The dollar.  We project  that the trade-weighted  exchange value  of the dollar against

the major foreign currencies  will  remain near its current level  in coming weeks  as  market
expectations are  met for an easing in the very  near term by the Federal  Reserve.  We
assume that  further cuts in  U.S. short-term  interest rates and,  over  time,  growing  concern

about the U.S.  external  deficit, will  cause the dollar to  fall  at an annual  rate of about 4

percent  against the euro during  1999 and 2000.  The dollar should also decline,  though

more moderately,  against the Canadian  dollar as that  currency  regains some  of the ground it

has lost in  recent months with the gradual  pickup in  global  activity.  There is considerable

uncertainty  about factors  that will  affect the dollar/yen  exchange  rate.  We expect declining

U.S. interest rates and growing  concerns  about diverging  external balances  in the United

States  and Japan to put downward pressure  on the  dollar.  At the  same time, chronic

macroeconomic  and financial  sector problems in Japan will  weigh on the yen.  As  a result,
we  are projecting  the dollar to remain little changed  against the yen while recognizing  that
the risk for large  movements  in either direction are  substantial.

At the same  time, our forecast has the real exchange  value  of the  dollar little

changed against  emerging market currencies  on average as increases  in terms of Latin
American currencies  are offset by decreases  against  Asian currencies.  We assume that the

Mexican peso  will decline  significantly  in the near term and that the Brazilian  real will

depreciate  substantially in real  terms over the  forecast period  as Brazil's currency  peg
succumbs  to  market pressures.  We  again project  that Chinese authorities  will allow  some

decline  in the renminbi  later  next year  and that the Argentine  and Hong  Kong currency pegs
will hold.  The projected  appreciation  of Asian currencies  in real terms reflects inflation

International Developments

1-35

rates that are  higher in those countries  than in the United States.  On a broad weighted

average basis,  in real terms,  the dollar falls  1 percent  in the fourth quarter and another 2

percent  over the next two years.

Activity in foreign industrial  countries.  The  staff projects  that real GDP growth
in the  foreign industrial  countries  will  edge up from  around 1 1/2  percent  in the third quarter

to  about 2 percent in  the fourth quarter  and that it will remain in that vicinity through  2000.
This rate of growth  is nearly  1/2  percent lower than that in the August forecast, reflecting

downward  revisions,  especially  in Europe  and Canada, in response to the expected  negative

effects  on spending of stock  market corrections  and weaker external  demand  resulting from

the  deteriorating  outlook in Latin America  and Eastern Europe  and the slowing  of growth in
the  United States.

Japan.  We now  expect  Japanese GDP to show another substantial  decline in the

third  quarter  as fiscal measures  are unlikely to  show through  significantly until later  in the
year.  We project  private domestic demand  to continue  declining through mid-1999  and to

begin  to turn up only very  sluggishly  in 2000.  Nevertheless,  we are  projecting real  GDP to

expand  at an  annual  rate of  3/4 percent  in the  fourth quarter and about  1 percent in  1999  as a
result of substantial  fiscal  stimulus now in train  (and  our assumption  that a bit more is  still

to come) plus  a small positive  contribution  from net exports.  Absent further  fiscal  stimulus
in 2000,  GDP  growth  will remain  around  1/2 percent  as private demand picks  up.  Assuming
growth of potential  output in  Japan remains  about  1 1/2 percent, this forecast implies  an

output gap of over 7  percent by the end of 2000.

Europe and Canada.  Real  output growth  in Euroland  is expected  to remain

around 2 1/4  to  2 1/2  percent  through the forecast period.  Strength in domestic demand
(supported by accommodative  monetary policy)  accounts  for continued expansion  as net
exports  are  projected to make  a negative contribution  throughout the remainder of the
forecast period.  Real  GDP growth  in the United  Kingdom  and Canada is projected  to slow
over the  next five  quarters  in response  to recent  monetary tightening  and stock market

declines  and to pick up moderately  in 2000.

Inflation.  Consumer price inflation in the major foreign industrial countries (on a

four-quarter  basis  and weighted by U.S.  non-oil import  shares) is projected to fall to just
below  1/2 percent  in the fourth  quarter as  Japanese prices  fall  1 percent.  We project  the
foreign  average  to rise to positive  1 percent  by 2000 as Japanese  inflation returns  to zero.
Inflation  is expected to be low everywhere  except in the United  Kingdom, where it is

anticipated  to remain  around  2 1/2  percent.

Interest rates.  This  forecast incorporates  the assumption  that short-term  market

interest rates  in Japan  will  remain  very low over the  forecast period.  In coming months,

1-36

Part 1: Summary and Outlook, September 23, 1998

interest  rates in Euroland will  decline on average  as rates converge  at the current  level of

German rates  (around  3 1/2 percent) before the  start of EMU.  In light of the weaker outlook

for  growth in Europe,  we  have dropped  our previous assumption  that the ECB  will  tighten
somewhat next year, and  we now  assume  that monetary  policy will remain  accommodative
over the forecast period with rates  unchanged.  We also  assume that both Canadian  and

U.K. interest rates  will decline  by  100 to  150 basis  points over the next two years as  growth

slows in those  countries  and  (especially in the case  of Canada) as  U.S. rates  are reduced.

Developing  countries.  Average  real GDP of our major trading partners  among

developing  countries  is projected to  decline  at an annual rate of nearly 3  percent  during the
second half of 1998 and  somewhat  less  in the  first quarter  of 1999 and  to pick up but

remain  sluggish  thereafter, with  growth  averaging a little over 

percent during  1999 and  a

bit less than  3 percent rate  in 2000  -- only half the trend  rate of recent  years.  This  forecast
represents  a substantial  downward revision from the previous projection  because  of a sharp
markdown  of our outlook for Latin America,  especially  Brazil and  Argentina.

Latin America.  Our best guess  for Latin America is that real GDP will be

depressed by diminished  access  to  external borrowing  and by the  sharply higher interest

rates  and fiscal  contractions  put in place  to bolster the confidence  of international  (and
domestic)  investors  in these countries.  Conditions  in Latin American  markets  are expected
to remain  unsettled  into next year;  however,  our forecast assumes that enough  confidence

will  be restored  to allow  these countries  to finance  reduced though  still negative  current
account balances. 3  Nevertheless,  we project that the financial  shock that has already
occurred  will  cause GDP in Brazil  and Argentina  to  decline  at  annual  rates of 3  to 6 percent
over the next several  quarters.  Venezuela  will continue  to be hit hard  as well, but Mexico

and Chile  less  so because  their domestic  policies  and more flexible  exchange rates have

rendered  them somewhat less  vulnerable.

Asia.  We project that real GDP in the Asian developing  countries on  average  reach

a trough in the first  half of  1999 (mid-2000  for Indonesia)  and will turn up  slowly
thereafter.  Only China is expected  to record  significantly positive  growth throughout  the
forecast  period.  Asian  growth  for 1998-99  has been marked down  slightly since the last
Greenbook.

Real net exports of goods  and services.  Trade data for June  and July have led us

to mark up the level  of real  exports of goods  and services  in the third quarter  somewhat

3.  Our forecasts  for Latin American  growth  and exchange rates  are  consistent with  the current  account
deficits  of these countries  falling to  half the  levels  we had projected  earlier  (and somewhat less than half
their  1987 levels).

International Developments

1-37

relative  to the previous  forecast.  The  decline in exports  of machinery  excluding computers
and  semiconductors in recent months  has been  less  than we had expected.  Beyond  the third
quarter,  however, we have  significantly reduced  the growth  of exports because  of weaker

GDP growth  abroad.  Latin  America accounts  for about  20 percent  of U.S.  exports,  roughly
the  same  as  Asia excluding Japan.  Exports  of nonagricultural  goods other than computers
and semiconductors  (core exports)  are now  projected  to drop  at  an annual rate of 6 percent

during the  second half of this year  and 2 percent  during  1999.  These exports  should expand
again in 2000, by nearly  3 percent,  as  GDP growth abroad picks up  and the moderate
decline  in the dollar  adds  some stimulus  to export demand.  With exports  of computers  and
semiconductors  expected  to continue  growing at a much more  rapid pace  than other exports
in real terms,  total exports  of goods  and services  should grow 2 to 3 percentage  points
faster than core exports  over the forecast  period.

We expect that the  growth of imports of goods  and services  will  slow noticeably

over the  year ahead from its rapid pace  over  the past several years  as U.S. real  GDP growth

declines.  Real  imports of non-oil goods  other than computers  and semiconductors  (core

imports)  should decelerate  to an  annual  rate of growth of about 8 percent  during the  second

half of this year from  13 percent  over the  past six quarters then  slow  to about  5  percent
growth in 1999  and  2000.  The moderate  decline  in the dollar over the forecast period
should keep  import  growth  steady as  U.S. GDP growth recovers in 2000.  Growth of
imports  of computers  and semiconductors  in real terms should remain  rapid.  The quantity

of oil  imports  should decline  during the second half of this year  as  inventories  retreat from
the current unusually high  levels.  We  project that oil  imports will  rise a bit more rapidly
than was forecast  in August  because  of the adverse  effect  of low  oil prices on  U.S. oil
production.  Overall,  real imports  of goods and  services  are projected  to expand at an

annual rate of 6  1/2 percent  during the  second half of this year and about  6 percent  next year.

Oil prices.  The staff has raised its projected path for the price of imported oil

slightly in the  near term to reflect recent  increases  in  spot oil prices  and anticipated  further
increases  in response  to production  cuts by major oil producers.  We project that the oil
import price will  rise from  a little more  than $11.50  per barrel  in the third quarter to about
$13.50  per barrel  in  1999,  and to  $14  per barrel  in 2000.  This longer-term  path is nearly
$0.75  per barrel below the previous  forecast largely because  of the weaker  outlook for
global  GDP  growth.

Prices of non-oil imports and exports.  We expect  that the net appreciation  of the
dollar in recent  quarters and  declining world commodity prices  through much  of next year
will  continue to  depress non-oil import prices  of core goods through  mid-1999.  We project
a rate of decline  of nearly 3  percent  in the second  half of 1998 and no change  in the first

I-38

Part 1: Summary and Outlook, September 23, 1998

half of  1999.  As the effects of past appreciation of the dollar  wane, and the dollar begins
to depreciate,  import prices should begin  to rise  slowly over the rest of the forecast  period.
Nonagricultural  export prices for core goods  are projected to decline  slightly further  in the
second  half of 1998 but to begin rising  very slowly over the remainder  of the forecast

period, in line with  comparable domestic  prices.

Selected  Trade Prices
(Percentage change from end of previous period
except as noted;  seasonally  adjusted)

Trade  category 

1997 

Projection

1998
19981999 
Q3 

Q4

H1 

2000

Exports
Nonagricultural  (core) 
Agricultural 

Imports
Non-oil  (core) 
Oil (level, dollars per barrel) 

.5 
-3.2 

-2.0 
-10.9 

-.8 
-11.5 

.1 
-11.4 

1.2 
1.7 

1.3
2.0

-.7 
17.72 

-2.6 
12.51 

-3.8 
11.64 

-1.8 
12.75 

0.6 
13.50 

1.4
14.00

NOTE.  Prices  for exports  and non-oil  imports of goods, excluding computers  and

semiconductors,  are on a NIPA chain-weighted  basis.

The price  of imported  oil for multiquarter  periods  is the  price for the final  quarter of the

period.

Nominal  trade and current account balances.  The nominal trade deficit  on

goods  and services  is  projected  to widen  significantly further over the forecast period,  from
about $175  billion  in the second  quarter of this year to nearly  $290 billion in the fourth
quarter of 2000.  The deficit on  net investment  income  also is projected  to widen over the
forecast  period.  As a result,  the current account deficit is expected  to grow from about
$225  billion in the  second  quarter (2  percent  of GDP) to an  average of more  than $360
billion  for the  year 2000  (4 percent of GDP,  noticeably above the previous peak for this
ratio that was reached  in  1987).

Risks

The risks surrounding  the international  outlook are substantial  and, if anything,  have

widened further  as a result of recent  events.  We consider two  alternative scenarios  that
highlight the potential implications  of these risks  for U.S. GDP  and inflation.  The first,
labeled  "pessimistic  scenario"  combines  several somewhat  interrelated  developments
abroad  that could  cause  U.S.  GDP to fall more than  in  our current baseline forecast.  The

International Developments

1-39

second,  labeled  "optimistic  scenario"  considers a combination  of developments  abroad  that
could  raise U.S.  GDP and exacerbate  U.S.  inflation pressures  relative to the baseline.

Pessimistic  scenario.  In this  scenario, we assume  that (a) Japan either fails to reach

an  agreement  on how to  deal with  its banking crisis or fails to implement a banking
resolution  agreement  effectively,  (b) Japanese  fiscal  expansion  falls  well short of current

expectations,  (c)  Latin American  financial markets  continue  in turmoil,  as Brazil  fails to
make  meaningful  progress in reducing its budget deficit,  international financial  assistance

falls  well  short of current  market expectations,  and as a result capital flight from Latin

America persists through  1999,  necessitating  a reduction  in these countries'  current

accounts  to zero  or in some cases  into small  surpluses,  (d)  negative reactions  in Asian

financial  markets  further depress  GDP in those countries,  (e) U.S. and European  interest
rates  follow the paths assumed  in the Greenbook  forecast.

In  this case,  GDP growth  in Japan  and Latin  America falls  about  5 percentage  points

below baseline  during  1999  and somewhat  less during 2000;  GDP growth in  the rest of
Asia falls  half as much,  and GDP growth in Europe  falls  a bit less than  in the United  States.
U.S.  GDP growth is reduced by  0.4percentage point relative  to baseline during  1999,  and
by 0.3  percentage  point during  2000.  The dollar appreciates  4 percent  in the near term  and
the U.S. inflation rate is reduced  0.2 percentage  point for the next two years.  In  this
simulation,  the  U.S.  stock market falls endogenously by 2 percent.  If the  U.S. stock market
were  to fall by an  additional 10 percent  (in excess  of the  model's prediction) in reaction  to
these events, the effects on U.S.  GDP would be about twice  as  large.  (See the  results
labeled "Pessimistic  + Stock Market"  in the table.)

Optimistic  scenario.  In this  scenario, we  assume that  (a) Japan quickly reaches
agreement  on bank  reform legislation  and  immediately begins  effective  implementation

with  generally positive response  in Japanese  and global financial markets,  (b) Japanese
fiscal  stimulus shows through  strongly and  is augmented with additional  legislation,
(c) President  Cardoso  wins convincingly  in the upcoming  Brazilian  election and undertakes
large and credible fiscal  correction,  international  financial  assistance to Latin America  is
substantial,  and Latin  American  financial markets recover  strongly, with yield spreads  and
domestic  interest rates  falling sharply  and allowing  countries to continue to finance  large
current account  deficits (though not as large as we had projected in August),  (d) Asian

financial  markets rebound  and activity picks up, (e) with emerging market jitters calmed,
investors  begin  to focus  on the outsized U.S.  external  deficit and the dollar falls 10 percent
against  a broad range  of currencies.

In  this case,  Japanese  GDP growth  rises about  2  percentage  points above baseline
in  1999 and  2000.  GDP  growth in Latin America  and Asia rises several  percentage  points

1-40

Part 1: Summary and Outlook, September 23, 1998

above  baseline but remains well below  longer-term  trend  rates.  The effect  on Europe is
small.  U.S.  GDP growth  rises  3/4 percentage  point above baseline  in  1999 and  1/2  percentage
point in 2000.  Consumer price inflation rises  by roughly  1/2 percentage  point  during  1999
and  2000.  Most of the effect on U.S.  growth and inflation results  directly from the decline
in the dollar.  If, in addition the U.S.  stock market were to rebound strongly to these
developments,  the  effects on  U.S. GDP would be  greater.

Alternative  International  Scenarios

(Percent change,  Q4 to  Q4)

Measure 

1998 

1999 

2000

U.S. Real GDP
Baseline 
Pessimistic 
Pessimistic  + Stock Market* 
Optimistic 

3.2 
3.2 
3.2 
3.3 

U.S. CPI ex. food and energy
Baseline 
Pessimistic 
Pessimistic  + Stock Market* 
Optimistic 
* U.S.  stock  market falls an  additional  10 percent.

2.3 
2.3 
2.3 
2.3 

1.2 
0.8 
0.5 
2.0 

2.1 
1.9 
1.9 
2.7 

2.4
2.1
1.8
2.8

2.1
1.9
1.8
2.6

Strictly Confidential  (FR)
Class  II  FOMC

September 23,  1998

OUTLOOK FOR FOREIGN REAL GDP AND CONSUMER  PRICES:  SELECTED COUNTRIES
(Percent, Q4  to  Q4)

Measure and country 

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000

----- Projected----

REAL  GDP

Canada 
Japan 
United Kingdom 
Euro-11  Average  (1) 

of  which:
France 
Germany 
Italy 

(2) 

0.9 
0.1 
0.4 
0.1 

-0.1 
0.9 
-0.8 

3.1 
0.5 
2.7 
-0.1 

-0.5 
-0.2 
0.1 

4.5 
0.8 
4.9 
3.4 

4.1 
3.4 
2.5 

0.8 
2.4 
2.0 
1.3 

0.3 
0.0 
2.6 

2.0 
3.4 
2.9 
1.9 

2.4 
2.1 
-0.2 

4.0 
-0.4 
2.9 
3.0 

3.0 
2.3 
2.8 

2.5 
-2.6 
1.5 
2.5 

2.2 
2.3 
1.4 

2.2 
0.9 
1.7 
2.3 

1.9 
2.0 
2.0 

2.5
0.6
2.3
2.4

2.0
2.2
2.3

Foreign G-7  Average

weighted by 1991  GDP 

0.2 

0.6 

2.8 

1.5 

2.3 

1.8 

0.4 

1.6 

1.7

Average weighted by share  of

U.S. nonagricultural exports

Total  foreign 
Foreign G-7 
Developing Countries 

CONSUMER PRICES

Canada 
Japan 
United Kingdom  (3) 
Euro-11  Average  (4) 

of  which:
France 
Germany  (2) 
Italy 

Foreign G-7  Average

weighted by  1991  GDP 

Average weighted by share  of
U.S. non-oil  imports 

2.3 
0.5 
5.2 

3.4 
1.9 
6.1 

5.0 
3.6 
7.2 

1.8 
1.2 
2.5 

4.1 
2.3 
6.8 

4.0 
2.8 
5.4 

-0.2 
1.3 
-2.9 

1.4 
1.8 
0.8 

1.8 
0.9 
3.7 
NA 

1.8 
3.4 
4.9 

1.8 
1.2 
2.7 
NA 

2.1 
4.2 
4.1 

-0.0 
0.8 
2.2 
NA 

1.6 
2.6 
3.8 

2.1 
-0.8 
2.9 
2.7 

1.9 
1.7 
5.9 

2.0 
0.1 
3.2 
2.0 

1.7 
1.4 
2.7 

1.0 
2.1 
2.8 
1.4 

1.2 
1.8 
1.6 

1.3 
-1.0 
2.6 
1.3 

0.9 
0.8 
1.7 

1.6 
-0.3 
3.0 
1.5 

1.0 
1.2 
1.8 

2.5
2.1
2.9

1.5
0.1
2.7
1.5

1.0
1.5
1.8

2.4 

2.5 

1.8 

1.6 

1.5 

1.8 

0.6 

1.0 

1.2

1.9 

2.0 

1.0 

1.1 

1.3 

1.7 

0.4 

0.9 

1.0

1. Includes  all  of  the  European Union countries except  the United Kingdom, Denmark,

Sweden, and Greece;  weighted by GDP.

2. CPI  excluding mortgage interest  payments which is  the  targeted  inflation  rate.
3. Harmonized CPI's  for  the  Euro-11, weighted by shares  in  final  consumption  of
households  converted to  a common currency using  estimated  PPP exchange  rates.

Strictly Confidential  (FR)
Class II  FOMC

OUTLOOK  FOR  FOREIGN  REAL  GDP  AND  CONSUMER PRICES:  SELECTED COUNTRIES
(Percent, quarterly change  at an  annual rate)

September  23

Measure and country 

REAL GDP

Canada 
Japan 
United Kingdom 
Euro-11 Average  (1) 

of  which:
France 
Germany 
Italy 

Foreign 0-7  Average

weighted by 1991  GDP 

Average weighted by share  of

U.S.  nonagricultural exports

Total  foreign 

Foreign G-7 
Developing Countries 

CONSUMER PRICES  (2)

Canada 
Japan 
United Kingdom  (3) 
Euro-11 Average  (4) 

of which:
France 
Germany 
Italy 

Foreign G-7 Average

weighted by 1991  GDP 

Average weighted by share  of
U.S.  non-oil  imports 

---------------------  Projected --------------------------

1998 
----------------------- 

1999 
----------------------- 

2000
--------- --------------

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4

2.5 
1.8 
3.4 
-5.2  -3.3  -2.7 
0.9 
2.0 
2.2 
2.5 
2.1 
3.3 

2.5 
5.9 
-0.5 

2.8 
0.4 
1.7 

1.8 
1.3 
3.5 

2.3 
0.8 
1.0 
2.0 

1.8 
1.6 
1.0 

2.2 
0.8 
1.4 
2.3 

1.8 
1.8 
2.0 

2.2 
1.1 
1.6 
2.3 

1.8 
2.0 
2.0 

2.2 
0.9 
1.8 
2.3 

2.0 
2.0 
2.0 

2.2 
0.7 
2.0 
2.4 

2.0 
2.1 
2.0 

2.2 
0.3 
2.1 
2.4 

2.0 
2.1 
2.3 

2.4 
0.5 
2.3 
2.4 

2.0 
2.2 
2.3 

2.6 
0.7 
2.5 
2.4 

2.0 
2.3 
2.3 

2.8
Q.9
2.5
2.4

2.0
2.3
2.3

0.1  -0.0 

0.4 

1.3 

1.5 

1.6 

1.6 

1.6 

1.5 

1.6 

1.8 

1.8

-0.8 
1.6 

0.4  -0.4  -0.1 
1.7 
1.2 
0.7 
-4.7  -1.1  -3.0  -2.6 

0.5 
1.8 
-1.2 

1.3 
1.9 
0.6 

1.8 
1.9 
1.6 

2.1 
1.9 
2.3 

2.2 
1.8 
2.5 

2.4 
2.0 
2.7 

2.6 
2.1 
3.0 

2.7
2.3
3.2

1.0 
2.1 
2.5 
1.2 

0.7 
1.2 
1.7 

1.0 
0.6 
3.0 
1.5 

1.0 
1.3 
1.8 

1.3 
1.1 
0.0  -1.0 
2.6 
2.6 
1.3 
1.4 

1.0 
0.8 
1.8 

0.9 
0.8 
1.7 

1.6 

1.6 

1.5 

1.6 
-1.0  -1.0  -0.7  -0.3 
3.0 
1.5 

2.9 
1.3 

3.0 
1.3 

2.9 
1.4 

0.9 
0.9 
1.7 

0.9 
1.0 
1.7 

0.9 
1.1 
1.7 

1.0 
1.2 
1.8 

1.5 
0.0 
2.9 
1.5 

1.0 
1.3 
1.8 

1.5 
0.0 
2.8 
1.5 

1.0 
1.4 
1.8 

1.5 
0.1 
2.8 
1.5 

1.0 
1.5 
1.8 

1.5
0.1
2.7
1.5

1.0
1.5
1.8

1.6 

1.3 

1.0 

0.6 

0.7 

0.7 

0.8 

1.0 

1.1 

1.1 

1.2 

1.2

1.6 

1.1 

0.8 

0.4 

0.5 

0.6 

0.7 

0.9 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0

1. Includes  all of  the European  Union  countries except  the United Kingdom, Denmark,

Sweden,  and Greece;  weighted by GDP.

2. Percent  change  from same  period a year earlier.
3. CPI  excluding mortgage interest payments which  is  the  targeted  inflation  rate.
4. Harmonized CPI's  for  the  Euro-11,  weighted by shares  in final  consumption  of
households  converted to a common  currency using  estimated PPP exchange  rates.

Strictly 
Class  II 

Confidential 
FOMC

(FR)

OUTLOOK FOR U.S.  INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTIONS

September  23,  1998

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996 

1997 

------  Projected ------
2000
1999 
1998 

NIPA REAL EXPORTS and IMPORTS

Percentage point  contribution to GDP growth,  Q4/Q4

Net Goods  &  Services 

Exports  of  G&S 
Imports  of  G&S 

-0.4 
0.4 
-0.8 

-0.6 
0.5 
-1.1 

-0.4 
1.0 
-1.4 

0.5 
1.1 
-0.7 

-0.3 
1.2 
-1.4 

-0.6 
1.1 
-1.7 

-1.7 
-0.4 
-1.2 

-0.6 
0.1 
-0.8 

Exports  of  G&S 

Services 
Agricultural  Goods 
Computers 
Semiconductors 
Other Goods  1/ 

Imports  of  G&S 

Services 
Oil 
Computers 
Semiconductors 
Other Goods 2/ 

Percentage change,  Q4/Q4

4.1 
-0.9 
10.4 
25.2 
64.8 
2.3 

7.4 
1.4 
12.1 
45.1 
42.0 
5.4 

4.6 
4.1 
-5.5 
23.7 
32.9 
3.6 

10.2 
3.2 
10.1 
39.3 
34.2 
9.5 

10.0 
6.0 
16.6 
32.0 
66.9 
7.0 

12.3 
1.4 
-0.2 
44.8 
54.5 
12.2 

10.5 
9.8 
-4.3 
55.5 
79.6 
5.8 

5.6 
6.1 
2.4 
48.1 
92.4 
-1.2 

10.3 
7.5 
4.8 
35.9 
46.2 
8.0 

11.8 
5.5 
7.9 
24.4 
57.6 
10.4 

9.6 
1.5 
2.8 
40.7 
21.0 
11.6 

14.0 
12.4 
4.0 
30.3 
32.7 
13.0 

-3.8 
-1.1 
-5.3 
9.0 
-0.8 
-6.2 

9.5 
2.5 
1.0 
31.1 
-7.3 
10.7 

1.3 
1.7 
1.5 
26.6 
16.9 
-1.9 

6.1 
1.3 
3.2 
30.2 
21.8 
4.8 

Billions  of  chained 1992  dollars

-0.4
0.5
-0.9

4.7
3.0
1.5
28.3
21.3
2.9

6.6
2.7
6.1
29.9
25.3
4.8

Net  Goods  &  Services 

Exports  of  G&S 
Imports  of  G&S 

-29.5 
639.4 
669.0 

-70.2 
658.2 
728.4 

-104.6 
712.4 
817.0 

-96.5 
792.6 
889.0 

-111.2 
860.0 
971.2 

-136.1 
970.0 
1106.1 

-250.9 
973.4 
1224.3 

-341.2 
965.3 
1306.5 

-386.0
1000.6
1386.7

Billions  of  dollars

US  CURRENT ACCOUNT BALANCE 

-51.4 

-86.1 

-123.8 

-115.3 

-134.9 

-155.2 

-233.7 

-319.0 

-364.1

Net Goods  &  Services  (BOP) 

Exports  of  G&S  (BOP) 
Imports  of  G&S  (BOP) 

Net  Investment  Income 
Direct, Net 
Portfolio, Net 

-38.7 
617.3 
656.0 

22.5 
51.6 
-29.1 

-71.9 
643.2 
715.2 

23.9 
55.7 
-31.7 

-100.9 
703.8 
804.7 

16.5 
51.8 
-35.3 

-99.9 
795.6 
895.5 

19.3 
63.0 
-43.7 

-108.6 
850.8 
959.3 

-110.2 
937.6 
1047.8 

-175.4 
920.7 
1096.1 

-243.2 
905.4 
1148.6 

14.2 
66.2 
-51.9 

-5.3 
63.7 
-69.1 

-17.2 
57.5 
-74.8 

-34.1 
49.2 
-83.2 

-277.6
938.8
1216.4

-44.8
55.9
-100.7

Net Transfers 

-35.2 

-38.1 

-39.4 

-34.6 

-40.6 

-39.7 

-41.1 

-41.8 

-41.8

1. Merchandise exports  excluding agricultural  products,  computers,  and  semiconductors.
2. Merchandise  imports  excluding oil,  computers,  and  semiconductors.

Strictly  Confidential  (FR)
lential  (FR)
Class  II  FOMC

OUTLOOK FOR U.S.  INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTIONS

September

1998

1995 
---------------------------- 

1996 
----------------------- '----- 

1997
------------------- '--------

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4

NIPA REAL  EXPORTS  and IMPORTS

Percentage point  contribution to  GDP  growth

Net Goods &  Services 

Exports  of G&S 
Imports  of  G&S 

-0.2 
1.0 
-1.2 

-0.3 
0.6 
-0.9 

1.6 
1.9 
-0.3 

0.7 
1.1 
-0.4 

-1.1 
0.4 
-1.5 

-1.0 
0.6 
-1.6 

-1.4 
0.2 
-1.6 

2.4 
3.2 
-0.9 

-1.3 
0.9 
-2.2 

-0.4 
1.7 
-2.2 

-0.5 
1.2 
-1.7 

-0.3
0.5
-0.8

Percentage change  from previous  period, SAAR

Exports  of  G&S 

Services 
Agricultural  Goods 
Computers 
Semiconductors 
Other  Goods  1/ 

Imports of  G&S 

Services 
Oil 
Computers 
Semiconductors 
Other Goods  2/ 

9.2 
9.1 
1.8 
36.4 
72.0 
4.3 

9.8 
20.5 
-11.4 
15.4 
37.1 
7.2 

5.4 
2.9 
-13.4 
33.8 
100.8 
1.4 

7.2 
-3.3 
15.4 
51.6 
105.5 
1.5 

17.8 
21.7 
5.0 
86.6 
96.2 
9.4 

2.0 
3.1 
31.4 
62.7 
128.2 
-8.8 

10.2 
6.4 
-9.4 
71.6 
53.6 
8.1 

3.5 
5.5 
-18.2 
69.3 
113.3 
-3.8 

3.7 
-4.0 
22.6 
57.6 
23.8 
0.1 

13.1 
9.2 
-9.8 
22.5 
38.7 
13.9 

5.8 
10.3 
-32.8 
24.7 
29.7 
6.0 

13.5 
4.3 
68.9 
22.9 
8.9 
10.5 

2.1 
-9.9 
-1.6 
27.7 
30.2 
5.7 

13.6 
9.9 
3.5 
18.8 
50.1 
13.5 

32.0 
39.8 
48.7 
35.9 
118.6 
21.3 

7.0 
-1.1 
-14.0 
33.8 
172.1 
4.2 

8.3 
-6.7 
-16.1 
70.2 
41.3 
13.8 

18.6 
17.8 
-8.2 
54.5 
89.0 
16.2 

15.5 
11.8 
-7.8 
78.7 
17.3 
15.6 

17.9 
10.6 
37.0 
39.0 
16.0 
16.1 

10.6 
5.9 
8.7 
41.9 
32.3 
9.2 

13.5 
15.8 
6.0 
30.6 
20.3 
11.8 

4.4
-4.0
32.8
-9.2
-2.2
8.0

6.3
5.8
-12.2
2.9
17.6
8.1

Billions  of  chained 1992  dollars,  SAAR

Net  Goods  &  Services 

Exports  of  G&S 
Imports  of G&S 

-109.5  -114.7 
774.0 
888.7 

763.9 
873.4 

-86.8 
806.3 
893.1 

-74.8 
826.1 
900.9 

-95.5  -113.5  -140.1 
-95.9  -121.5  -131.6  -142.4  -149.0
845.5 
833.6 
849.9 
911.1 
998.8
963.6 
990.0  1007.0  1050.9  1095.2  1130.5  1147.8
958.9 
929.1 

929.4 

988.1 

US CURRENT ACCOUNT BALANCE 

-123.7  -134.2  -115.5 

-87.7  -112.9  -132.0  -161.6  -133.2  -148.0  -140.4  -152.4  -180.2

Billions  of dollars,  SAAR

Net  Goods  &  Services  (BOP) -109.3  -125.8 
782.0 
907.7 

Exports  of  G&S  (BOP)  765.4 
Imports  of  G&S  (BOP)  874.7 

Net  Investment  Income 
Direct, Net 
Portfolio,  Net 

20.1 
59.9 
-39.8 

24.0 
67.2 
-43.2 

-90.0 
809.7 
899.7 

10.2 
56.5 
-46.2 

-74.5 
825.6 
900.1 

22.7 
68.3 
-45.5 

-92.4  -112.8  -132.3 
837.5 
845.3 
833.6 
969.8 
958.2 
926.0 

-96.8  -112.5  -106.1  -108.4  -113.8
957.8
886.7 
936.1 
983.5  1017.3  1042.1  1060.1  1071.7

904.7 

951.7 

21.4 
64.8 
-43.3 

15.9 
64.4 
-48.5 

6.9 
61.9 
-55.0 

12.7 
73.6 
-60.9 

0.1 
64.2 
-64.2 

1.8 
69.6 
-67.8 

-6.2 
65.5 
-71.7 

-17.0
55.6
-72.6

Net Transfers 

-34.5 

-32.4 

-35.8 

-35.9 

-41.9 

-35.1 

-36.2 

-49.1 

-35.5 

-36.1 

-37.8 

-49.3

1. Merchandise exports  excluding  agricultural  products, computers,  and  semiconductors.
2. Merchandise  imports excluding oil,  computers,  and  semiconductors.

Strictly 
Class  II 

Confidential  (FR)
FOMC

OUTLOOK FOR U.S.  INTERNATIONAL  TRANSACTIONS

September  1998

NIPA REAL EXPORTS  and  IMPORTS

Percentage point contribution  to GDP growth

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

1998 
---------------------------- 

-----------------------------  Projected --------------------------------
1999 
---------------------------- 

2000
---------------------------
Q4

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Net Goods  & Services 

Exports  of  G&S 
Imports of  G&S 

-2.3 
-0.3 
-1.9 

-2.1 
-0.9 
-1.2 

-0.9 
-0.2 
-0.7 

-1.3 
-0.3 
-1.0 

-1.0 
-0.1 
-0.9 

-0.8 
9.1 
-0.9 

-0.5 
0.2 
-0.8 

-0.3 
0.3 
-0.6 

-0.3 
0.4 
-0.7 

-0.5 
0.5 
-1.0 

-0.5 
0.5 
-1.0 

-0.2
0.6
-0.8

Percentage change  from previous period, SAAR

Exports of  G&S 

Services 
Agricultural  Goods 
Computers 
Semiconductors 
Other  Goods  1/ 

Imports of  G&S 

Services 
Oil 
Computers 
Semiconductors 
Other Goods 2/ 

-2.8 
-1.2 
-9.9 
-15.5 
-2.0 
-1.6 

15.7 
9.3 
8.8 
38.8 
9.9 
16.1 

-7.6 
2.0 
-23.5 
8.9 
-18.2 
-11.1 

9.2 
-0.5 
40.8 
22.9 
-29.5 
10.6 

-1.7 
-2.8 
14.7 
21.5 
7.4 

-5.0 

5.5 
-0.1 
-13.2 

29.6 
-18.5 
7.4 

-2.8 
-2.2 
1.6 
26.2 
12.6 
-6.8 

7.7 
1.6 

-21.7 

33.5 
17.0 
8.9 

-0.8 
0.1 
1.6 
26.2 
14.8 
-4.6 

6.8 
1.0 

-6.3 
33.5 
19.3 
6.4 

0.9 
1.7 
1.5 
26.2 
15.9 
-2.5 

6.9 
0.3 
35.0 
31.1 
21.6 
4.2 

2.3 
2.5 
1.5 
26.7 
17.9 
-0.8 

5.9 
1.5 
9.6 
28.6 
22.7 
4.1 

2.9 
2.4 
1.5 
27.2 
19.3 
0.3 

4.7 
2.2 

-18.3 
27.4 
23.9 
4.5 

3.8 
2.5 
1.5 
27.7 
20.4 
1.7 

5.5 
1.6 
7.0 
26.2 
25.3 
3.7 

4.6 
3.2 
1.5 
28.2 
21.6 
2.6 

7.6 
3.3 
25.6 
31.1 
25.3 
4.8 

5.0 
3.1 
1.5 
28.6 
21.6 
3.5 

7.6 
3.0 
14.3 
31.1 
25.3 
5.5 

5.3
3.1
1.5
28.6
21.6
4.0

5.6
3.0

-17.6

31.1
25.3
5.2

Billions  of  chained  1992  dollars,  SAAR

Net Goods  & Services 

Exports  of  G&S 
Imports  of  G&S 

-198.5  -244.4  -265.1  -295.3  -318.0  -337.2  -350.5  -358.9  -367.7  -381.4  -394.5  -400.6
994.0  1006.2  1019.4
1190.4  1216.8  1233.3  1256.5  1277.3  1298.6  1317.4  1332.7  1350.5  1375.4  1400.7  1420.1

966.8 

973.8 

968.1 

982.9 

961.5 

959.3 

991.9 

961.2 

972.4 

US  CURRENT ACCOUNT BALANCE 

-186.9  -224.5  -242.3  -281.0  -293.0  -311.2  -325.6  -346.1  -343.0  -357.0  -370.4  -386.0

Billions  of dollars,  SAAR

Net  Goods  &  Services  (BOP) -140.0  -174.3  -180.3  -207.1  -226.2  -240.6  -250.1  -255.9  -263.2  -275.0  -284.4  -287.6
Exports  of  G&S  (BOP)  946.2 
900.2 
956.7
Imports  of  G&S  (BOP)  1086.2  1095.4  1093.9  1108.9  1126.4  1142.4  1156.7  1168.9  1185.1  1207.5  1228.7  1244.3

921.9 

913.6 

932.5 

912.9 

906.7 

901.9 

944.2 

901.9 

921.1 

Net  Investment  Income 
Direct, Net 
Portfolio, Net 

-9.0 
62.4 
-71.3 

-13.0 
61.0 
-74.0 

-23.0 
53.7 
-76.7 

-23.9 
53.1 
-77.0 

-27.8 
49.9 
-77.8 

-31.6 
49.1 
-80.7 

-36.6 
48.2 
-84.8 

-40.2 
49.5 
-89.7 

-40.8 
53.4 
-94.2 

-42.9 
55.5 

-48.4
58.8
-98.4  -103.0  -107.3

-46.9 
56.1 

Net Transfers 

-37.9 

-37.3 

-39.0 

-50.0 

-39.0 

-39.0 

-39.0 

-50.0 

-39.0 

-39.0 

-39.0 

-50.0

1. Merchandise exports  excluding  agricultural  products,  computers,  and semiconductors.
2. Merchandise  imports  excluding oil,  computers,  and  semiconductors.




==== GREENBOOK | 1998-09-29_fomc19980929gbpt219980923.txt ====

Prefatory Note 

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 

available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain. 

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 

gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.    

1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Confidential (FR)  Class  III  FOMC

Part 2

September 23,  1998

CURRENT  ECONOMIC
AND  FINANCIAL  CONDITIONS

Recent  Developments

Prepared for the Federal  Open Market  Committee
by the staff of the Board  of Governors of the Federal  Reserve System

Confidential (FR)  Class  III FOMC

September 23,  1998

RECENT  DEVELOPMENTS

Prepared for the  Federal Open Market  Committee
by the staff of the  Board of Governors of the Federal  Reserve System

DOMESTIC  NONFINANCIAL
DEVELOPMENTS

Domestic  Nonfinancial  Developments

Overview

As  the third  quarter  draws  to  a  close,  the  U.S.  economy  appears  to be  expanding
moderately.  As  a  result  of reduced  export  demand  and rising  import  competition,
activity  in the industrial  sector  has stagnated  and the  pace  of factory job  losses  has
quickened.  But  domestic  final  demand  to  date  has  remained  strong,  sustaining  hefty
employment  gains  in  the  construction  and  service  sectors.  The  unemployment  rate  has
remained  low,  and anecdotal  reports  of sizable  wage  increases  are  heard  with  some
frequency.  However,  the  available  aggregate  data  on pay  inflation suggest  at most  a
modest  upcreep,  and  readings on  price  trends  remain  mixed.

Labor Market  Developments
Many  of the  labor  market  indicators  were  distorted  in July  and August  by  the  effects
of the  General  Motors  shutdown.  But combining  the two  months  to  filter  out  that
noise,  growth  in overall  labor  demand  appears  to have  weakened  a  bit  from  its robust
pace  over  the  first  half of the  year.  Private  nonfarm  payrolls  expanded  an  average  of
181,000  per  month  in  July  and August,  down  from  an  average  pace  of 222,000  per
month  in the  first  half of the  year.  The  unemployment  rate  held  steady  at  4.5  percent
in  August,  a  tad above  the  low  registered  in the  spring.

Change  in Employment
(Monthly  average,  thousands)

Category 

Total private  nonfarm payrolls 

Manufacturing 
Nonmanufacturing 
Construction 
Transportation  and utilities 
Trade 
Finance,  insurance,  real estate 
Services 

July-
1998:H1  August
average

222 
-2 
223 
23 
15 
49 
23 
117 

181
-53
234
19
21
64
24
111

Manufacturing  payrolls  fell  about  53,000  per month  on  average  in  July  and

August  after  having  posted  a  smaller  decline  in  the  second  quarter  and a  small  gain  in

(Thousands  of  employees;  based  on  seasonally  adjusted  data)

CHANGES IN 

EMPLOYMENT

1996 

1997

Q1 

Q2 

1998
June

July  Aug.

Nonfarm  payroll  employment  1

Private

Manufacturing
Nonmanufacturing
Construction
Transportation  and  utilities
Trade
Pinance, 
Services
Total  government

insurance,  real  estate

Private  nonfarm  production  workers  1
Manufacturing  production  workers

Total  employment a
Nonagricultural

Memo:
Aggregate hours of  private  production

workers  (percent  change) 1"'

Average  workweek  (hours)  1
Manufacturing  (hours)

-Average monthly changes-
279
233 
224 
251
-16
3 
267
222 
29
28 
8 
11
76
54 
14 
25
129
117 
28
9 

282 
263 
21 
241 
20 
14 
48 
17 
142 
20 

208 
192 
13 
180 
17 
18 
22 
21 
104 
16 

68
54
-200
254
21
18
101
35
86
14

49 
-190 

190 
0 

232 
226 

212
16

240 
243 

136 
4 

72 
157 

195 
-23 

172 
-28 

72 

-244 
2  -251 

-142 
-241 

151
77

101
14

3.2
34.4
41.6

3.4
34.6
42.0

3.2
34.7
42.0

0.8
34.6
41.7

-0.1
34.6
41.8

0.3
34.6
41.7

0.1
34.6
41.7

n.&.  Not  aailable.
Note.  Average  change  from  final  month  of  preceding  period  to  final  month  of  period  indicated.
1.  Survey  of  establismnents.
2.  Survey  of  households.
3.  Annual  data  are  percent  change  from  Q4  to  Q4.  Qaarterly  data  are  percent  change  from  preceding  period

at  an  annual  rate.  Monthly  data  are  percent  change  froa  preceding  aonth.

Average  Weekly  Hours

Hours

1993 

1994

1995 

1996

1998

Domestic Nonfinancial Developments

the first  quarter.  Job  losses were  greatest  in the  electronic  components  and apparel
industries,  in which  the  Asian  crisis  is  taking  a  toll.  Outside  of manufacturing,
construction  employment  continued  to record  healthy  gains  despite  ongoing  anecdotal
reports  of shortages  of skilled  workers.  Job  gains  remained  strong  in the service-
producing  sector.1

Aggregate  hours  of production  or nonsupervisory  workers  on  nonagricultural
payrolls  increased  0.1  percent  in  August  after  having  risen  0.3  percent  in July.  The
level  in  August,  which  was  unaffected  by  the  GM  strikes,  was  0.5  percent  above  the
second-quarter  average.  The  workweek  held  steady  at  34.6  hours  in  August  for the
third straight  month;  the  workweek  has  fluctuated  around  this level  since  early  1997,
with  a  modest  drop-off in  manufacturing  being  offset  by a  rise  elsewhere  in the
economy.

The household  survey  continues  to  point to  tight  labor markets,  albeit  with  a

slight  hint  of easing pressures.  As noted  above,  the unemployment  rate,  at
4.5  percent,  was  a  little  above  the  second-quarter  average,  and total  employment  has
shown  little growth  over the past two  months.  The labor  force  participation  rate
remained  at  66.9  percent  last month--a  touch  below  the  67.0  percent  level  that
prevailed  in the  second  quarter,  and  still  farther  below  the all-time  high  of this  past
winter.  The  sum  of those  who  would  accept  a job but have  not been  searching  and
those  reporting  themselves  as  unemployed--which  represents  a  measure  of the  supply
of  available  workers--has  been  moving  up  since  May,  which  is  consistent  with  a
marginal  relaxation  of labor  market  pressures.

Other  indicators  of overall  labor  market  activity  remain strong.  The  four-week
average  of initial  claims  for unemployment  insurance  has  remained  below  its pre-GM
strike  level  and  is consistent  with robust  employment  growth  in September.
Manpower  Inc.'s  survey  of hiring  strength  for the  fourth quarter  points  to considerable
strength  in labor  demand,  although  this  survey  is a  better  indicator  of  conditions  in  the
quarter  in  which  it  is administered  (in this  case  the  third quarter)  than  of the
conditions  in  the  survey's  reference  quarter  (the  fourth).  The  adjusted  index  of help-

1. Employment  in  retail  trade  surged  in  July  but posted  only a small  gain in  August,  as  strong  early

summer  demand  pulled  some  normal  August hiring  into July.  Conversely,  the  increase  in  employment
in  the  service  industry  was  relatively  small  in  July  and  considerably stronger  in  August, reflecting  a
large swing  in hiring  in  the  help-supply  industry--some  of which  was  an  indirect  effect  of the  GM
strikes.

I-4

SELECTED  UNEMPLOYMENT  AND  LABOR  FORCE  PARTICIPATION  RATES
(Percent;  based on  seasonally adjusted data,  as published)

Civilian unemployment  rate
(16 years  and older) 

Teenagers 
Men, 20 years and  older 
Women, 20  years and  older 

1996  1997 

1997 
Q4 

1998 

Q1 

Q2 

1998
June  July  Aug.

5.4 

4.9 

4.7 

4.7 

4.4 

4.5 

4.5 

4.5

16.7  16.0  15.0  14.6  14.0  14.6  13.7  15.0
3.7
4.1

3.9 
4.0 

3.8 
4.3 

3.7 
4.1 

4.0 
4.0 

3.6 
4.0 

4.2 
4.4 

4.6 
4.8 

Labor  force participation rate  66.8  67.1  67.1  67.3  67.0  67.0  66.9  66.9

Teenagers 
Men, 20 years and older 
Women,  20 years and older 

52.3  51.6  51.4  53.3  52.4  53.0  51.9  52.3
76.8  76.9  76.9  76.9  76.8  76.7  76.9  76.5
59.9  60.5  60.5  60.6  60.4  60.4  60.1  60.4

Women maintaining families 

65.3  67.4  68.2  67.9  67-5  67.4  68.4  68.1

Unemployment  Rate

Labor Force  Participation Rate

Percent

Percent

--68

-67.5

- 67

S66.5

I 

I 

I 

I 

66

1995 

1994 
Percent of Population (age  16 to 64)

1997 

1996 

1998

That Wants  a Job* 

Percent

1995 

1996 
1994 
Percent of Population (age  16 to 64)
That Does  Not Want  a Job* 

1997 

1998

Percent

- 21.2

20.8

20.4

20

-19.6

1997 

1998

1 

1 

I 

1994 

1995 

1996 

1997 

I 

1998

19.2

1994 

1995 
"Seasonally adjusted  by FRB staff.

1996

Domestic Nonfinancial Developments

wanted  advertising  remained  at  a  high  level  in  July.2  The  demand  for  new  hires  still
appears  to  be straining  the  available  supply:  Surveys  of hiring  conditions  by  the
National  Federation  of Independent  Businesses  and  the Bureau  of National  Affairs
suggest  that  companies  continued  to  have  difficulty  hiring  new  workers  in August,
though less  so than  in  July.

Reflecting  a  dramatic  slowdown  in  output growth  last  quarter  and  a  more

modest  slowing  in  the  hours  worked  by  all  persons,  labor productivity  in  the  nonfarm
business  sector increased  0.1  percent  at  an  annual  rate  in  the  second  quarter, down
from  the  3.5  percent  rise  in the  first quarter.  The productivity  figures  were  held  down
by  the  lost  production  resulting  from  the GM  strikes  because  the hours  data  were
collected  before  the  strikes  began.  Without  the  strikes,  second-quarter  productivity
growth  would  likely  have  been roughly  1/2  percentage  point  greater.  Productivity  in
the nonfinancial  corporate  sector  rose  2.8  percent  at  an  annual  rate  in the  second
quarter,  little changed  from  the  2.6  percent  increase  recorded  in  the  first  quarter.  The

substantial  difference  between  productivity  in  the  nonfarm  business  sector and  the
nonfinancial  corporate  sector  reflects  some  of the same  factors  that resulted  in a
widening  of  the statistical  discrepancy  in  the second  quarter:  The  output  of  the
nonfinancial  corporate  sector,  which  is  estimated  from  the  income  side  of the  national
accounts,  has  been  growing  faster  than  nonfarm  business  output,  which  is measured
from  the product  side.

Turning  to the  most recent  data  on  labor  costs, average  hourly  earnings  of

production  or  nonsupervisory  workers  on  private  nonagricultural  payrolls rose  at an
average  monthly  rate  of about  1/3  percent  in  July  and August.3  Over  the  past twelve
months,  average  hourly  earnings rose  4.2  percent,  up  a  couple  of tenths  from  the
increase  in  the  year-earlier  period.  The  three-month  change  in  August  dropped  below
the  corresponding  change  in May,  but  given  the  noise in the  monthly  figures,  it  is too
soon to tell whether  this  reflects  a  topping  out  of wage  gains.

With  respect  to benefits  costs,  information  from  public-sector  employers  points
to a  step-up  in health  insurance  premium  increases  in  1999.  The  Office  of Personnel
Management  recently  announced  that  total  premiums  (including  both  government  and
employee  shares)  for FEHBP health  insurance  will  rise  about  10-1/4  percent  next  year,

2.  The  Board  staff makes  rough adjustments  to the  Conference  Board's  Index  of Help-Wanted
Advertising  to account  for consolidation  in the  newspaper  industry  and  the  increase  in  temporary  help
employment--which  can  replace  newspaper  advertising  as  a  method  of posting  and  filling open  positions.
3.  As  published,  average  hourly earnings  rose 0.2  percent  in  July  and  0.5  percent  in  August.  BLS

estimates,  however, that  the  effects  of  the  GM  strikes  held  down  the  July  increase  by  0.1  percentage
point and  boosted  the  August  increase  by  the same  amount.

II-6

Labor Market  Indicators

Initial Claims for Unemployment  Insurance

Net  Hiring Strength

Thousands

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994 

1996 

1998

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994 

1996 

1998

Note.  State  programs,  includes EUC adjustment.

Note.  Percent planning an  increase  in employment  minus percent

planning a reduction.

Reporting  Positions Hard  to Fill

Reporting  Positions Hard to Fill

Percent

Percent

S60

BNA's Survey of  Personnel  Executives

Technical/Professional 
Production/Service

-

-

-

- Office/Clerical 

Q3

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994 

1996 

1998

1988 
1988 

1990 
1990 

1992 
1992 

9-94/-- 1998 
1996 

1994 

1998
1998

Help Wanted  Index

Current Job Availability

Index, 1990=100

Percent of households

50

40

30

20

0

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994 

1996 

1998

1988 

1990  1992 

1994 

1996 

1998

Note. Senes has been adjusted to take account ot structural and
institutional changes, including  consolidation of newspaper industry
and tendency to increase hiring  through  personnel  supply agencies.

II-7

AVERAGE HOURLY EARNINGS
(Percentage change;  based on  seasonally adjusted data)

Twelve-month 
percent  change 

Three-month

percent change 

1998

Aug. 
1996 

Aug. 
1997 

Aug. 
1998 

May 
1998 

Aug.
1998 

July 

Aug.

-

-

-

-

- - - -Annual rate-  -

-

-

-

-

-

-

-Monthly rate-

3.4 

3.4 

2.5 

2.3 

3.6 

3.8 

3.5 

3.7 

4.0 

2.8 

3.5 

3.7 

5.1 

4.4 

4.9 

4.2 

4.2 

2.6 

3.9 

2.1 

5.0 

5.4 

4.4 

4.9 

4.5 

1.5 

3.0 

1.6 

5.9 

6.2 

5.6 

6.8 

4.1 

2.1 

5.7 

.8 

4.6 

4.7 

4.4 

4.8 

.2 

-.2 

.8 

.5 

.1 

.6 

.6 

.2 

.5

.8

.3

-. 1

.7

.5

.6

.5

Total private nonfarm 

Manufacturing 

Construction 
Transportation  and

public  utilities 

Finance, 

insurance,

and  real  estate 

Retail  trade 

Wholesale trade 

Services 

LABOR  PRODUCTIVITY  AND  COSTS
(Percent  change  from  preceding  period  at  compound  annual  rate;
based  on  seasonally  adjusted  data)

1996  1 

1997  1  

1997 

1998 

1997:Q2

to

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

1998:Q2

Output  per  hour

Total  business 

Nonfarm  business 
Manufacturing 
Nonfinancial

corporations  2 

Compensation  per  hour

Total  business 

Nonfarm  business 
Manufacturing 
Nonfinancial

corporations  2 

Unit  labor  costs

Total  business 

Nonfarm  business 
Manufacturing 
Nonfinancial

corporations 2  

2.4 
2.1 
4.6 

2.4 

3.9 
3.7 
2.4 

3.4 

1.9 
1.7 
4.5 

2.6 

4.0 
3.9 
5.3 

3.9 

3.7 
3.6 
7.3 

5.6 

4.1 
3.9 
5.6 

4.2 

1.5 
1.6 
-2.1 

2.0 
2.1 
0.7 

0.4 
0.3 
-1.6 

0.9 

1.2 

-1.3 

0.9 
0.9 
4.9 

1.0 

5.3 
4.9 
8.0 

5.0 

4.4 
4.0 
3.0 

4.0 

4.1 
3.5 
1.4 

2-6 

4.9 
4.6 
4.1 

3.6 

0.8 
1.1 
2.7 

0.9 

-0.2 
0.1 
2.5 

2.8 

4.1 
4.0 
2.6 

4.6 

4.3 
3.9 
0.1 

1.8 

2.1
2.0
4.0

3.0

4.6
4.4
5.0

4.3

2.4
2.3
1.0

1.3

1.  Changes  are  from  fourth  quarter  of  preceding  year  to  fourth  quarter  of  year  shown.
2. Nonfinancial  corporate  sector includes  all corporations doing business

in  the  United  States

except banks,  stock and commodity brokers,  and finance and insurance  companies;  the sector
accounts for about  two-thirds of business  employment.

II-8

GROWTH  IN SELECTED  COMPONENTS  OF  INDUSTRIAL  PRODUCTION
(Percent change from preceding comparable period)

Proportion
1997

1998

1998

19971 

01 

02

June  July  Aug.

Total index
Previous

Manufacturing
Durables

Motor vehicles and parts
Aircraft  and  parts

Nondurables

Manufacturing excluding

motor vehicles and parts

Mining
Utilities

IP by market  group excluding
motor vehicles and parts

Consumer  goods

Durables
Nondurables

Business equipment

Information processing

Computer and office eq.

Industrial
Transit
Other

Construction supplies

Materials
Durables

Semiconductors
Basic metals

Nondurables

-Annual rate- --Monthly rate---

1.2 
1.2 

1.7  -1.1 
1.9  -1.1 

-.4
-.6

1.7

2.3
2.6
-17.7
10.8
1.8

.8
2.6
-11.9
.0
-1.4

-1.3
-1.7
-14.3

-. 4
-. 9

-. 4 
-. 9 

2.0
3.8
-12.3  39.7
.6
-. 1

1.3 
.2 

5.8
5.8

6.3
9.5
11.9
18.5
2.6

6.0

3.7 

1.6 

-. 5

.3 

.1

2.1 
2.4 

9.9 

-16.5 

-4.0  -2.2 
18.8 
2.7 

.3 

-. 9 

-. 6
.4

2.3 
4.2 
2.0 

10.8
12.2
36.3
5.6
27.3
9.5

2.2

6.9
10.8
39.8
4.8
3.5

.0
10.6
-1.8

2.9
6.3
56.6
-2.0
19.4
-8.8

1.6 
4.6 
1.1 

9.8
15.9
59.7
6.0
4.1
5.8

-. 3

-1.4

-.1

1.5
.9

4.1
2.7
-. 2
1.2

8.5 

2.5 

-. 3 

3.2
6.0
30.8
1.8
-. 8

2.0
2.4
10.6

-10.4

-3.1

-. 8
-. 9
.1
-2.2
-. 2

-. 2
-. 5
-. 1

-. 4
1.2
2.5
-. 9
1.5
-7.0

-. 7

.6
1.3
1.1
3.7
-.5

.7
-. 2
2.4
1.0
1.7
2.5

.4 

.2
.0
1.4
-. 8
.4

100.0

86.2
46.6
5.2
2.3
39.6

81.0

6.2
7.6

26.3
4.0
22.3

12.3
5.5
1.8
4.5
1.1
1.3

5.6

38.5
21.1
3.7
3.6
9.0

1.  From  the  final  quarter of  the  previous  period  to  the  final  quarter of  the

period indicated.

CAPACITY  UTILIZATION
(Percent  of  capacity;  seasonally  adjusted)

1988-89  1959-97  1997 

1998 

1998

High 

Avg. 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

June 

July  Aug.

Manufacturing 

85.7 

81.7 

82.2 

81.6 

80.7 

79.7 

79.1 

80.4

Primary processing 
Advanced processing 

88.9 
84.2 

82.8 
81.1 

86.0 
80.4 

85.6 
79.8 

84.8 
79.0 

84.0 
77.8 

83.9 
77.0 

83.9
78.8

Domestic Nonfinancial Developments

II-9

up  from  an  8-1/2  percent  increase  this year--the  largest  increase  in  ten  years.4  The
California  Public  Employees'  Retirement  System,  the  second  largest  purchaser  of
employee  health  benefits  behind  the federal  government,  announced  earlier  this  year
that  overall  premiums  would  increase  about  6  percent  in  1999  after  rising  about
3  percent  in  1998  and  declining  in the  previous  three  years.  The  1998  increases  in
public-sector  health  insurance  costs  do not  appear  to have  carried  over  into  the private-
sector premiums  that  are  included  in  the  employment  cost  index  and the hourly
compensation  figures.  However,  the  same factors  leading  to the  rise in  public-sector
health  insurance  costs  in  1999--mainly  rising  prescription  drug prices  and  a  need to
replenish  financial  reserves--could  contribute  to  rising private-sector  premiums  as
well.5

Industrial Production
Industrial  output  grew  1.7  percent  in August,  almost  entirely  because  of GM's  post-
strike  production  ramp-up.  Outside  of the  motor  vehicles  and  parts  industries,
manufacturing  edged  up 0.1  percent,  remaining  nearly  unchanged  from its  level  in
May.  The  rise  in production  for  all  of  manufacturing  in August  pushed the  factory
operating  rate  up  to  80.4  percent;  nevertheless,  this rate  is  more than  1 percentage
point  below  the  long-term  average  and about  2  percentage  points  below  the  level  late
last  year.

Motor  vehicle  assemblies  shot  up to  13.2  million  units  at  a  seasonally  adjusted
annual  rate  in August  from  8.2  million  units  in  July.  Even  with  the  increased  pace  of
assemblies  at  GM,  inventories  of autos  and  light  trucks  remained  extremely  lean  in
August.  GM's  scheduled  production  through  the  fourth  quarter remains  strong,  as  it
will  likely  take  several  months  to rebuild  dealer  stocks.

Outside  of motor  vehicles  and parts,  the  deterioration  in net  exports  clearly  has

contributed  to this  year's  lackluster  growth  in industrial  production.  Indeed,  most

4.  These  figures  are  calculated  assuming  that enrollment  patterns  are  unchanged  from  the previous
year.  OPM  estimates  that  when  changes  in  enrollment  are taken  into  account,  the  increase  for  1998  will
be  7  percent, rather  than  8-1/2  percent.

5.  OPM  also  cited rising  costs  associated  with  the aging  of the  federal  workforce  in  its  recent

announcement.

II-10

Industrial Production Indicators

Manufacturing Capacity Utilization
Percent

Average  capacity  utilization

(1959-  1997)

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998

Purchasing Managers  (Manufacturing)*
Percent

New  Orders
Diffusion  index

Percent

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998

Percent reporting increases  minus percen  repoting decreases.

90.7

87.7

84.7

81.7

78.7

75.7

72.7

45

30

<5

+
0

15

30

Domestic Nonfinancial Developments

II-11

industries  (including  steel;  chemicals;  miscellaneous  manufacturing;  and  stone,  clay,
and  glass)  experienced  negative  swings  in  net  exports  in the  first  half of the year.6

Production of  Domestic  Autos  and  Trucks
(Millions  of units  at an  annual  rate;  FRB  seasonal  basis)

Item

U.S. production 

Autos 
Trucks 

Domestic  stocks3

Autos 
Light  trucks 

1998

July 

Aug.1  Sept.2  

Q2 

8.2 
3.9 
4.3 

1.1 
1.3 

13.2 
6.3 
6.9 

1.2 
1.3 

12.6 
6.3 
6.3 

n.a. 
n.a. 

11.6 
5.3 
6.4 

1.1 
1.4 

Q32  

11.4 
5.5 
5.9 

n.a. 
n.a. 

Q42

12.6
5.7
7.0

n.a.
n.a.

NOTE.  Components  may  not sum to  totals  because  of rounding.
1. Production  rates  are  latest estimates  from  Ward's  Automotive  Communications.
2. Production  rates  are  manufacturers'  schedules.
3. Quarterly  data  are  for last month  of quarter.
n.a.  Not  available.

Since  the first  quarter, producers  have  largely  been  able  to avoid  inventory  imbalances,
despite  the  softening  demand,  by  slowing  production  accordingly.7

The  production  of non-auto  durable  consumer  goods  slid in  August, held  down
by  a  reduction  in  appliance  production,  and  the  output  of nondurable  consumer  goods,
which  has been  weak  all  year, pulled  back  a  bit further.  The  production  of business
equipment  also fell,  as  strength  in  information  processing  and  aircraft  production  was
outweighed  by  lower  output  of industrial  and other  equipment.  Within  industrial
equipment,  mining  and  oil  and  gas  machinery  continued  to  recede  in response  to  soft
oil  prices,  and  special  industrial  machinery--which  includes  semiconductor
manufacturing  equipment--declined  further.  The output  of farm machinery  fell  in
August  as  well,  because  of weakening  farm  income.  One  bright  spot  has been

6.  The Beige  Book  and  staff discussions  with  industry  contacts  continue  to  point to  reduced  exports

to  Asia and  increased  foreign  competition  for  a  variety  of industries.  In addition,  National  Association
of Purchasing  Management  surveys indicate  that  the percentage  of manufacturers  reporting  declines  in
export  orders  minus the  percentage  reporting  increases  has  been  positive  and  increasing  all  year.

7.  One  noteworthy  exception  is  the troubled  chemical  industry,  for which  inventory-sales  ratios

have risen  substantially;  domestic  output  of chemicals  has  dropped  only  modestly  despite a  loss  of
market  share  to  a  flood of imports.  In contrast,  producers  in the  electrical  machinery  industry  have
liquidated  inventories  since  April,  as  output has  not kept  pace  with  thriving  demand.

II-12

SALES  OF AUTOMOBILES AND LIGHT TRUCKS
(Millions of  units at  an annual rate,  FRB seasonals)

1997 

1998 

1998

1996 

1997 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

June 

July 

Aug.

Total 

Adjusted 1  

15.0 
15.1 

15.1 
15.0 

15.1 
14.8 

15.1 
15.3 

16.1 
16.0 

16.9 
17.0 

13.8 
13.6 

14.4
14.6

Autos 
Light  trucks 

8.5 
6.5 

8.3 
6.8 

8.1 
7.0 

8.0 
7.0 

8.4 
7.6 

North American2  

Autos 

Big Three 
Transplants 

Light trucks 

13.3 
7.3 
5.3 
2.0 
6.1 

13.1 
6.9 
4.9 
2.0 
6.2 

13.1 
6.7 
4.7 
1.9 
6.5 

13.1 
6.6 
4.7 
1.9 
6.5 

Foreign Produced 

Autos 
Light  trucks 

1.7 
1.3 
.4 

1.9 
1.4 
.6 

1.9 
1.4 
.6 

1.9 
1.4 
.6 

14.1 
7.1 
5.0 
2.0 
7.0 

2.0 
1.4 
.6 

8.8 
8.1 

14.9 
7.4 
5.3 
2.1 
7.5 

2.0 
1.4 
.6 

7.2 
6.6 

7.8
6.6

11.7 
5.8 
3.5 
2.3 
5.9 

2.1 
1.4 
.7 

12.4
6.4
4.1
2.4
6.0

2.0
1.4
.6

Note.  Components may not  add to totals  because  of  rounding.  Data  on sales

of  trucks and imported autos  for the most recent month are preliminary and
subject  to revision.

1. Excludes  the estimated effect  of  automakers' changes  in reporting periods.
2. Excludes some vehicles  produced in Canada that are  classified as  imports

by the  industry.

General  Motors'  Fleet & Retail  Sales
(FR8 seasonals; annual rate)

Buying Attitudes for New  Vehicles
(3-month moving average)

Millions of units

Index

Index

6 

5 

4 

3 

2 

1 

0 

5

4.5

4

3.5

3

2.5

2

-
-

-

Michigan Survery  (right scale)
-*  Conference  Board (left scale)

1991 

1993 

1995 

1997

1991 

1993 

1995 

1997

Note. Data  are confidenial.  Retail includes consumer leasing.

Domestic Nonfinancial Developments

II-13

construction  equipment,  where  production  has grown  sharply  this  summer, reflecting
the  strong  pace  of  construction  activity.

Within  materials,  steel  production  increased  in August  after  declining  for five

straight  months.  Nonetheless,  steel  output remains  well  below  its  level  earlier this
year,  and  output  appears  to be  weakening  substantially  in  early  September.  Low-
priced  imports  are  now  flooding  the market,  and  domestic  producers  have  been  forced
to  slash  prices  and  idle  some  mills.  Semiconductor  output  increased  again, but  recent
gains  lag  the  pace  set  last year. 8

Leading  indicators  of industrial  production  are  mixed.  In  August,  the  index  of

new  orders  from  the  National  Association  of Purchasing  Management  survey
registered  its  lowest  level  in more  than  two  years, with  the  proportion  of companies
reporting  increased  orders  barely  exceeding  the  proportion  reporting  decreased  orders.
In  contrast,  the  staffs estimate  of real  adjusted  durable  goods  orders  has  rebounded
recently,  advancing  more than  4  percent  from  May  to July,  and the  new  orders  index
from  Dun  & Bradstreet  remains  at  a  high  level.

Consumption  and Personal  Income
The  available  data  suggest  that  consumer spending  has  increased  considerably  this
quarter, despite  a  drop-back  in vehicle  sales  from  the elevated  level  of the spring.
We  estimate  that the  level  of real  personal  consumption  expenditures  in August  was
about  a  percentage  point  above  its second-quarter  average,  not  at  an  annual  rate.
Sales  of light  vehicles  were  14.4  million  units  (annual  rate) in  August  and

13.8  million  units  in  July,  well  below  the  elevated  pace  of about  16  million units  in
the  second  quarter.  The  drop  in  sales  reflects  the  effects  of the  expiration  of the
"coupon"  incentive  programs  offered  by  the  Big Three  as  well  as  the  recent  crippling
strikes  at General  Motors.  Despite  a  quick ramp-up  of production  following the
settlement  of the  strikes  in late  July,  total  retail  vehicle  sales  slipped  a  bit further  in
August,  as  the  share  of light  vehicles  going to  fleets  edged  back  up  toward  its  recent
average  and the sparse  stocks at  GM  dealerships  limited retail  supply.  Sales  at Ford
and  the  major Japanese  firms  moved  up  in August,  likely  benefiting  from  GM's  woes.
Supply  constraints  at  GM  are  likely  to limit  sales  somewhat  for another  month  or  so.

8.  Recent  news  on  the semiconductor  industry has  been  mixed.  Two  Japanese  firms  recently
announced  that  they were  closing  semiconductor  plants  in  the United  States,  and Motorola  has halted
construction  of  a plant to  be  built in  Richmond.  In  contrast,  Intel and  National  Semiconductor
announced  that  orders  have  picked  up  lately.

II-14

RETAIL SALES
(Percent change  from preceding period)

Total sales 

Previous estimate 

Building materials

and supplies 

Automotive dealers 

Retail  controll 

Previous  estimate 

GAF 2  

Durable goods 

Furniture and appliances 
Other durable goods 

-Nondurable goods 

Apparel 
Food 
General merchandise 
Gasoline stations 
Drug stores 
Eating  and drinking 
Other nondurable goods 

1998 

1998

Q1 

Q2 

June 

July 

Aug.

2.0 

5.8 
2.3 

1.6 

3.6 

3.8 
4.7 
3.1 

1.1 
4.1 
.2 
3.0 
-4.7 
2.4 
2.3 
.6 

1.9 
1.9 

2.3 
3.6 

1.3 
1.3 

1.1 

.0 
-.6 
.6 

1.6 
1.1 
1.7 
1.8 
-. 4 
2.3 
1.0 
4.0 

.1 
.1 

-.6 
-.4

.2

-1.5 
.1 

1.3 
-4.1 

.3 
1.0 

.0 

.9 
1.0 
.8 

.1 
-.7 
.3 
-.2 
-.1 
.4 
.6 
.2 

.6 
.4

.4 

.5 
1.2 
.0 

.6 
1.3 
.4 
-.3 
1.7 
.7 
-.3 
2.6 

-.5
-.2

.4

.7

.6
1.0
.3

.3
1.2
.4
.3
-. 9
1.1
-.2
1.1

1. Total  retail sales less  sales at building material and

supply stores  and automotive dealers,  except  auto and home
supply stores.

2. General merchandise, apparel,  furniture, and appliance stores.

Personal  Consumption  Expenditures

Billions of chained  (1992)  dollars

5200

5000

4800

4600

4400

4200

1997 

1998

1994 

1996 
Note.  The June, July, August and Q2 numbers  are staff estimates.

1995 

Domestic  Nonfinancial Developments

II-15

Looking  ahead,  the  factors  affecting  near-term  sales  are  more  mixed than  they

were  earlier  in the  year  but still,  on balance,  appear  favorable.  Although  concerns
about  the  economic  outlook  and the  loss  of stock  market  wealth  may temper  future
demand,  auto  company  sources  have  indicated  that  September  sales  got  off to  a  good
start,  and car-buying  attitudes  in the preliminary  Michigan  SRC  survey  for the  month
were  only  a  little  below  their  average  in  the  first  eight  months  of the year.
Automakers  continue  to  offer  attractive  pricing:  The  announced  prices  of  1999  models
are  little  changed  from  the  1998  models,  and  incentives  in the  fourth  quarter  are
expected  to  at  least  match  those  in  the third  quarter,  as  GM's  concern  about  market
share  has  prompted  the first  significant  wave  of incentives  on  1999  models  as  well  as
revised  and  extended  incentives  on  1998  models.

Outside  of motor  vehicles,  household spending  on  goods  has  advanced  at  a
solid  clip  so  far this  quarter.  Nominal  retail  sales  in the  "control"  category,  which
excludes  spending  at  automotive  dealers  and  building  material  and  supply  stores,  rose
0.4  percent  in  August  after  gaining  an  upward-revised  0.6  percent  in  July.  Most
components  of the  control  total  were up  in August,  with  especially  large  increases  at
apparel  outlets and  furniture  and appliance  stores.

Growth  in spending  on  services  likely  will  considerably  outpace  that  for  goods
this  quarter.  Real  outlays  for services  moved  up  0.3  percent  in July  after  having  risen
at  a  robust  5.2  percent  annual  rate  in the  second  quarter.  Spending  on  most  types  of
non-energy  services  posted  gains  in  July,  led  by  another  large  advance  in  the
recreation  category,  for  which  expenditures  have  been  climbing  rapidly  since the
beginning  of the  year.  At the  same  time,  spending  on energy  services  moved  down  in
July:  Although  the  weather  was  unseasonably  warm,  it was  less  so than  in  June.9
Looking  beyond  July,  the very  high temperatures  in August  point  to  a  pickup  in

energy  services  in that month.  In  addition,  the  sharp  rise in  stock market  volume  at
the  end of last  month  implies  at  least  a  modest  gain  in  spending  on  personal  business
services  in August,  to  be followed  by a  more  substantial  increase  in  September. 10
Real  disposable  income  appears  to be  rising swiftly  this  quarter.  The most
recent  figures  on  personal  income  show  a  0.6  percent  rise  in  wages  and  salaries  in
July,  and  the  labor  market  data  for  August  suggest  another  large  increase  in that

9.  For  consumer  spending  on  energy  services,  BEA  constructs  its  initial  estimates  for a  given  month

by  comparing  the  number  of heating  and  cooling  degree  days  with  their seasonal  norms.  The  energy
estimates  are  typically  revised  in  the  third  release  of a  given  month  to  incorporate  data  from  the Energy
Information  Administration  on  actual utility  billings.

10.  BEA's  estimates  of  the brokerage  and  investment  counseling  component  of  personal  business

services  are  based  in  part  on  stock market  volume.

II-16

REAL PCE SERVICES
(Percent change  from the preceding period)

1998 

1998

1997 

Q1 

Q2 

May 

June 

July

Q4/Q4 

- Annual rate  -

---  Monthly rate  ---

PCE Services 
3.8 
1.1 
Energy 
3.9 
Non-energy 
Rousing 
2.4 
Household operation  8.7 
Transportation 
5.1 
Medical 
2.3 
Recreation 
4.8 
4.7 
Personal business 
Other 
6,8 

3.5 
-24.2 
4.9 
2.7 
6.5 
3.7 
3.1 
10.7 
6.5 
8.2 

5.2 
24.2 
4.5 
2.2 
5.9 
8.7 
3.3 
8.3 
5.7 
6.0 

.2 
1.7 
.1 
.2 
.5 
-.1 
.3 
.4 
-.7 
.7 

.7 
2.6 
.6 
.3 
.7 
.6 
.2 
1.5 
.9 
1.4 

.3
-1.1
.4
.2
.4
.0
.2
1.5
.2
1.1

Mote. Derived from billions  of  chained  (1992) dollars.

PERSONAL  INCOME
(Average monthly percent change)

1998 

1998

1997 

Q1 

Q2 

May 

June 

July

Q4/Q4 

Annual  rate 

---  Monthly rate  ---

Total personal income 

Wages  and salaries 

Private 

Other  labor  income 

Less:  Personal  tax and
nontax payments 

Equals:  Disposable

5.4 

7.2 
7.9 

2.8 

5.9 

7.4 
7.9 

5.9 

4.5 

5.6 
6.0 

2.9 

.4 

.7 
.7 

.2 

11.5 

17.1 

7.9 

1.1 

.3 

.2 
.1 

.2 

.6 

personal income 

4.4 

4.0 

3.8 

.3 

.2 

Memo:

Real disposable income1  

2.9 

4.0 

2.9 

Saving rate  (percent) 

2.1 

1.2 

.6 

.1 

.5 

.2 

.1 

.5

.6
.7

.2

.6

.5

.3

.8

1. Derived  from billions of  chained  (1992) dollars.

II-17

Wealth  and  Consumer  Spending

Ratio of  Net Worth to Disposable  Income

Ratio

6.25

6

5.75

5.5

5.25

5

4.75

1995 

1996 

1997

1998

Stock Market

Wilshire 5000

Index

12000

X
Sept. 22

9000

1995 

1996

1997

1998

L 

I

Estimated  Contribution of Wealth  Effect to  PCE  Growth

6000

3000

Percent

1.5

1

0.5

0

m

V

7/
III

1997 

1998

H11 7/T

1996 

1995 

Note.  Calculations show the  effect on  PCE  growth  relative to baseline  in which  the wealth-to-income  ratio is  held
constant at  its 1994:04  value.  Calculations also  assume  that  the  stock market  stays at  its current  level through  the end  of
the year.

II-18

Michigan Survey

Consumer  Sentiment

Household Financial  Conditions

Index

Index

1994 

1996

1998 

1994 

1996 

1998

Expected  Change  in  Unemployment

Expected  Business Conditions

Index 

Index

Next  12 months

1994 

1996

1998

1994

1996

1998

Domestic Nonfinancial Developments

II-19

month.  Outside  of  labor  income,  July  changes  in most  components  of  personal
income  were  in  line with  those  of recent  months.  With  personal  income  up  more  than
outlays  in  July,  the  personal  saving  rate jumped  0.7  percentage  point from  June,
although  at  0.8  percent,  it  remained  extraordinarily  low.

During  the  past  few  years,  the  saving  rate  has  dropped  roughly  3  percentage
points.  Over this  period,  household  wealth  has  soared  relative  to  disposable  income.
The  drop  in  the  stock  market  since  July  undoubtedly  will  cause  a  noticeable  decline  in
the  wealth-income  ratio this  quarter, but  a back-of-the-envelope  calculation  suggests

that--even  if the  market  had  stabilized  at  its  record  high--the  so-called  "wealth  effect"
alone  would  have  caused  consumption  growth  to have  fallen  roughly  1/4  percentage
point  in the  second  half of this  year  as  the  lagged  effect  of past  stock price  increases
dissipated."  The  recent  drop  in  equity  prices  will  likely  result  in  a  more  pronounced
slowing  in consumption  growth.  Assuming  that  the  stock  market  stays  at  its  current
level  (roughly  9500  on  the Wilshire  5000),  the  recent  decline  in equity  values  should
trim  an  additional  1/2  percentage  point  or so  off of consumption  growth  in the  second
half of  1998,  bringing the  total  decline  in the  contribution  of the  wealth  effect  to
consumption  growth  to  a  little  less  than  a  percentage  point.

Households'  reactions  to recent  financial  market  developments  appear  to  be

reflected  in Michigan  SRC data on  consumer  sentiment.  The  overall  Michigan  index
fell noticeably  in early  September  after  slipping  in  August,  although  the  current
reading  is  still  at  the top  of  the range  that prevailed  before  the beginning  of last  year.
The  decline  in  the  overall  index  was  attributable  to markedly  less favorable  views  by
households  of their  current  and  expected  personal  financial  situations  as  well  as
substantially  less  optimistic  expectations  of business  conditions  over  the  next  year.  In
addition,  the  index  of the  expected  change  in unemployment  over  the  next  twelve
months  moved  up  sharply.  When  asked  about  unfavorable  economic  news  they had
heard, survey  respondents  cited  both  stock  price  declines  and  the widening  trade
deficit.

11.  The  calculation  assumes  that an  additional  dollar  of stock market  wealth  leads  to  a  permanent
rise  in  the  level  of consumption  of three  cents,  with  about  60 percent  of the  adjustment  occurring  in  the
first year.  Most  econometric  models  produce  a  marginal  propensity  to  consume  out  of wealth  of
between  zero  and  six cents,  with  the adjustment  occurring  over several  years.  The bulk  of the  estimates
fall in  the  middle  of this  range,  though most  are  not  very  precise.

II-20

Private  Housing Activity
(Millions of units;  seasonally adjusted annual  rate)

All units
Starts 
Permits 

Single-family units
Starts 
Permits 
Adjusted  permits 1  

New  home  sales 
Existing home  sales 

Multifamily units
Starts 
Permits- 

Mobile homes
Shipments 

1997 

1997 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 r  

Juner 

Julyr 

Auq.P

1998

1.47 
1.44 

1.13 
1.06 
1.14 

.80 
4.22 

.34 
.39 

.35 

1.53 
1.48 

1.14 
1.10 
1.18 

.83 
4.38 

.39 
.38 

.35 

1.58 
1.59 

1.24 
1.15 
1.24 

.86 
4.68 

.34 
.44 

.37 

1.57 
1.53 

1.24 
1.14 
1.23 

.89 
4.78 

.33 
.38 

.37 

1.62 
1.52 

1.27 
1.13 
1.23 

.90 
4.74 

.35 
.39 

.36 

1.71 
1.58 

1.30 
1.17 
1.26 

.89 
4.93 

.41 
.41 

.36 

1.61
1.62

1.25
1.17
1.25

n.a.
n.a.

.37
.44

n.a.

Note.  p Preliminary.  r Revised.  n.a.  Not available.
1.  Adjusted permits  equals permit issuance plus total starts outside of permit-issuing areas, minus a  correction for
those starts  in permit-issuing places that lack a permit.

Private Housing Starts
(Seasonally adjusted annual rate)

Millions of units

1977 

1979 

1981 

1983 

1985 

1987 

1989

1991 

1993 

1995 

1997

Domestic Nonfinancial Developments

II-21

Housing  Markets
Demand  for  single-family  homes  has been  robust  so  far this year,  and  the most  recent
data  indicate  that  activity  has  stayed  at  a  high  level.  Starts  of  single-family  homes
were  at  a  1.25  million  unit  annual  rate  in August,  similar  to  the  average  posted  during
the  first seven  months  of the  year.  In  July,  sales  of new  single-family  homes  were  at
an  886,000  unit  pace,  slightly  higher  than  in  the first half.  Sales  of  existing  homes--
which  are  a  lagging  indicator  of housing  demand  because  they  are  recorded  mainly  at
closings--came  in  at  a  4.93  million unit  rate  in July,  more  than  4  percent  above  the

first-half  pace.

Indicators  of near-term  housing  demand  continue  to be  quite  favorable:  The

thirty-year,  fixed  mortgage  rate,  which  has  been  under  7  percent  since  last  spring, has
edged  down  further  in recent  weeks.  Builders'  assessments  of current  sales  conditions,
which  reached  a  record  high  in July,  have  eased  only  slightly  during  the  past  two
months.  Mortgage  applications  for home  purchase  have  been  strong  all  year,  and the
MBA  index  of  loan  applications  set  another new  high in mid-September.  Consumers'
assessments  of home-buying  conditions,  which  posted  an  all-time  high in  April,  have
receded  in recent  months but  remain  at  a  very  favorable  level  by  historical  standards.

Affordability  for  existing homes,  as  measured  by  an index  calculated  by  the

National  Association  of Realtors,  increased  sharply  in  the  latter  part  of  1997  and
during  the  first  two months  of this  year,  owing  mainly  to a  decline  in  the thirty-year,

fixed mortgage  rate.  Although  it  remains  at  an historically  high  level,  this
affordability  index has  slipped  during  the past  six  months.  Rates  drifted  a  bit  lower
during that  period,  but price  increases  for  existing  homes  outpaced  gains  in median
household  income.  By  contrast,  new  home  affordability,  a  measure  constructed by  the
staff, has  continued  to  improve  in  recent  months,  primarily  reflecting  the  more
moderate  rate  of increase  in  the  median  price  of new  homes.12

Multifamily  starts,  which  are  highly  volatile  on  a  monthly  basis, jumped to

407,000  units  at  an  annual  rate in  July but  fell  back  to 368,000  units  in  August.  The
July-August  average  for  these  starts  was  almost  17  percent  above  the  first-half
average.  Multifamily  permits  rose  8-1/2  percent  last month,  and the  permit  backlog
edged  up.  Other  indicators  of market  conditions  in the  multifamily  sector  are  mixed.
The  vacancy  rate  for  these  units, a  highly  volatile  measure,  rose  to  9.4 percent  in the
second  quarter,  about  1/4  percentage point above  its year-earlier  reading  and the
highest  rate  since  mid-1996.  Still, real  rents for  apartments  have  been  rising at  about

12.  This  index  is  based  on the  same formula  as  the  NAR  index  for the  affordability  of  existing

homes.

II-22

Indicators of Housing Demand

Builders'  Rating of New Home  Sales, SA

N

Diffusion index

Sept

1990 

1998
Note. The index is calculated from  National Association of Homebuilders data  as  the proportion of  respondents rating current sales as good

1997 

1996 

1995 

1994 

1993 

1992 

1991 

minus  the proportion  rating them  as poor.

MBA  Index  of Mortgage  Loan Applications for Home  Purchase,  SA

-
------ 

4-week moving average
Weekly

Index

Sept.  18

* 

,  ..

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998

Consumer  Homebuying  Attitudes, NSA

Diffusion index

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996 

1997

1998

Note. The homebuying  attitudes Index is calculated from Survey  Research Center data  as the proportion of  respondents

rating  current conditions  as good minus the proportion rating  conditions as bad.

II-23

BUSINESS  CAPITAL SPENDING INDICATORS
(Percent  change  from  preceding  comparable  period;
based on seasonally adjusted data, in  current dollars)

1998 

1998

Q1 

Q2 

May  June 

July

Producers' durable  equiment

Shipments of nondefense  capital goods 

Excluding aircraft and parts 

Office and computing 
Communications equipment 
All other categories 

4.6 
3.7 
9.5 
4.4 
1.4 

1.4 
1.6 
4.7 
.8 
.6 

.1 
-.1 
-3.7 
4.3 
.4 

-2.5
3.6 
-2.5
4.7 
7.4 
.1
4.8  -11.3
-1.3
3.6 

Shipments of complete aircraft 

37.1  -12.6 

24.6  -10.6 

40.9

Sales of  heavy trucks 

3.1 

4.7 

1.1 

-6.7 

9.2

Orders  for nondefense capital  goods 

Excluding aircraft and parts 

Office and computing 
Communications equipment 
All other categories 

-1.9 
4.2 
12.1 
21.8 
-2.5 

-. 1 
-.9 
4.3 
-4.9 
-1.8 

-. 8 
1.2 
-2.5 
19.2 
-1.8 

-. 8
.4 
-1.8
3.2 
7.3 
-.6
-5.7  -14.8
1.2
4.1 

Nonresidential structures

Construction put in place, buildings 

Office 
Other commercial 
Institutional 
Industrial 
Lodging and miscellaneous 

.8 
7.0 
2.5 
.5 
.1 
.8  -3.3 
-3.0 
3.2 

.8  -1.8 
1.3 
-.3 
-3.9 
-5.8 
-1.6 

3.0 
-4.2 

1.1 
7.1 
-.8 
-4.3 

-1.2
-7.9
5.5
-1.4
.3  -4.0
-.1

3.6 

Rotary drilling rigs  in usel 

8.1  -11.9 

-4.6 

-3.2 

-5.1

Memo  (1992 Chained dollars):
Business  fixed investment 

Producers' durable  equipment 

Office and computing 
Communications equipment 
Other equipment2  

Nonresidential  structures 

22.2 
34.3 
101.5 
35.9 
13.2 
-4.9 

12.6 
18.1 
58.9 
9.5 
7.8 
-1.6 

n.a.  n.a. 
n.a.  n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a.  n.a. 
n.a.  n.a. 

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

1. Percent change of number of  rigs  in use, seasonally adjusted.
2. Producers'  durable equipment excluding office and computing,

communications, motor vehicles, and aircraft and parts.

n.a. Mot  available.

II-24

Orders  and  Shipments  of Nondefense  Capital  Goods

Office and  Computing  Equipment

Billions of dollars, ratio scale

July

12

11

10

9

-

8

1994 

1995 

II3---

r 

I 

*July

1996 

1997 

1998

Other Equipment  (Excluding  Aircraft,  Computing,  and Communications  Equipment

Billions of dollars, ratio scale-

July

L 

30
i

1994^ 

1 

199 

I 

1996 

1  

I 

997

I 

199

13

I

I- 

C 

)30

Billions  of  dollars,  ratio  scale

-

199 

1994

19 
1995 

I1\

199 
1996

19719
1997

1998

-

18

Domestic Nonfinancial Developments

II-25

a  1-1/2  percent  annual  rate  recently,  in  contrast  to  the average  annual  decline  of
1/2  percent  from  1990  to  1996.13

Business  Fixed  Investment
After  a  blistering  first  half, growth  in  real  business  fixed investment  appears  set for a
pause  in the  current  quarter.  The  slowing  in  large  measure  reflects the  effects  of the
GM  strikes:  Supply  shortages  created  by  the  strikes  led  to  a  substantial  reduction  in
fleet  sales  over  the  summer  and  curtailed  consumer  leasing,  which  is counted  as
spending  on  producers'  durable  equipment  in the  national  accounts.  Outside  of light
motor  vehicles,  however,  business  spending  on equipment  likely  has continued  to  rise.
In the  high-tech  sector,  computer  prices  have continued  to  fall  rapidly:
Although  the  inventory  adjustment  that  drove  price-cutting  over the  first  half of the
year  appears  to  be  over,  technological  change  and  falling  prices  of components  have
fueled  further  large  price  declines.  The  PPI for  computing  equipment,  which  is
hedonically  adjusted  to  account  for  product  improvements,  fell  4-1/2  percent  in  August
alone,  driven  by  a  record  13  percent  drop  in  the  price of  personal  computers.  Despite
these  ongoing  price  declines,  nominal  shipments  of computing  equipment  have  held  up
well;  they  were  unchanged  in July  following  a  7-1/2  percent  increase  in  June.  Thus,
real  expenditures  on  office  and  computing  equipment  appear  poised  for another  huge
gain  in the  current  quarter.

Orders  and  shipments  of communications  equipment,  which  have  been
increasingly  erratic  in  the  past  two years, plummeted  in  July.  However,  a  number  of
factors  suggest  that shipments  for  this  category  may  bounce  back  at  least  somewhat  in
the coming  months.  These  factors  include  a  sizable  backlog  of unfilled  orders, further
expansion  of the  Internet,  and  fiber  optic  upgrades  for cable  systems.

Sales  of medium  and heavy  trucks  rose  sharply  further  in August,  reaching  an
annual  rate  of 546,000  units.  So  far this  quarter,  sales  are  running  substantially  above
the  second-quarter  pace.  Even  so, backlogs  moved  higher  last month,  suggesting  that
the near-term  outlook  is  still  favorable.

Excluding transportation  and high-tech  equipment,  orders  and shipments  have

picked  up  in  recent  months.  After  having  fallen  earlier  in  the  year,  orders posted
strong  gains  in  June  and  July.  Moreover,  the  July  level  of shipments  in this  category,
though  off somewhat  from  June's,  still  stood  1.2  percent  above  the  second-quarter
average.

13.  Real  rents  are  computed  by dividing  the  CPI  for  rent of  shelter  by  the  total  CPI.

Exports and  Shipments  of Nondefense  Capital  Goods

II-26

Office and Computing  Equipment
Billions of dollars 

Shipments
(right scale)

Exports
(left scale)

Billiolns  of dollars

July

July  -

1996

1997

a 

a 

a 

* 

a 

• 

a 

a 

a

' 

'  i 

'

1998

Communications  Equipment
Billions  of dollars

Billions of dollars

I\

1996 

1997 

1998

Other Equipment
Billions of dollars 

a'

-I  ~

Billions of dollars

Na

1996

SI 

I 

.

, 

a 

a 

a 
1997

t 

a 

a 

I 

aI 

aI 

a 

* 

a 

a

a 
1998

II-27

Nonresidential  Construction and  Contracts
(Six-month  moving average)

Total  Building

Index,  Dec.  1982  = 100, ratio scale

1980 

1982 

1984 

1986 

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994 

1996 

1998

Office

Other Commercial

1984  1986  1988  1990  1992  1994  1996  1998

1984  1986  1988  1990  1992  1994  1996  1998

Lodging and  Miscellaneous

Institutional

1984  1986  1988  1990  1992  1994  1996  1998 

1984  1986  1988  1990  1992  1994  1996  1998

Note.  For contracts, total includes private only; individual sectors include public and private.

II-28

CHANGES  IN MANUFACTURING AND TRADE  INVENTORIES
(Billions of  dollars  at  annual  rates;
based  on  seasonally  adjusted  data)

Book  value  basis

Total 

Excluding wholesale and

retail  motor vehicles 

Manufacturing 

Excluding aircraft 

Wholesale 

Excluding motor  vehicles 

Retail 

Auto  dealers 
Excluding auto  dealers 

1997 

Q4 

1998 

1998

Q1 

Q2 

May 

June 

July

39.8 

62.7 

7.0 

-6.4 

5.9 

40.2 
15.6 
15.0 
18.1 
19.5 
6.0 
.9 
5.1 

55.3 
23.3 
19.2 
17.3 
11.5 
22.1 
1.6 
20.5 

35.0 
19.0 
6.9 
-.4 
10.9 
-11.5 
-16.6 
5.0 

23.9 
12.7 
6.9 
21.2 
28.9 
-40.3 
-22.6 
-17.7 

44.3 
11.7 
1.9 
-2.2 
6.3 
-3.6 
-29.9 
26.3 

2.2

23.4
16.3
9.9
-7.4
.1
-6.7

-13.7

7.0

SELECTED  INVENTORY-SALES RATIOS
(Months' supply,  based on Census  book-value data.  seasonally adjusted)

Manufacturing and trade 

Less wholesale  and  retail

motor  vehicles 

Manufacturing 

Primary metals 
Nonelectrical machinery 
Electrical machinery 
Transportation equipment 

Motor vehicles 
Aircraft 

Nondefense capital  goods 
Textiles 
Chemicals 
Petroleum 
Home  goods  & apparel 

Merchant wholesalers 

Less motor  vehicles 

Durable  goods 
Nondurable  goods 

Retail  trade 

Less  automotive  dealers 
Automotive  dealers 
General  merchandise 
Apparel 
GAF 

Cyclical
reference  points 
1990-91 
high 

1995-96 
low 

1.58 

1.55 

1.75 
2.08 
2.48 
2.08 
2.93 
.97 
5.84 
3.09 
1.71 
1.44 
.94 
1.96 

1.36 
1.31 
1.83 
.95 

1.61 
1.48 
2.22 
2.42 
2.53 
2.42 

1.38 

1.35 

1.38 
1.49 
1.77 
1.41 
1.51 
.56 
4.44 
2.27 
1.42 
1.25 
.80 
1.63 

1.26 
1.22 
1.55 
.91 

1.50 
1.43 
1.69 
2.20 
2.27 
2.23 

Range  over

preceding  12  months 

High 

Low 

1.39 

1.36 

1.40 
1.64 
1.75 
1.39 
1.83 
.64 
5.12 
2.33 
1.54 
1.41 
.89 
1.69 

1.30 
1.28 
1.62 
.96 

1.50 
1.42 
1.77 
2.11 
2.45 
2.15 

1.37 

1.34 

1.36 
1.53 
1.61 
1.30 
1.57 
.54 
4.34 
2.12 
1.40 
1.30 
.83 
1.59 

1.26 
1.23 
1.56 
.92 

1.45 
1.40 
1.56 
2.00 
2.32 
2.06 

July
1998

1.38

1.37

1.40
1.65
1.61
1.31
1.88
.64
4.97
2.20
1.49
1.41
.90
1.62

1.29
1.28
1.58
.96

1.45
1.40
1.60
2.03
2.42
2.08

Domestic Nonfinancial Developments

II-29

Domestic  demand  for  capital  equipment  has  been  considerably  stronger  this

year  than  might  be  suggested  by  a  literal  reading  of the  data  on  orders  and  shipments
alone.  Trade  flows  loom  large  in the  capital  goods  sector,  and  weak  demand  from
abroad  has  appreciably  held  down  shipments by  U.S.  producers  in  recent  quarters.
Between  October  1997  and  July  1998,  exports  of computing  equipment  declined
14  percent,  exports  of  communications  equipment  declined  15  percent,  and  exports  of
capital  goods  excluding  high-tech  and  transportation  equipment  fell  7  percent.  Over

the  same period,  computer  shipments  rose  18  percent,  shipments  excluding  high-tech
and  transportation  equipment  rose  3-1/2  percent,  and  shipments of  communications
equipment  fell  only  3  percent,  despite  the  sharp  decline  in  July. 14  That  total shipments
have  continued  to  grow  despite  the  substantial  negative  external  shock from  abroad  is
an  indication  of robust  domestic  demand.

Nonresidential  construction  activity  has  remained  sluggish  overall.  Ample

capacity  in  the  factory  sector  has put  construction  of  industrial  buildings  on  a
downward  trend  since  early  1997.  Construction  of retail  and  lodging  buildings  has
been flat  so  far  this year.  The  one  bright  spot  has  been  the  office  sector,  in which
outlays  have  been  on  a  strong uptrend  for  the  past  two  years  or  so.  Contracts  for
construction,  an  important leading  indicator,  have  weakened  significantly  this year,
even for  the  office  sector.  Furthermore,  available  financing  for commercial  real  estate,
such  as  real  estate  investment  trusts  and commercial  mortgage-backed  securities,  has
tightened  considerably  recently.  These  indicators  suggest  that  a  pickup  from  the
sluggish  growth  in nonresidential  building  activity  remains  unlikely  in  the  near  future.

Business  Inventories
After declining  sharply  in the  second  quarter,  investment  in  business  inventories  fell
off further  in  July.  For manufacturing  and  trade  excluding  motor  vehicles,  the  book
value  of inventories  rose  at  a  $23  billion annual  rate  in July,  continuing  the  downshift
in the  pace  of stockbuilding  from  the first-quarter  bulge.  The  latest  figure  translates
into  a  2-1/2  percent  annual  rate  of  growth  in  the  book value  of  non-auto  stocks.
Inventory-sales  ratios  remain  moderate  on the  whole.

14.  Over the  October-to-July  period,  the  ratio  of  exports  to  shipments  fell  from  45  percent  to  33

percent  for computers,  from  37  percent  to  29 percent  for communications  equipment,  and  from  49
percent  to  44  percent  for equipment  excluding  high-tech  and  transportation.  Some  caveats  are  required
in  interpreting  these ratios.  For  computers,  parts  account for a  high  proportion  of  exports.  Such
shipments  are  not counted  as  final  demand  and  thus  do not  affect  expenditures  on  producers'  durable
equipment  in  the  national  accounts.  Also,  the  definition  of  the  "other  equipment"  category  in  the  orders
and shipments  (M-3) release  differs  slightly  from  the  definition  in  the  merchandise  trade  report.

II-30

Inventory-Sales  Ratios, by Major  Sector
(Book  value)

Manufacturing

Ratio
-

2.15

1.9

1.65

July

- 1.4

I 
1979 

I 
1981 

l 
I 
1983 

L 
1985 

i 

l 
1987 

l. 
.1 
1989 

.
1991 

I 

I 
1993 

I 

I 
1995 

I  1 

1997

i 

1.15

Wholesale Excluding  Motor Vehicles

1979 

1981 

1983 

1985 

1987 

1989 

1991 

1993 

1995 

1997

Retail

2.8 

-

2.6  -

2.42

2  \'. 

*-.'.,, 

; 

\. 

GAF group  (left scale) 

2.2 

Total excluding autos (right scale)

1979 

1981 

1983 

1985 

1987 

1989 

1991

1993 

1995 

1997

Ratio
-

1.5

July

-1.4

1.3

1.2

1.1

Ratio
-

1.7

1
- 1.6

July

1.4

Domestic  Nonfinancial Developments

II-31

In  manufacturing,  inventories  increased  at  a  $16  billion  annual  rate  in  July, just

off the  second-quarter  pace.  As  in  the  spring,  an  above-average  share of the  July
buildup  was  in stocks  of aircraft  and  parts.  Rising  inventories  of aircraft  parts  and
partially  completed  airplanes  are  a  natural  consequence  of the  increased  production
rates  at Boeing.  However,  finished  aircraft  are  also  being  stockpiled,  as  Boeing  has
not  yet  acquired  the  legal  rights to  divert  some  planes  earmarked  for  struggling  Asian
airlines  to  other  carriers.  Outside  of aircraft,  manufacturers'  inventories  grew  at  a
$10  billion  pace  in  July.

The book  value  of wholesale  inventories  excluding  motor  vehicles  was  little

changed  in  July  after  an  appreciable  buildup  in  the  first half of the  year.  A  slight
increase  in  inventories  at  distributors  of nondurable  goods,  mainly  chemicals  and  farm
products,  was  offset  by  a  small  net  drawdown  in stocks  held  by  durable  goods
wholesalers.  The latter  was  led by  a  further  decline  in  inventories  at  professional  and
commercial  equipment  wholesalers,  a  category  that  includes  computer  distributors.
Although  much  of this  decline  likely  stems from  efforts  of computer  makers  to move
toward direct  delivery  of PCs--as  indicated  by  the  lowest  inventory-sales  ratio  on
record  in  this  category--some  of the  decrease  might  also  reflect  the  recent  steep  drop
in  PC  prices.

In  retail  trade,  book-value  inventories  dropped  again  in  July,  reflecting  the

sharp  decline  in stocks  at  automotive  dealerships.  Excluding  autos,  retail  inventories
rose  at  a  moderate  rate,  a  touch  above the  pace  of  accumulation  in the  second  quarter.
The  buildup  was led  by  a  sizable  increase  in  stocks  held  by  furniture  and  appliance
stores.  Most  other  categories  registered  small  positive  changes  in  inventories.

Federal  Government
With  one  month  left  in the  fiscal year,  the  federal  government  clearly  will post  its first
unified  budget  surplus  since  1969  and  its largest  surplus  as  a  share of  GDP  since
1957.  This  favorable  outcome  is  the  result  of  a  meager  increase  in  outlays  and  a huge
rise  in  receipts.

Total outlays  fell  in  July  and August  relative  to  a  year  earlier  owing  in part to

the  timing  of payments  for several  programs.  After  adjusting  for  the timing  shifts  and
excluding  deposit  insurance  outlays  and  spectrum  auction  proceeds,  spending  was
0.2  percent  higher  than  a  year  earlier.  Medicare  has been  an  important  contributor  to

the  slowing  of outlays:  Spending for  the  program  over  the twelve  months  ending  in
August  was  only  1.6  percent  above  the  previous  twelve  months--one  of the  smallest
increases  in its history,  in part  reflecting  the  cost-containment  actions  taken  in  last

II-32

FEDERAL  GOVERNMENT  OUTLAYS AND RECEIPTS
(Unified  basis;  billions  of  dollars)

July-August 

12  months ending  in Aug.

1997 

1998 

Percent 
change 

1997 

1998 

Percent
change

Outlays

Deposit insurance
Spectrum auction
Other

Receipts

273.5
-1.1
-0.7
275.3

266.7
-1.0
-0.4
268.1

212.7 

231.5

Surplus  (+)/deficit 

(-)

-60.8 

-35.3

-2.5
n.a.
n.a.
-2.6

8.8

n.a.

1598.5
-14.6
-11.1
1624.3

1633.5
-4.4
-1.2
1639.1

1561.9  1715.2

2.2
n.a.
n.a.
0.9

9.8

-36.6 

81.8 

n.a.

Adjusted for payment timing shifts 1
and excluding deposit  insurance and spectrum auction

Outlays

National  defense
Net  interest
Social security
Medicare
Medicaid
Other health
Income security
Other

Receipts

Individual income and
payroll taxes
Withheld + PICA
Nonwithheld + SECA
Refunds  (-)

Corporate
Other

267.7
45.6
42.7
61.1
33.6
15.1
4.7
35.5
29.3

268.1
44.4
42.2
63.1
32.2
16.6
5.1
35.5
29.0

212.7 

231.5

178.7
173.1
9.3
3.7
6.0
28.0

196.5
190.5
10.0
4.0
5.5
29.4

0.2
-2.7
-1.2
3.3

-4.1

9.7
9.1
-0.1
-1.1

8.8

9.9
10.1
7.8
9.9
-7.4
5.3

1624.0
271.5
246.1
364.0
189.1
94.4
28.4
230.9
199.6

1646.7
269.0
244.4
377.9
192.2
101.4
29.1
231.5
201.2

1561.9  1715.2

1226.1
1046.2
272.5
92.6
180.1
155.7

1356.0
1144.9
310.3
99.2
189.2
170.0

1.4
-0.9
-0.7
3.8
1.6
7.5
2.2
0.3
0.8

9.8

10.6
9.4
13.9
7.2
5.1
9.2

Surplus  (+)/deficit  (-)

-55.0 

-36.6 

n.a.

-62.2 

68.5

n.a.

Note. Components may not  sum to totals because of rounding.
1. A shift  in payment timing occurs when the first  of the month falls on
a weekend or holiday.  Outlays for defense,  edicare,  income security, and
"other" have been adjusted to account for this shift.

n.a.--Not applicable

Domestic Nonfinancial Developments

II-33

year's  Balanced  Budget  Act.  Other  prominent  areas  of spending  restraint  were
defense,  net  interest  (reflecting  lower interest  rates  and  the  reduction  in  publicly  held
debt),  and income  security  payments  (reflecting  the  reductions  in caseloads  for means-
tested  public  assistance  programs).

Receipts  in  July  and August  were  9  percent  higher  than  a  year  earlier  as

receipts  of  individual  income  taxes  continued  to rise  more  rapidly  than the NIPA-
based estimates  of the  underlying  tax base  (which  excludes  capital  gains).  Receipts
were  held  down  in August  by  weak  excise  tax  collections  attributable  to  a  delay  in
payments  allowed  under  last  year's  Balanced  Budget  Act.15

Congress has  yet to  complete  action  on  the  fiscal  1999  budget.  The  budget
resolution  has  not  been  completed  owing  to  disagreements  over  the  extent  to which
last  year's budget  agreement  should be  modified  to  accommodate  tax  cuts and

spending  increases.  The  House is  considering  a  tax  bill  that  would  reduce  receipts  by
$6  billion  in fiscal  1999  and  by  roughly  $18  billion  per  year  over  the  succeeding  four
years.  Proposals  to  boost  spending  on agriculture,  Y2K-related  problems,  embassy
security,  and  defense  are  also  under  consideration,  but  no decision  has been  made
whether  to treat  them  as  emergency  measures,  and thus  raise  overall  spending,  or  to
require  offsets  in  other  programs.  As  of September  22,  only  one  of the  thirteen
regular  appropriations  bills had  been  sent to  the  President,  and  a  short-term  continuing
resolution  had  been  passed  to fund  the  government  when  the new  fiscal  year begins
October  1.

State  and  Local  Governments
Indicators  of real  spending  by  state  and  local  governments  so far  in the  third  quarter
have  been mixed,  with  employment  up  and  construction  down.  State  and  local
employment  rose  substantially  in  August,  adding to  a  modest  increase  in  July.  The
bulk  of the  hiring in  August  was  at  local  governments,  particularly  at school  districts,
for  which  the  increase  appears  to reflect  earlier  starting  dates  for  many  schools;
according  to  BLS,  this trend  has  been  apparent  for  about  five  years. 16  Real
construction  expenditures  by  state  and local  governments  fell  1-1/2 percent  at a

15.  Excise  taxes totaled  only  $3  billion  in  August,  about  half the  level  recorded  in  July.  The
Balanced  Budget  Act  included  provisions  allowing  a  delay  in  payment  of certain  excise  taxes due  in
August  and  September  until  October.

16.  Most  of these employees  are  not teachers,  who  typically  choose  to be  paid  on a  year-round

basis  and,  hence,  are  on  the payrolls  in  the summer.

II-34

CPI AND PPI  INFLATION RATES
(Percent change)

From twelve

months earlier 

Aug. 

1997 

Aug.
1998 

1998 

1998

Q1 

Q2 

July 

Aug.

-Annual rate- 

-Monthly rate-

CPI

All  items  (100.0) 1  

Food  (15.3) 
Energy  (7.0) 
CPI less  food  and  energy  (77.7) 

2.2 

2.5 
.8 
2.3 

1.6 

2.2 
-7.7 
2.5 

.5 

1.4 
-19.9 
2.4 

2.0 

1.9 
-6.7 
2.7 

Commodities  (24.1) 

.6 

1.1 

.8 

1.0 

New vehicles  (5.1) 
Used cars  and trucks  (1.9) 
Apparel  (4.9) 
Tobacco  (0.9) 
Other Commodities  (11.3) 

Services  (53.6) 

Shelter  (29.4) 
Medical  care  (4.4) 
Other  Services  (19.8) 

PPI

Finished goods  (100.0)2 

Finished consumer foods  (23.2) 
Finished energy  (13.6) 
Finished goods less  food

and energy  (63.2) 

Consumer goods  (38.0) 
Capital  equipment  (25.2) 

.1 
-5.2 
1.5 
4.3 
.7 

3.0 

3.0 
2.7 
3.2 

-.2 

-. 3 
-. 5 

-. 1 

.1 
-. 4 

-. 1 
1.8 
1.2 
12.4 
.2 

3.1 

3.3 
3.5 
2.7 

-.3 
.4 
-1.5 
9.6 
1.6 

3.1 

3.1 
3.1 
3.2 

-1.1 
4.9 
.8 

16.5 
.3 

3.4 

3.8 
4.1 
2.8 

-. 8 

-3.3 

.0 

.1 
-10.3 

-1.7 
-22.0 

.5 
-8.0 

1.0 

2.1 
-. 7 

.6 

1.3 
-. 7 

1.7 

3.2 
-. 5 

Intermediate materials  (100.0) 3  

-. 2 

-2.1 

-4.3 

-2.0 

Intermediate materials 

less  food  and energy  (81.8)

.4 

-. 5 

-. 7 

-. 8 

.2 

.2 
.0 
.2 

.1 

.5 
.3 
-.3 
2.6 
-. 1 

.2 

.1 
.2 
.4 

.2 

.4 
.3 

.1 

.3 
.1 

.0 

.0 

.2

.2

-1.0

.2

.2

.3
-. 1
1.1
.1
-. 2

.3

.4
.3
.0

-.4

-.4
-2.3

-.1

.0
-. 3

-.3

-. 1

Crude materials  (100.0) 4  

-7.3 

-12.0 

-35.4 

-4.2 

-1.8 

-2.7

Crude food materials  (42.1) 
Crude energy  (36.4) 
Crude materials  less 

food and  energy  (21.5)

-13.8 
-4.9 
3.0 

-7.7 
-18.1 
-10.9 

-14.3 
-61.3 
-14.1 

-2.0 
-4.2 
-8.2 

-2.8 
-. 6 
-1.8 

-1.1
-5.1
-2.0

1. Relative  importance weight for CPI, December 1997.
2. Relative  importance weight  for  PPI,  December  1997.
3. Relative  importance weight for intermediate materials,  December  1997.
4. Relative  importance weight for crude materials, December  1997.

Domestic Nonfinancial Developments

II-35

monthly  rate  in July,  to  a  level just  a  bit below  the  second-quarter  average.  Much  of
the  weakness  in July  was  in educational  buildings  and  highways.

Gubernatorial  elections  will take  place  in  nearly  three-quarters  of the  states this
fall, and  many  candidates  likely  will  include  tax  cuts  among  their  campaign  promises.
The  popularity  of tax rate  reductions  reflects  continued  strong  revenues.  Most
recently,  the  Center  for  the  Study  of the  States  reported  that revenues  increased
9.7  percent  over the  twelve  months  ending  in the second  quarter.  The  strength  was
especially  apparent  in  income tax  collections,  which  increased  19.5  percent.  Although
a  number  of states  were  expecting  strong  gains  in  personal  income  tax  receipts,  the
magnitude  of the  rise came  as  a  surprise  to  many  governments.  By  comparison,  over
the  1992  to  1997  period  the  average  annual  rise  was  6.7  percent.  For the  twelve
months  ending  in the  second  quarter  of  1998,  sales  tax  receipts  rose  5.3  percent,  a
little  below  the  annual  average  over  the preceding  six  years,  and  corporate  tax  revenue
declined  a  little.

Prices
Both  the  overall  consumer  price  index  and the  index  excluding  food  and  energy
increased  0.2  percent  in  July  and August.  The  twelve-month  change  in  the  core  CPI
was  2.5  percent  in  August,  up  0.2  percentage  point  from  the  rate  recorded  over  the
year-earlier  period;  the  overall  index  was up  only  1.6  percent  over  the  past  twelve
months  because  of the  sharp  decline  in  energy  prices.  The  PCE deflator  excluding
food  and  energy  also  rose 0.2  percent  in July,  the  latest  month  for which data  are
available,  but  increased  just  1.1  percent  over  the twelve  months  ending  in July.17

Consumer  food  prices  rose  0.2  percent  in both  July  and  August.  The  index  for

fruits  and  vegetables  moved  down  last month  after  having risen  in July,  while  price
increases  for other  foods  picked  up  somewhat.  Over  the  twelve  months  ending  in
August,  overall  food  prices  rose  2.2 percent,  down  slightly  from a  2.5  percent  pace  in
the year-earlier  period.  The  CPI for energy  fell  1.0  percent  in  August  after no  change
in  July  and is down  about  7.7  percent  over the  past twelve  months.  Retail  gasoline
prices  dropped  1.5  percent  in August,  and  survey  evidence  for early  September
suggests  that they  have  slid  further;  however,  crude  oil prices  have  turned  up  in recent
weeks,  suggesting  that declines  in retail  prices  of gasoline  may be  behind  us.
The  consumer  price  index  for  commodities  other  than  food  and energy

increased  0.2  percent  in  August,  a  little  faster  than its pace  in recent  months.  The

17.  The  PCE  chain  price  index  excluding  food  and energy,  which  is  available  only  on  a  quarterly

basis,  shows  a  similar  1.1  percent  increase  over  the four  quarters  ending  in  the  second quarter.

II-36

Measures  of Core  Consumer  Price  Inflation
(Twelve-month  changes except as noted)

CPI  Excluding Food and  Energy

Percent

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998

CPI  Services and Commodities

r  , -

/

Percent

" -

CPI  services ex. energy
^/ 
V 

.--

-

----

"--"------ 

Aug. 

3

CPI commodities  ex. food and  energy-

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993

1994 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998

' 

'

CPI  and  PCE

Percent

Food and  Energy

PCE  deflator ex. food and  energy

-"-July 

1

1990 

1991 

1992

1993 

1994 

1995

1996 

1997 

1998

Domestic Nonfinancial Developments

II-37

twelve-month  change  in  core  commodity  prices  was  1.1  percent,  up  from  a  0.6 percent
pace  a  year  ago.  Apparel  prices jumped  1.1  percent  in  August,  as  the  late  occurrence
of Labor  Day  caused  holiday  and  "back-to-school"  discounts  to be  concentrated  in
September  this  year instead  of being  offered  in  August  as  well.18 Also,  prices  of new
motor  vehicles  increased  0.3  percent  in  August,  following  a  0.5  percent  hike  in  July,
as  the  Big  Three  coupon  incentives  were  withdrawn."  Looking  forward,  major
automakers  have  announced  flat  or  lower  prices for  comparably  equipped  vehicles  in
the new  model  year,  and  General  Motors  has  announced  a  sweetening  of  incentives  to
bolster post-strike  sales.  Retail  prices  of tobacco  products  were  up only  0.1  percent  in
August--despite  another  hike  in the  wholesale  price  of  cigarettes  that  month--following
a  2.6 percent  increase  in  July.  Over  the  past  twelve  months,  the CPI  for tobacco  has
risen  12.4  percent.

Prices  of non-energy  services  rose  0.3  percent  in  August  after increasing
0.2  percent  in each  of the preceding  two  months;  the  index  has risen  3.1  percent  over
the  past year,  about  the same  as last  year.  Owners'  equivalent  rent  increased
0.2  percent  in August,  a  bit  less than  the  average  monthly  increase  over  the  past year,
while  rates for  lodging  away  from  home jumped  0.7  percent  in  August,  reversing
July's  drop.  Among  services  excluding  energy  and shelter,  prices  for medical  care
increased  0.3  percent  in  August--in  line  with  the  average  pace  over  the  past year.  In
contrast,  telephone  service  charges  dropped  1.1  percent  in  August  and  are  up  only  1/2
percent  so far  this year.

Most  other  broad  measures  of  inflation  have  continued  to  rise  less  rapidly  than

has  the  CPI,  and  these  prices  have also  decelerated  to  a  greater  degree  over  the  past
year.  The  four-quarter  change  in  the GDP  chain  price  index  was just  1 percent  in the
second  quarter,  half the rate  recorded  in  1997:Q2.  About  one-quarter  of the
deceleration  in  GDP  prices over  the  past four  quarters  can be  attributed  to a  large
decline  in the  rate  of change  in  the  implicit  price  index  for services  provided to
consumers  without  charge  by  financial  institutions,  a component  of PCE; 20  elsewhere
in  PCE, a  modest  slowing  in  inflation  rates  was  widespread  across  expenditure  groups.

18.  BLS  attempts  to  account  for  the timing  of Labor  Day  in  its seasonal  adjustment  procedures  but

does  not feel  that  it adequately  captures  the  effect.  As a  result,  some  of  the  August  increase  may  be
reversed  in  the  September  data.

19.  Because  of  bimonthly  sampling  for  some  cities  in  the CPI,  the effect  of  withdrawing  coupons

was spread over  July  and  August.

20.  After  rising  13  percent over  the  four quarters  ending  in  1997:Q2,  inputed  prices for  services

provided  without  charge  by  financial  institutions  increased  only  2.3 percent  in  the  year ending  in
1998:Q2--somewhat  below  the  long-term average  increase  in  these  prices.

II-38

BROAD MEASURES  OF INFLATION
(Four-quarter percent  change)

Product  prices

GDP  chain price index 

Nonfarm business chain-type price index i  

Expenditure prices

Gross  domestic  purchases chain-type price index 

Less  food  and energy 

PCE  chain-type price  index 

Less food  and energy 

CPI 

Less  food and energy 

Median CPI 
Trimmed mean CPI 

1. Excluding housing.

1995 
Q2 

1996 
Q2 

1997 
Q2 

1998
Q2

2.4 

2.2 

1.9 

1.3 

2.0 

2.0 

2.5 
2.5 

2.6 
2.5 

3.0 
3.0 

3.0 
2.8 

1.7 
1.5 

2.0 
1.8 

2.9 
2.7 

3.2 
2.8 

1.7 
1.7 

1.9 
2.0 

2.3 
2.5 

2.9 
2.5 

1.0

0.7

0.6
0.8

0.8
1.1

1.6
2.2

2.8
2.1

SURVEYS OF  (CPI) INFLATION EXPECTATIONS
(Percent)

Actual 
inflation i  

1996-Ql 
Q2 
Q3 
QA 

1997-Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 

1998-Q1 
Q2 
Q3 

Apr. 
May 
June 

July 
Aug. 
Sept. 

2.7 
2.8 
2.9 
3.2 

2.9 
2.3 
2.2 
1.9 

1.5 
1.6 

1.4 
1.7 
1.7 

1.7 
1.6 

University of Michigan 

(1-year) 

Mean 2  

Median 3  

(5- to  -10-year) 
Mean 4  

Median 5  

Professional
forecasters
(10-year)6

3.9 
4.5 
4.2 
4.0 

3.8 
3.6 
3.4 
3.3 

2.8 
3.0 
2.9 

2.7 
3.1 
3.2 

3.1 
2.7 
2.8 

2.8 
3.0 
3.1 
3.0 

2.9 
2.9 
2.7 
2.8 

2.4 
2.6 
2.4 

2.4 
2.6 
2.7 

2.6 
2.4 
2.3 

4.2 
4.3 
4.3 
3.9 

3.8 
3.8 
3.6 
3.8 

3.3 
3.3 
3.1 

3.2 
3.3 
3.3 

3.1 
3.0 
3.3 

3.2 
3.1 
3.2 
3.0 

3.1 
3.0 
3.0 
3.1 

2.9 
2.8 
2.8 

2.7
2.8
2.9 

2.7
2.7
2.9 

3.0
3.0
3.0
3.0

3.0
2.9
3.0
2.7

2.6
2.5
2.5

2.5

2.5

1. CPI;  percent  change  from the  same period  in the preceding year.
2. Average increase  for responses to the question:  By about what percent do you

expect  prices  (CPI) to go up, on the average,  during the next  12  months?

3. Median increase  for responses to the question above.
4. Average increase  for responses  to the question:  By about what percent per year
do you expect prices  (CPI) to go up, on the average, during the  next 5 to 10  years?

5. Median increase  for responses  to question above.
6. Compiled by the  Federal Reserve Bank of  Philadelphia.

Domestic Nonfinancial Developments

II-39

Large  declines  in  energy  and non-oil  import  prices  have  helped  hold  down  GDP  prices
by  reducing  materials  costs  and by  providing  more  intense  competition  for
domestically  produced  goods,  while  a  deceleration  in  food  prices  has  contributed
directly  to slower  growth  in  GDP prices.  In  addition,  a  decline  in  the  rate  of increase
of government  prices--in  part  due to  slower  growth  in  average  hourly  compensation
for government  workers--to  the  slowest  pace  in thirty-eight  years  contributed
1/4  percentage  point to  the  deceleration  in  GDP  prices  over the  past year.

Short-term  inflation  expectations  have turned  back  down  recently  after having

backed  up  somewhat  in  the second  quarter.  According  to  the  Michigan  survey,
median  one-year  inflation  expectations  were  2.4 percent  in  the third  quarter,  the  same
rate  as  the  low  recorded  in  the first  quarter  of the  year  and  0.3  percentage  point  below
expectations  a  year ago.  Longer-term  inflation  expectations  appear  to  have stabilized
in the  third  quarter  at  very  low rates,  with  both  the  Michigan  median  five-to-ten-year
inflation  expectations  and the  Philadelphia  Fed's  survey  of professional  forecasters

ten-year  expectations  between  1/4  and  1/2  percentage  point  below  the pace  recorded  a
year  earlier.

Prices  of capital  goods continued  to  weaken  in recent  months.  The  PPI  for
capital  equipment  fell  0.3  percent  in  August,  after  edging  up  in  July,  and is  down
0.7  percent  over the  past twelve  months.  Computer  prices  fell  4.5  percent  in  August,
led by  a  whopping  decline  in personal  computer  prices.  Over  the twelve  months  to
August,  overall  computer  prices have  dropped  26  percent,  compared  with  23  percent
over  the preceding  twelve  months.

Inflation  remains  dormant  at  earlier  stages  of processing.  The  PPI  for
intermediate  materials  other than  food  and energy  edged  down  again in  August  to  a

level  0.5  percent  below  a  year  earlier.  The PPI  for core  crude  materials  dropped
considerably  further  in both July  and  August  and is  down  nearly  11  percent  over  the
past  year.21  Within  crude  materials,  price  declines  have  been  widespread  over the  past
year,  with the  drop  in  metals  prices  particularly  large.  Since  the  mid-August  PPI
reporting  date,  many  industrial  commodity  prices  have  declined  further.  The Journal
of Commerce  industrial  price  index  is  down  about  1-1/4  percent  since that time,  while
the  Commodity  Research  Bureau measure  of industrial  commodity  prices has  declined
about  4-1/2  percent.  Both the  JOC  and  CRB  measures  include  industrial  materials,
such  as  metals  and fibers,  but the  JOC  measure  includes  energy  commodities  and

21.  Raw  materials  other  than  petroleum  make  up  a small  proportion  of the  cost structure  of finished
core  consumer  goods.  Therefore,  even  for declines  in raw materials  prices of this  magnitude,  the  direct
effect  on  retail  consumer  prices  is  fairly  small.

II-40

Daily Spot and  Posted  Prices of West  Texas  Intermediate

Dollars per barrel

It"
'"I

Spot

I 

i:

I

tAIt

Posted

Nov. 

Oct. 
Note.  Posted prices are evaluated  as the mean  of the range listed in  the Wall  Street Journal.

June 

Dec. 

Mar. 

Feb. 

Apr. 

May 

Jan.

~t 

1 

,

en

July 

Aug. 

Sept.

Monthly Average  Prices of West Texas  Intermediate

Month 

October 
November 
December 
January 
February 
March 
April 
May 
June 
July 
August 
September 1  

1.  Through September22,  1998.

Posted 

19.80 
18.83 
16.97 
15.33 
14.78 
13.44 
13.90 
13.13 
12.09 
12.36 
11.73 
12.29 

Spot

21.26
20.17
18.32
16.71
16.06
15.02
15.44
14.86
13.66
14.08
13.36
14.61

Metals

Copper  (lb.) 
Steel scrap  (ton) 
Aluminum, London  (lb.) 

.800 
97.833 
.594 

-21.3 
-15.1 
-8.5 

-24.3 
15.9 
-.6 

-4.9 
-21.8 
-14.1 

II-41

SPOT  PRICES OF SELECTED COMMODITIES

--------------- Percent  change  ---------------

Current 
price 
($) 

1996 

1997 

Dec. 30 
to 

Aug. 112 

Aug.  112 
to 

Sept.  22 

Memo:
Year
earlier
to  date

288.900 
4.930 

-4.8 
-6.1 

-21.4 
28.3 

-1.9 
-14.6 

278.000 
365.000 

59.2 
-3.2 

-29.6 
-4.8 

4.8 
22.7 

14.190 
.456 
.420 

59.000 
29.500 
.708 

1.750 
2,850 
5.080 
.731 

29.3 
27.2 
18.3 

-31.7 
-25.8 
-29.7 

-31.2 
-22.4 
-32.8 

-1.1 
14.9 
12.5 

3.0 
-36.4 
-21.2 

-24.4 
-12.8 
-3.7 
-8.7 

.2 
-22.6 
-1.8 
-9.7 

-14.7 
.0 
52.8 

-23.9 
-22.7 
-19.6 
9.5 

3.9 
-9.6 
1.5 

1.4 
-5.7 

-9.2 
-.8 

27.5 
17.3 
26.6 

1.7 
-15.7 
-6.2 

-10.0 
4.8 
-6.4 
4.4 

-18.4
-25.9
-20.7

-10.0
5.9

-14.5
9.0

-24.0
-23.1
-22.5

-11.9
-39.8
31.0

-31.5
-24.7
-20.4
2.1

Precious metals
Gold  (oz.) 
Silver  (oz.) 

Forest  products

Lumber  (m. bdft.) 
Plywood  (m. sqft.) 

Petroleum

Crude oil  (barrel) 
Gasoline  (gal.) 
Fuel oil  (gal.) 

Livestock

Steers  (cwt.) 
Hogs  (cwt.) 
Broilers  (lb.) 

U.S.  farm crops
Corn  (bu.) 
Wheat  (bu.) 
Soybeans  (bu.) 
Cotton  (lb.) 

other  foodstuffs
Coffee  (lb.) 

Memo:
JOC  Industrials 
JOC Metals 
KR-CRB Futures 
KR-CRB Spot 

1.085 

34.7 

25.4 

-22.0 

-18.4 

-48.3

95.200 
80.900 
202.780 
277.850 

-4.1 
-8.3 
-.1 
.9 

-8.6 
-5.0 
-3.2 
-8.4 

-1.7 
-6.8 
-12.0 
-5.1 

-1.2 
-2.3 
-.1 
-4.6 

-10.2
-18.9
-16.0
-18.1

1.  Changes,  if not  specified, are  from  the last week of  the  preceding year to

the  last week of  the period indicated.
2.  Week of the August Greenbook.

II-42

Commodity  Price  Measures

Journal of Commerce  Index

Ratio scale,  index, 1990=100

KR-CRB  Spot Industrials

Ratio scale, index, 1967=100

KR-CRB  Futures

Ratio scale, index, 1967=100

1998

Metals

Aug. 

Sept.

1998

KR-CRB  Industrials
-
-

301

289

S  1 

Aug 

I 

July 

Sept.

273

1998

KR-CRB Futures

S209

-- 

July 

Aug. 

Sept.

1998

201

193

Note.  Weekly  data, Tuesdays.  Vertical  lines on  small  panels indicate week  of last Greenbook-  The Joumal  of  Commerce  index  is based almost
entirely on  industrial commodities,  with a small  weight given  to energy  commodities,  and the KR-CRB  spot price index  consists entirety of  industrial
commodities, excluding energy.  The  KR-CRB futures index gives about  a 60 percent weight to food commodities  and splits the remaining  weight roughly
equally among  energy commodities,  industrial commodities, and precious  metals.  Copyright for Joural  of Commerce  data  is held  by CIBCR,  1994.

Domestic Nonfinancial Developments

II-43

forest products  not  included  in the  CRB  measure.  Over  the past  year,  the  CRB  futures
index,  which  attracts  a  good  deal  of market  attention,  has  dropped  16 percent;
however,  only  a  small  share  of this  index  reflects  changes  in  industrial  commodities
prices,  and  its  coverage  of industrial  commodities  is narrow--only  copper  and  cotton
are  included.22

Developments  in  Agriculture
Agricultural  prices remain  weak.  The  PPI  for crude  foodstuffs  fell  7-3/4  percent  over
the  twelve  months  ending  in August,  with  over  half of the  decline  occurring  in July

and  August.  The  fall  in prices  came  against  a  backdrop  of favorable  reports  on  the
prospective  harvests  of most food  crops,  increased  levels  of livestock  production,
sluggishness  of  real  agricultural  exports,  and  sizable  increases  in farm  inventories.

In  the  aggregate,  crop  output  this year  probably  is going  to  come  close to

matching  the high  level  of  1997,  despite  a  moderate  cutback  in aggregate  plantings,
several  weeks  of severe  heat  and  drought  across  the  southern  tier  of states  this  past
summer, and  scattered  problems  with  weather  and plant  disease  in the main
agricultural  areas  of the  Midwest.  To  be sure,  the  adverse  weather  in  the  South  did
cut  sharply  into  the  national  output  of some  crops that  are  more heavily  concentrated
in  that  region-the  USDA  is projecting  production  declines  for cotton  and tobacco  of
28  percent  and  14  percent  respectively.  However,  these  losses  appear  to  have  been
offset in  the aggregate  by  increased  production  of the  major  food  commodities-wheat,
corn,  and  soybeans.  National  average  yields  of all  three  crops  are  expected  to be
above their  estimated  long-run  trends  this  year,  and,  according  to  the  Agriculture
Department's  latest  crop  forecasts,  combined  output  of the  three  crops  will  be  up

4  percent  from  that  of last  year.

Livestock  output  also  has  moved up  appreciably  this  year,  probably by  almost
2  percent  overall.  Output  of pork is  registering  an  especially  large  increase--close  to
9  percent  in terms of annual  totals--and  marketings  of other  livestock  products  are
projected  to record  percentage  gains that  are  small  to  moderate.  A  1 percent  gain  in
output now  anticipated  for  beef is notable  mainly  because  it  contrasts  so  sharply  with
earlier  expectations  that  cutbacks  in the size  of the  cattle  herd would  be constraining
the  flow  of product  to  consumers  this year;  the  USDA  has  pushed  back to  1999  its
forecast  of  a big  decline  in the  output  of beef.  By  contrast,  production  gains  have

22.  More  than  half of the  CRB  futures  index  is  made  up  of  food  commodities,  with  the  remaining

weight  divided  among  energy  commodities,  precious  metals,  and  industrial  commodities.

II-44

The  Farm  Sector
(BEA  data)

Crop  Production

Billions  of  chained  (1992) dollars

Livestock Production

-- 

Billions of chained  (1992)  dollars
--- 

100

1998

/

1985  1987  1989  1991 

1993  1995  1997

I 
I 
I 
1985  1987  1989 

I 
I 
1991 

I I 
1993 

I 
I 
I 
1995  1997

I

Note.  Observation  for 1998  is a staff estimate  derived

Note.  Observation for 1998  is a staff estimate derived

from  USDA  commodity  data.

Agricultural  Exports

from  USDA commodity data.

Change  in  Real  Farm  Inventories

Billions of chained  (1992)  dollars

Percent of Gross  Farm  Output

1985  1987  1989  1991  1993  1995  1997

1985  1987  1989  1991  1993  1995  1997

Domestic Nonfinancial Developments

II-45

been  smaller  than  usual  for  milk  and  poultry--two  farm  products  that  have  been  among
the  few  to  experience  rising  prices  this  year.

Farm  exports  surged  for a  time  during  the  first  half of the  1990s;  but  gains
have  been  slow  since  about  1995,  and,  according  to preliminary  NIPA  data  for the
second  quarter,  farm  export  volume  has not  grown  at  all  this  past year.  Exports  of
some  key  products--notably  the  grains--have  dropped  sharply  since  the  mid-1990s.  By
contrast,  shipments  of meats  and  poultry  have  continued  to  move  up,  although  the

gains  this  year  will  apparently  be  smaller that those  of recent  years.  The sluggishness
of farm  exports  overall  is primarily  a  reflection  of the  economic  problems  in Asia,  the
region that  U.S.  producers  had  been  counting  on  most heavily  for market  expansion.

Farm  inventories  changed  little,  on net,  from  the  end of  1989  to the  end  of

1995,  as  temporary  spells  of  accumulation  during  that period  tended to  be followed  in
fairly  quick  succession  by spells  of decumulation.  The  past  three  years,  however,  have
brought  a  more  sustained  period  of stockbuilding.  According  to the  NIPA  data,  nearly
3  percent  of all  farm  output  in  1996  and  1997  went  into  inventories,  and  a  large  share
of this year's  output  also  seems  to be  headed  for the  storage  bin.  The  USDA's
September  update  of its  crop  forecasts  indicates that  the  combined  stocks  of  wheat,
corn,  and  soybeans  at  the  end  of  the  current  marketing  year will  be  the  largest  since
the  late  1980s,  when  big  inventory  overhangs  that had  accumulated  earlier in that
decade  finally  were  worked off.

Clearly,  this inventory  build is  not  sustainable.  However,  the  manner  in  which

the  buildup  will  eventually  be  halted  and  current  excesses  worked  down  is not  so
obvious.  The  best  alternative,  of course,  would  be  the  renewal  of a  healthy  uptrend  in
real  farm  exports.  Absent  that,  domestic  producers  will  need  to  adjust  output  to  a
level  that  is more  in line  with  scaled-down  prospects  for  demand.  In the  past,  such
adjustments typically  were  coordinated  by  the  federal  government,  which  provided
inducements  to  farmers  to  take  acreage  out  of production  when  stocks  seemed  to be
growing  excessively  large.  But those  policy  options  were  eliminated  by the  Freedom
to Farm  Act,  and the  history  of recent  decades  offers  little  guidance  for judging  how
quickly  farmers  might  act  to adjust  production  in  the  absence  of government  supply
If next year's  early  reports  on planting  intentions  do  not  show  significant
controls. 
acreage  adjustments--and  if exports  are  still  looking  sluggish--pressures  on  the federal
government  to re-establish  some  form  of supply  control  in  agriculture  almost  surely
will  intensify.

Even  apart  from  the  possibility  of renewed  supply  management  and  the  costs  it

might  entail,  federal  spending  on  agriculture  will  likely be  increasing  over  the  near

II-46 

Part 2: Recent Developments, September 23,  1998

term.  For  example,  farmers  still have  the  option of  taking  out  loans  from  the
Commodity  Credit  Corporation  to  aid in  the  financing  of  inventories,  and  these  loans
will  likely  be  used  more  heavily  than  in  other  recent  years.  So-called  loan  deficiency
payments,  which  are  linked  to  the  CCC  loan  programs,  also  are  kicking  in  at  present
because  market  prices  have  dropped  below  the  specified  levels  that trigger  those
payments.  In the  1999  fiscal  year, farmers  also  will  have  the  option  of receiving  their
"production  flexibility  payments"  at  an  earlier  date  than previously  had  been

scheduled;  these  payments,  amounting  to several  billion  dollars  per  year,  are  made
annually  over the  seven-year  period  covered  by the Freedom  to Farm  legislation.
Other policy  actions  to  aid farmers  seem to have  substantial  support  in  Congress  and
from  the  Administration,  and  a  number  of proposals  are  currently  under  discussion.

DOMESTIC  FINANCIAL
DEVELOPMENTS

III-T-1
Selected  Financial Market Quotations
(One-day  quotes in  percent except as noted)

1997 

1998 

Change to Sept. 22 from
selected  dates (percentage  points)

Instrument 

Sept. 30 

Dec.  31 

FOMC* 
Aug.  18 

Sept. 22 

Sept.  30 

Dec.  31 

FOMC*
Aug.  18

Short-term
Federal  funds

FOMC  intended  rate 
Realized rate 

Treasury  bills 2
3-month 
6-month 
1-year 

Commercial paper

1-month 
3-month 

Large negotiable  CDs 2

1-month 
3-month 
6-month 

Eurodollar deposits 3

1-month 
3-month 

Bank prime rate 

Intermediate- and long-term
U.S.  Treasury (constant maturity)

2-year 
10-year 
30-year 

U.S.  Treasury  10-year indexed  note 

Municipal revenue  (Bond Buyer) 4  

Corporate bonds, Moody's seasoned  Baa 

High-yield corporate  5 

Home mortgages  (FHLMC survey  rate) 6

30-year fixed 
1-year adjustable 

5.50 
5.51 

4.93 
5.08 
5.18 

5.51 
5.48 

5.59 
5.67 
5.72 

5.56 
5.63 

8.50 

5.80 
6.12 
6.41 

3.61 

5.63 

7.66 

9.02 

7.28 
5.51 

5.50 
5.44 

5.22 
5.23 
5.22 

5.65 
5.57 

5.65 
5.72 
5.74 

5.63 
5.72 

8.50 

5.66 
5.75 
5.93 

3.70 

5.40 

7.28 

9.06 

6.99 
5.53 

5.50 
5.55 

4.93 
4.98 
4.98 

5.50 
5.48 

5.57 
5.59 
5.62 

5.50 
5.56 

8.50 

5.34 
5.40 
5.56 

3.82 

5.34 

7.14 

9.53 

6.91 
5.60 

5.50 
5.48 

4.69 
4.69 
4.50 

5.51 
5.32 

5.56 
5.43 
5.34 

5.44 
5.38 

8.50 

4.66 
4.73 
5.16 

3.65 

5.20 

7.08 

10.59 

6.66 
5.43 

.00 
-.03 

-.24 
-.39 
-.68 

.00 
-.16 

-.03 
-.24 
-.38 

-.12 
-.25 

.00 

-1.14 
-1.39 
-1.25 

.04 

-.43 

-.58 

1.57 

-.62 
-.08 

.00 
.04 

-.53 
-.54 
-.72 

-.14 
-.25 

-.09 
-.29 
-.40 

-.19 
-.34 

.00 

-1.00 
-1.02 
-.77 

-.05 

-.20 

-.20 

1.53 

-.33 
-.10 

.00
-.07

-.24
-.29
-.48

.01
-.16

-.01
-.16
-.28

-.06
-.18

.00

-.68
-.67
-.40

-.17

-. 14

-.06

1.06

-.25
-.17

Record high 

1997 

1998 

Change  to Sept. 22
from selected  dates (percent)

Stock exchange index 

Dow-Jones  Industrial 
S&P  500  Composite 
NASDAQ  (OTC) 
Russell  2000 
Wilshire 5000 

Level 

Date 

Dec.  31 

9,337.97 
1,186.75 
2,014.25 
491.41 
11,106.10 

7-17-98 
7-17-98 
7-20-98 
4-21-98 
7-17-98 

7,908.25 
970.43 
1,570.35 
437.02 
9,298.19 

FOMC* 
Aug.  18 

8,574.85 
1,083.67 
1,818.04 
403.96 
10,064.79 

Sept. 22 

7,897.20 
1,029.63 
1,697.80 
368.24 
9,452.79 

Record 
high 

-15.43 
-13.24 
-15.71 
-25.06 
-14.89 

Dec. 31 

-.14 
6.10 
8.12 
-15.74 
1.66 

FOMC*
Aug.  18

-7.90
-4.99
-6.61
-8.84
-6.08

1. Average for two-week reserve maintenance  period ending on or before date shown.  Most  recent

observation is average  for  current maintenance period  to date.

2.  Secondary market.
3.  Bid rates for Eurodollar deposits  collected around 9:30 a.m.  Eastern  time.
4.  Most recent Thursday quote.
5.  Merrill Lynch Master II high-yield  bond index  composite.
6.  For week ending Friday  previous  to date shown.
*  Data are  as of the close on  August 17,  1998.

Selected  Interest Rates

Percent
--

i  6.5

Federal  Funds 
-  
Daly 

FOMC 
Aug.  18

Percent

-

Selected  Short-Term  Interest Rates

Statement Week Averages

Federal  fundsli

.

I 

*
*5 
.;
-
*..". 

*.l*% 
* 

*« 
*::~  .- ;;** 
i~.s
: 

*  * 

: 

5' 

5-i/ 

.r4*J 

1 

Ii

* 

; 

* 

*5

-

y' 

.

r

-/ 

1. 
\ 

i 

\ 

%PA

A

Jul. 31 

Sep. 22

Note. Vertical lnes  indicate and  of reserve  erflod.

3-Month Treasury  Bills  Percent

8

7

6

5

I
Discount  Rate

3-month  Treasury bills

--  4.5

I  I 

I  I I  I  I  I  I  I  i  I I  I I 

tr I  ~ 

l 

I 

I

II 

1997 

1998

Selected  Long-Term  Interest Rates 

Percent

Weekly
friday 
"-.. 

... 

Corporate bonds

'*..  Moody's  Baa

*..."" 

... .* 
'* 
Treasury bonds* 
30-year constant maturity 

*.  .*..

*" *..

'.... 

"-.

Jul. 31

Weeldy

FOMC
Aug. 18

S

ep. 22

Pe

rcent

8.0

Corporate
**........

........

- *

S7.5

7.0

-6.5

-6.0

-5.5

* 5 .0

Sep. 18

Percent

Municipal bo* 
Bond  Buyer Revenue
(Thursday)

.

.

-

30-Yr. Trea

I
Iury 

.
, 

, 

.

. .

. .

, 
1997

.

.

.
1998

Selected  Mortgage  Rates

SWeeidy
Friday

.

, 

, 

.

I 

' 

'

Municipal

Jul. 31

Deilvhirquenow

Weeldy

FOMC
Aug.  18

FRM

-'141*

" 

ARM

." 

.. 

********. 

. *

ARM

I 

|  I  I 

I 

I 

I  | 
it 

t 

S 

I 

I 

I 

I  I  I  I  I 

I

1997

1998

* 

J  I 

I 

Jul. 31

l 

I * 

I
I 

I

Se.. . 1

Sep.  18

Domestic  Financial Developments

Overview
An  intensification  of  concerns  about  the  global  economy  has  triggered  substantial
declines  in the  values  of risk  assets  in  recent  weeks.  In  volatile  trading,  major equity
indexes  have  fallen  between  5  percent  and  9  percent  since the  August  FOMC  meeting,
with  financial  sector stocks  taking  especially  large  hits.  Yield spreads  on  a  broad
range  of debt  securities  have  widened  appreciably  relative to  Treasuries,  owing to  the
heightened  preference  for safety  and  liquidity.  Even  among  Treasury  securities,
investors  have  shown  a  marked  preference  for liquidity,  bidding  the  prices  of "on-the-
run"  securities  up notably  relative  to  "off-the-run"  issues.  The  search  for a  safe  haven
--and the  widespread  view  that deteriorating  prospects for  world  growth  will  prompt
the  Federal Reserve  to ease  over  coming  months--has pushed  down  Treasury  yields  as
much  as  2/3  percentage  point over  the  intermeeting  period.  Indeed,  the  entire
Treasury  yield  curve  has moved  far  below  the  5.5 percent  federal  funds rate,  with the
thirty-year  bond  rate  at  one point  in recent  days  touching  a  low  of 5.04  percent.

Although  bond  yields  have  risen  absolutely  only for  lower-rated  corporate

credits,  the  recent market  turbulence  has  disrupted  long-term  debt  issuance  along  a
broad  front  during  the past  several  weeks.  The  volume  of investment-grade  offerings
has  fallen  markedly  since  the  second  week of August,  and high-yield  issuance has
virtually  ceased.  New  issuance  has dried  up  in the  equity  markets  as  well.  Not
surprisingly,  many  firms  with  urgent financing  needs  have  turned  to the  commercial
paper  and bank  loan  markets.  The  monetary  aggregates  have  reflected  the
corresponding  expansion  of bank credit  and the tendency  of retail  investors  to  seek
refuge  in  money  market  funds.

Amid  the turmoil,  bank  loan  officers  have  become  more  cautious  in recent
weeks,  reportedly  tightening  underwriting  standards  and terms on  commercial  and
industrial  loans;  spreads  on syndicated  loans, especially  for lower-rated borrowers,

evidently  have  widened  appreciably.  Moreover,  financing  for  commercial  real restate

transactions  from  all  major  sources  has  been  curtailed.

Household  sector  borrowing  has  continued to  be sizable,  largely  fueled  by
increases  in mortgage  debt;  with the  drop  in mortgage rates  to  a  new  cyclical  low,
another  surge  in applications  for  refinancing  is now  under  way.  Despite  generally
positive  indicators  of household  credit  quality,  increased  investor  caution  has
reportedly  caused  a  substantial  falloff  in sales  of securitized  subprime  loans,  likely

prompting  more sober  lending  postures  among  originators.

GROSS  ISSUANCE OF SECURITIES BY U.S.  CORPORATIONS
(Billions of  dollars;  monthly rates,  not  seasonally adjusted)

Part 2: Recent  Developments. September 23,  1998

Type of  security 

1996 

1997 

Q1 

Q2 

June 

July 

Aug.

1998

All  U.S.  corporations 

Stocks 1  
Bonds 

Nonfinancial  corporations
Stocks i  

Initial  public offerings 
Seasoned offerings 

Bonds 

By rating,  sold in U.S. 2

Investment  grade 
Speculative  grade 

Public 
Rule  144A 

rinancial  corporations
Stocks i  
Bonds 

58.4 
10.2 
48.2 

69.7 
9.8 
59.9 

94.3 
12.7 
81.6 

97.0 
14.8 
82.2 

109.4 
17.1 
92.3 

72.5 
9.4 
63.1 

59.3
3.5
55.8

6.7 
2.9 
3.8 

5.0 
1.8 
3.2 

6.1 
1.2 
4.8 

8.4 
3.6 
7.0 

10.2 
6.1 
11.1 

6.1 
2.6 
6.8 

2.5
1.0
2.5

12.4 

17.0 

27.2 

26.8 

23.5 

21.2 

18.6

6.3 
4.8 
2.3 
2.5 

7.4 
8.0 
1.5 
6.5 

13.1 
12.6 
2.1 
10.5 

10.7 
14.3 
3.0 
11.3 

11.5 
11.1 
4.5 
6.6 

12.9 
6.9 
2.3 
4.6 

10.5
3.0
.6
2.4

3.5 
35.8 

4.8 
42.6 

6.6 
54.3 

6.4 
55.3 

6.9 
68.8 

3.3 
41.4 

1.1
35.5

Kemo
Net  issuance  of  commercial
paper, nonfinancial  corporations 3  
Change in  C&I  loans  at
commercial  banks3  

-. 1 

5.3 

1.1 

6.2 

4.5 

3.4 

.5 

7.6 

9.0 

11.3 

3.0 

5.2 

11.9

12.3

Note. Components may not  sum to  totals because  of  rounding. These
data  include  speculative-grade  bonds  issued privately under Rule  144A.
All  other private placements  are  excluded.  Total reflects  gross  proceeds
rather than par value  of  original discount bonds.

1.  Excludes  equity issues  associated with equity-for-equity swaps that have

occurred in restructurings.

2.  Bonds  categorized according to Moody's  bond ratings,  or to  Standard &  Poor's

if unrated by Moody's.  Excludes mortgage-backed  and asset-backed bonds.

3. End-of-period basis.  Seasonally adjusted.

Corporate Bond  Yields  and Spreads

Yields

Percent

Spreads

Percent

1990

1992 

1994 

1996 

1998

1990 

1992 

1994 

1996 

1998

"Rate  over 7-year  Treasury
"Rate  over 30-year Treasury

Domestic Financial Developments

With  the  federal  government  headed  for a  sizable  surplus in  FY1998,  the

Treasury  will make  a third-quarter  paydown  of debt  for the first  time  in twenty-five
years.  The  credit  quality  of states and  localities  remains  strong,  and these  units have
continued  to borrow  considerable  amounts  to finance  capital  outlays  and to refund
higher-cost  debt.

Business  Finance
Bond  issuance  by  nonfinancial  businesses  nearly  halted in  late  August,  and  conditions
have  remained  difficult in  September.  Yield  spreads  of existing  issues  over  Treasuries
have  widened  sharply,  especially  for  "junk" bonds.  Despite  sizable  declines  in
Treasury  yields, the  level  of  investment-grade  yields has  fallen  only  a  little  since  the
August FOMC,  and a  broad index  of yields  on  speculative-grade  issues  actually  has
risen  about  100 basis  points.  The jump  in junk-bond  yields reflects  some  greater
concerns  about  credit  quality,  but  also  the  reluctance  of investors  to hold  these
securities--which  offer  very  limited liquidity--at  a  time  of heightened  uncertainty.

Given  the  inhospitable  conditions  in the capital  markets,  higher-quality  firms

have  tapped the  commercial  paper market,  boosting  issuance  in  that market
considerably  in August  and  the first  half of  September.  In the  speculative-grade
sector,  where  only  one  borrower  has  sold  debt in  volume  since  mid-August,
commercial  paper  issuance  is  not  a  ready  alternative.  Instead,  lower-quality  borrowers
tend to  substitute  for  market  financing  by  turning  to bank loans,  but those  businesses
that have  attempted to  do  so  in recent  weeks  likely  found  tighter  credit standards  and
terms--as  suggested  by early  information  from  the special  Senior  Loan  Officer  Opinion
Survey.'  The  banks that  reported  having  tightened  attributed  their  actions  to  a  less
favorable  economic  outlook,  a  worsening  in industry-specific  problems,  and a  reduced
tolerance  for risk.  Further  evidence  of a  shift in banks'  lending  attitudes  can  be found
in  the  syndicated  loan  market, where  lenders  have  reportedly  been pulling  back from
new  credits  and spreads  on  lower-quality  loans have  widened  a  good  bit.

Although  concerns  about  the  economic  outlook  are prompting  a reassessment

of default  risks  in some  sectors,  Moody's  downgraded,  on net,  only  a small  amount  of
nonfinancial  debt  in August  and  the first  half of September.  Moreover,  its
Watchlist--a  more  timely  indicator  of credit  quality--still points  to  a small net  upgrade
of nonfinancial  debt in the near  term,  though some  financial  institutions  have  been  put
on watch  for downgrading.  With business  activity  strong  to date,  the  actual  default

1. The  full results  from  the September  loan  officer survey  will  be included  in  the  Greenbook

supplement  to be  published at the  end  of the week.

Credit  Quality, Stock Market  Prices, and  Corporate  Earnings

Part 2: Recent Developments, September 23,  1998

Default  Rates  of Outstanding
Corporate  Junk Bonds

Percent

Annual

Jan.-Aug.

I 

I 

i 
1986 

I 

I 

I 

I 
1990 

I 

1 

I 
I 
1994

_

1-99
1998

Note. Jan.-Aug. observation at an annual  rate.

S&P 500 Volatility
(Implied  by Call Options)

Percent

Rating Changes
by Moody's

Billions of dollars

-

500

H1  - 400
- 300

- 200

1000
100
f  200

Jul.-Sept.  14

- 300

- 400

S500

es

1990 

1992 

1994 

1996 

1998

Note.  1998 observations at an annual rate.

Stock Indexes

Percent change  to Sept. 22 from
selected  dates

Last 
EMC' 

Record  Year-end
high 
1997

-8 

-5 

-7 

-9 

-28 

-15 

-13 

-16 

-25 

-40 

0

6

8

-16

-20

1. DJIA

2.  S&P 500
3. Nasdaq
4. Russell 2000
5. Money Center

Banks

I  *From Aug.  17 close.

Analysts' Forecasts  of Growth  in
S&P  500 Earnings per Share

Forward  Earnings-Price  Ratio
against  30-year Treasury Yield

Percent

1997 

1998

Forecast  Period

1997:Q3  1997:Q4
1998:03  1998.04

Date  of forecast:

1. Mid July 
2. Mid  August 
3. September  11 

7.1 
4.3 
-1.1 

12.3
10.9
9.1

Monthly

S&P 500 forward  earnings-price ratio*

10

Sept.  22

Source. I/B/E/S.

I 

Real 30-year Treasury yield"
It 

II 

I 

I  II 

I 

1  0

1984  1986  1988  1990  1992  1994  1996  1998
'Based  on  /B/E/S operating  earnings  aver coming  12  months.
"Nominal  yield  less  Philadelphia  Fed ten-year inflation  expectations.

Domestic Financial Developments

rate  on  corporate  debt  is well below  its  average  level  over  the past  decade,  and  the
business  failure  rate remains  at its  lowest  level  in ten years.

Gross  equity  issuance  also  came to  a  near halt  in recent  weeks,  leaving  its

volume  for August  and  so far  in  September  well below  the  pace  earlier  this year.  At
the  same  time,  both equity  retirements  and announcements  of share  buyback programs
have  remained  strong.  Despite the extreme  volatility  in  equity  markets,  several

pending  merger  deals  have  been  completed  since  the August  FOMC  meeting.
Nonetheless,  if the  prospects  for  future  corporate  earnings  continue to  deteriorate,  the
long list  of still-pending  deals may  shorten  as  firms  reevaluate  their  strategic
alternatives  or  as  financing for  cash-payment  deals becomes  less  readily  available.

Equity  prices  declined  further  over  the intermeeting  period  amid  outsized  daily
swings.  During  the first  week  of September,  both volume  and  the  implied  one-month

volatility  derived  from  S&P  500  option  prices jumped  to  extremely  high  levels.  Since
then, the  market  has  partially  reversed  the  late-August  losses,  but implied  volatility  has
remained  elevated,  suggesting  that  investors  continue  to be  highly  uncertain  about
events  going  forward.  The DJIA,  S&P 500,  and  NASDAQ  indexes have  declined
between  5  and  8 percent  since the  last FOMC  meeting  and  are  13  to  16  percent  below
the  record  highs  posted  in July.  The  Russell  2000  index  of smaller-capitalization
firms has  fallen  a  bit more than  large-cap  stocks  since  mid-August,  continuing  to
underperform  broader  indexes.  Financial  sector  stocks  have  been hit  especially  hard
over  the  intermeeting  period--some  losing  close  to half their  value  since the  July
highs--as  several  banks  and  securities  firms  have  announced  substantial  losses  owing
to  exposure,  direct  or indirect, to  Russian  and other  emerging  markets,  and as  investors
have  worried  about additional  losses.

Company  analysts have  been  marking  down  their  estimates  of third-quarter
operating  earnings  per share  for  S&P  500 firms--and  by more  than  is customary  as the
quarter-end  approaches.  On the  basis  of data  through  the third  week  of September,
earnings  growth  over the year ended  in the third  quarter  is projected  to be  slightly
negative,  well  below  the  7  percent  growth  projected  for  that  period  as  recently  as
mid-July.  Revisions  have  been  concentrated  in  the  energy  and financial  sectors.
Extending  a  pattern  observed  since  the beginning  of the  year,  analysts  have  only
slightly  revised  their  earnings  growth  forecasts  beyond the  current  quarter;  the  latest
surveys indicate  that  a major  resurgence  of  earnings is  expected  in  1999.

The  supply  of finance  for  commercial  real estate  has  tightened  dramatically  in
recent  months.  Share  prices of real  estate  investment  trusts,  which  dropped  6  percent
over the  second  quarter,  have  shed  an  additional  10-1/2  percent  since  then;  the  office

Part 2:  Recent  Developments, September  23,  1998

REIT  Equity Prices and  Issuance

REIT Gross  Equity Issuance 

Billions of Dollars

Quarterly

Price Indexes

Index (January 1997  =  100) 

F End  of month

. S&P  500 
-

S*.  '. 

SSept. 22

.

-

-

-

All  REiTs

Sept. 22

150

140

130

120

110

100

- 90

- 80

L'  1  70 

1997 

1998

1996 

.

1997 

1998

Source.  National Association  of Real  Estate  Investment Trusts.

Note. 1998:Q3  is staff estimate.

Source. National Association of Real Estate  Investment Trusts.

Interest Rates on CMBS  Less
10-year Treasury Yield 

.

End of month

S- 

BBB-rated 

-

AAA-rated

CMBS  Spreads

and  Issuance

CMBS  Gross Issuance 

Billions of  Dollars

F  Quarterly

Basis points

-

250

225

Sept. 11

S200

-

175

-150

SSept.  11

S125

100

75

I 

i1 

| 

I  t 

I 

1 
i 

i 
I 

1994 

1995

Source.  Morgan  Stanley.

lirtpI 
i  ti  50
1998

1997 

1996 

1997

1998

Note.  1998:03 is staff estimate.
Source. Commerical  Mortgage  Alert

Domestic Financial Developments

and hotel  sectors  have  been particularly  hard hit.  Although  vacancy  rates remain  low
and  rental  income  growth strong,  investors  fear  that  construction  already  in  the
pipeline  will  weigh  on  earnings  in  the future.

In  this  environment,  REITs have  about  stopped  issuing shares.  Press  reports
suggest that  bank  financing  for REITs also has  been  less  readily  available  in the  past
few  months.  Reflecting  the more  limited  availability  of funding,  REIT  acquisitions  of
properties  slowed  markedly  in August,  with the  value  of purchases  less  than  half the
average  rate  from  January  through  July.

The issuance  of commercial  mortgage-backed  securities  also  has  slowed
sharply  from  the robust  first-half pace.  Yields  rose  markedly  in  August  for both the
investment-grade  and speculative-grade  tranches  of these  securities.  Thus  far  in
September,  investment-grade  yields  have  reversed  last month's  rise,  but yields  on
lower-rated  tranches  have continued  to rise.  Across  the  entire  quality  range,  spreads
on CMBS  relative  to Treasury  securities  are  at their  highest  levels  since  1995.
Moreover,  despite  the  decline  in investment-grade  yields,  many  Wall  Street  conduits
have  been  left  holding  large  pools  of mortgages  originated  in the  spring  and early
summer  that  cannot  be profitably  securitized  at  current  CMBS yields.2  As  a result,
there  are  reports  of  conduits backing  out  of deals  that  correspondents  had arranged  but
not  closed,  and in  the  last  week  of August  many correspondents  stopped  quoting rates
to  borrowers  altogether.  Initial  reports  for September  suggest  that these  lenders  have
still not reentered  the market.

Household  Sector  Finance
Household  balance  sheets  have  deteriorated  considerably  during the  third  quarter.  The
ratio  of household  net  worth  to income  fell  noticeably,  primarily  because  of the
decline  in equity  prices.  Since  the end of the  second  quarter,  the  decline  is estimated
to have trimmed  about  $700 billion  from  the value  of households'  directly  held
equities  and  $500  billion  from  the  value  of assets  held  indirectly,  primarily  in mutual
funds  and pension  funds.

2. Conduits  are firms  that  facilitate  the  origination  and  securitization  of  mortgages;  they usually  rely

on one  or  more correspondents,  often  banks,  to originate  the  loans, and  they provide  the  underwriting
standards  for the  loans  and  issue  the securities.  Conduits  such  as  Lehman  Brothers,  Morgan  Stanley,
and  Capital  America  (formerly  Nomura  Securities)  are  among  the largest  issuers  of CMBS.

Loans  originated  for  securitization  are  usually  securitized  two  to  six months  after they  are
originated.  The securitizer,  typically  a  Wall  Street conduit,  warehouses  the  loans  after origination  and
bears  the interest rate  risk.

g 

Part 2:  Recent Developments, September  23,  1998

Household  Net  Worth  Relative  to Disposable  Personal  Income
(Quarterly,  seasonally adjusted)

Ratio

1970 

P.  Staff projection.

1977 

1984 

1991 

1998

Net  New  Flows  into Mutual  Funds
(Billions of dollars; quarterly  and  annual  data  at  monthly rate)

1996 

1997 

Q1 

Q2 

Jul. 

Aug.e 

1998 

Memo:
End  of July

Asset 
level 

Liquidity
ratio1

Total  Mutual  Funds 

30.8 

36.2 

60.9 

37.8 

60.1 

46.6 

5,179 

n.a.

Equity Funds 

Domestic 
International 

Hybrid Funds 

Bond  Funds 
International 
High-yield 
Other Taxable 
Municipals 

18.0 
14.1 
4.0 

1.0 

0.2 
-0.2 
1.0 
-0.1 
-0.5 

19.0 
15.8 
3.1 

20.5 
18.8 
1.6 

21.7 
18.3 
3.4 

19.3 
15.2 
4.1 

-11.5 
-6.2 
-5.2 

2,814 
2,399 
415 

1.4 

2.4 
-0.1 
1.4 
1.0 
0.1 

2.3 

7.3 
0.0 
2.5 
3.7 
1.2 

1.1 

5.7 
-0.0 
1.1 
3.3 
1.3 

1.1 

7.0 
0.1 
1.9 
4.0 
1.0 

-0.7 

7.4 
-0.3 
-3.0 
7.0 
3.8 

356 

792 
26 
124 
359 
283 

5.1
4.7
7.4

6.8

3.3
7.6
4.8
4.0
2.8

Money  Market  Funds  11.5 

13.5 

30.9 

9.3 

32.7 

51.4 

1,217 

100.0

1.  Ratio of liquid assets  to total  net assets.
e  Staff estimates.  Money  market flow Is data.
Source.  Investment Company  Institute (ICI).  Data are not  seasonally adjusted.

Domestic Financial Developments

Although  the  drop  in  equity  prices  caused  most  of the  "rebalancing"  of

portfolios,  households  recently  took some  measured  actions  to shift  their  financial
holdings  into  other types  of assets.  Shareholders  pulled  more  than  $11  billion  from
equity  mutual  funds  in  August  and  almost $1  billion  from  hybrid  funds.3  Preliminary
data  provided  by the  ICI  on  a  confidential  basis  indicate  that  equity  fund  flows  turned

positive  in the  first half of  September,  but  the  rate  of inflow  was only  about  half of

that  posted earlier  this year.  In  contrast, bond  funds  and,  especially,  money  market

funds  have  received  strong  inflows  recently.  Among  bond  funds,  households

reallocated  assets  from  global  and high-yield  bond  funds  into  less-risky  government

and investment-grade  corporate  bond  funds.

Based  on data through  mid-September,  household  debt  is  estimated  to have

grown  moderately  in the  third  quarter,  with its mortgage  component  increasing  at  an

almost 9  percent  annual  rate  and  consumer  credit  expanding  at  only  a  3  percent  pace.

Mortgage  debt  has been  fueled by  low  and  declining  mortgage  rates  and  brisk home

sales.  Applications  for  mortgage  refinancing  have  surged  in recent  weeks,  and

confidential  data from Freddie  Mac  show  that 37  percent  of its mortgage  refinancings

in  July  (the latest  month  available)  involved  some  cashing  out  of equity.  The  growth

of consumer  credit  has  likely  been  restrained  somewhat  by paydowns  financed  by

home  equity  loans  and  cash-out mortgage  refinancings.

In  general,  recently  released  data on  household  credit  quality  remain  good.

Call  Report  data indicate that the  delinquency  rate  on overall  consumer  loans  in the

second  quarter  remained  close  to where  it has been  for more  than a  year.  Similarly,

the  Call Report  delinquency  rate on credit  card  accounts  was  about  unchanged  in the

second  quarter,  while  the  rate  calculated  by  the  ABA  rose  slightly.  In  contrast,

Moody's reported  that the  delinquency  rate  on credit  card  accounts  in  securitized  pools

fell  in July--its  eighth  straight  monthly  decline.  According  to  the  MBA,  the  home
mortgage  delinquency  rate edged  down  in the  second  quarter,  and auto  finance

companies  reported  that  delinquencies  dropped  in July,  to a  level  well  below  the

second-quarter  average.

Despite  favorable  readings  on  household  credit  quality,  investors  appear  to be

more  reluctant  to add asset-backed  securities  to  their  portfolios,  presumably  reflecting

3. These  outflows  represented  less than one-half percent  of the  assets  of equity and hybrid  funds.  On

average,  these  mutual  funds had more-than-adequate  liquidity  to cover  these  redemptions,  as shown  in
the table.  Households  also  shifted  a small  portion  of their  assets  held in  self-directed  pension  plans.
Data  from an  industry  report  on 401(k) pension  plans  indicate  that accountholders  transferred  some  of
their  assets from  equities  to  fixed-income  instruments  in August,  but these  transfers  represented  only
about  1 percent of assets  in the  surveyed  plans.

Part 2: Recent Developments,  September 23,  1998

Household  Debt Growth
(Quarterly, seasonally adjusted annual  rate) 

Percent
Percent

1970 

1977 

P. Staff projection.

1984 

1991 

1998

MBA  Mortgage  Purchase  Application Index
(Seasonally  adjusted  by Board  staff)

Weekly

Index
4-week moving average

March  16,  1990 = 100

..  ;  j Sept.

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998

MBA Mortgage  Refinancing Application Index
(Seasonally  adjusted  by Board  staff)

March  16,1990=100

Weekly

2500

2000

1500

1000

500

1993 

1994

1995 

1996 

1997

1998

Domestic Financial Developments 

1I

Consumer  Loan  Delinquency  Rates  at Commercial  Banks
(Seasonally adjusted,  end  of quarter)

Call Report

American  Bankers Association

Percent

Percent

1983 

1986

1989 

1992 

1995 

1998

1983 

1986  '  1989 

1992 

1995 

1998

SBreak in series between  1986 and 1987.

Yield Spreads  on  Aaa-Rated  Asset-Backed  Securities

Basis points

Weekly

Home  Equity  Loans

Sept  18

Credit Cards

t 

i 

l 

i 

t 

i 

l 

i 

t 

i 

l 

i 

l 

l 

l 

l 

l 

t 

i 

l 

l 

i 

l 

l 

i 

f 

l 

i 

l 

l 

i 

l 

l 

i 

1 

1 

1 

1

1 

i.. 

1 

= 

1 

....................

1 

1 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

Note. Spreads on 2-year fixed-rate issues relative to comparable  Treasuries.
Source.  Salomon  Smith  Barney.

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998

220

200

180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

Part 2: Recent Developments, September 23,  1998

Treasury and Agency  Finance

Treasury Financing
(Billions  of dollars)

1997 

1998

Item

Total  surplus, deficit  -) 

-39.7 

-30.2 

136.9 

51.1 

-24.1 

-11.2

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

June 

July 

August

Means  of financing deficit
Net borrowing 

Nonmarketable 
Marketable 

Bills 
Coupons 

Decrease  in  cash balance 

Other' 

MEMO
Cash  balance,  end  of period 

33.7 
15.8 
17.9 
14.4 
3.5 

11.7 

-5.7 

25.9 
17.3 
8.6 
4.1 
4.6 

4.3 

.0 

-81.8 
15.9 
-97.7 
-78.8 
-18.9 

-12.6 
4.5 
-17.1 
-6.7 
-10.4 

-44.6 

-36.1 

-16.4 
2.5 
-18.9 
-3.0 
-15.9 

36.2 

34.0
.3
33.7
38.3
-4.7

-.4

-10.5 

-2.3 

4.2 

-22.5

31.9 

27.6 

72.3 

72.3 

36.1 

36.4

NOTE. Components  may not sum to totals because  of rounding.
1. Direct loan  financing, accrued items,  checks  issued less checks paid, and other  transactions.
n.a. Not available.

Net Cash Borrowing of  Government-Sponsored  Enterprises
(Billions of dollars)

Agency

FHLBs 
FHLMC 
FNMA 
Farm Credit Banks 
SLMA 

1998

Q I 

4.0 
24.1 
11.3 
-1.2 
-1.4 

Q2 

June 

July 

August

10.5 
7.0 
25.1 
2.4 
-3.1 

6.4 
-4.4 
6.7 
1.0 
-2.7 

-.5 
8.5 
9.0 
-.2 
n.a. 

6.5
5.0
8.0
-6.6
n.a.

NOTE.  Excludes mortgage pass-through  securities issued by FNMA  and

FHLMC.

Domestic Financial Developments

less  tolerance  for risk  and  a  desire  for  greater  liquidity.  Spreads  have  widened,  and
industry  contacts  indicate  that  lower-quality  issues  and  tranches  have  become  more
difficult  to  place  with  investors.  The  demand for  assets  backed  by high  loan-to-value
home  equity  loans  has fallen  off especially  sharply,  and new  deals  have been  sparse  in
the  past  few  weeks.  Some subprime  lenders  have  responded  to  the  scarcity  of
investors  by  securing  buyer  commitments  before  making  loans,  while  others  have
scaled  back their  issuance.

Federal  Government  Finance

The  budget  position  of the  U.S.  Treasury  continued  to  improve  during  the  intermeeting
period.  However,  even  as  it has  paid  down  debt,  the Treasury  stepped  up  weekly  bill
auction  sizes  by $3  billion  recently,  from  the  low  $13  billion level  that  had prevailed
since  April.  This  increase,  while  larger  than  we  expected,  follows up  on the
Treasury's  stated  intent to expand  the  supply  of short-dated  debt;  the  weekly  auctions
will  be  split evenly,  with  $8  billion  each  of thirteen-  and twenty-six-week  bills.  The
Treasury  also  plans  to  raise  about  $8  billion  in  October through a  ten-year  indexed
note  auction  and  is expected  to  announce  in the next few  months  a  regular schedule  of
quarterly  indexed  offerings  for  1999  and beyond.

The  Treasury's  new  indexed  savings  bonds,  I-bonds,  became  available  this

month  in  several  denominations  from  $50  to $5,000.  The bonds  have  no fixed
maturity,  but  cease  earning  interest  after  thirty  years  and incur  a  penalty  if cashed
before  five  years.  The bonds  pay a  fixed  rate  set by the  Treasury  every  six  months,
plus  an  inflation  premium based  on  changes  in the  CPI-U  over  a  six-month  period.
The  current  fixed  rate,  valid for  the  life of the  bond, is  3.40  percent,  and the  current
inflation  compensation  brings the  nominal  return  on the bond  to  an  annualized
4.66  percent.

Mounting  pressures  on international  financial  markets  have  accelerated  the

decline  in foreign  official  holdings  of U.S.  Treasury  securities.  Those  balances  at  the
Federal  Reserve Bank  of New  York have  fallen  more  than $20 billion since  the end  of
August--and  $50 billion since  June,  a  decline  of nearly  10 percent--apparently  in
connection  with  attempts  by several  central  banks  to  defend  their  domestic  currencies.
Gross  debt  issuance  by government-sponsored  enterprises  has edged down  over
the  intermeeting  period, but  it remains  at  a  strong  level.  Fannie  Mae  and the Federal
Home  Loan  Bank have  brought  large  issues  of new  debt to the  market, reflecting  the
ongoing  strength  of mortgage  loan  originations  and  increases  in the asset  holdings  of
these  agencies.

Part 2: Recent Developments, September 23,  1998

State  and  Local  Finance

GROSS OFFERINGS OF  MUNICIPAL  SECURITIES

(Billions 

of  dollars;  monthly rates, not  seasonally  adjusted)

1998

1995 

1996 

1997 

Q1 

Q2 

June 

July 

Aug.

15.4 
12.1 
3.6 
8.5 

3.3 

0.7 

17.9 
14.3 
4.9 
9.4 

3.6 

0.8 

21.5 
17.9 
6.6 
11.3 

3.6 

1.1 

23.3 
22.0 
9.5 
12.5 

1.3 

1.3 

27.5 
24.3 
8.5 
15.7 

3.2 

0.8 

37.3 
29.7 
10.3 
19.3 

7.6 

0.8 

24.9 
22.6 
6.7 
15.9 

2.3 

1.3 

23.7
20.3
9.1
11.3

3.3

1.6

Total  tax-exempt 

Long-term 

Refundings 1  
New capital 

Short-term 

Total  taxable 

Note.  Includes  issues  for  public  and  private  purposes.
1. All  issues  that  include any refunding bonds.

Tax-Exempt  to Taxable  Yield  Ratio

Thirty-Year  Revenue Bond  Yield  to Thirty-Year Treasury Yield

Monthly

Ratio

1.16

Sept.  1

1.06

0.96

0.86

0.76

1985  1986  1987  1988  1989  1990  1991 

1992  1993  1994  1995  1996  1997  1998

Note.  Average  of weekly data.  Last  value is average  of weeks to date.

Domestic Financial Developments

Although  agency  debt yields  have  declined  over  the  intermeeting  period,

spreads  between  noncallable  agency-issued  securities  and  Treasuries  have  widened
14  to  29 basis  points--almost  doubling  their  norms  and  indicating  the  substantial
premium  that  investors  are  paying  for the  higher  liquidity  of the  Treasury  market.
Yield  spreads  have  also  widened  on  even  the  most liquid  issues  of agency  debt,
including  the  Benchmark  and  Reference  Note  series  that Fannie  Mae  and Freddie  Mac
issued  over  the past  year.

Municipal  Finance
Gross  issuance  of long-term  municipal bonds  in  August  and the  first three  weeks  of
September  was  below  the torrid  second-quarter  pace  but  remained  at  a  high  level.
Boosted  by  declining  rates,  refunding  as  a  percentage  of gross  long-term  issuance  rose
to 42  percent  in  August,  and incoming  data  suggest  even  higher  readings  for
September.  Issuance  to  raise new  capital  also  remained  healthy  in August  and,  to
date,  in  September.

On the demand  side, uncertainty  in  the corporate  securities  market  has  likely

sparked  some  renewed  investor  interest  in  the  municipal  bond  market,  as  evidenced  by
larger  inflows  into  municipal bond funds.  Nonetheless,  because  of their  relative  lack
of  liquidity,  municipal  bonds  have  not benefited  as  much  as Treasuries  from  safe-
haven  buying,  and the  ratio of yields  on  revenue  bonds  to Treasury  yields  has  risen  to
a  twelve-year  high.

Credit  quality  in  the state  and local  sector  continued  to improve  over the  inter-

meeting  period, with  the number  of upgrades  outpacing  downgrades  by three  to one.

Money  and Bank  Credit
Both  bank credit  and the  monetary  aggregates  have  been  importantly  influenced  by the
turbulence  in  financial  markets.  Bank credit  expanded  at a  brisk  16-1/4  percent  annual
rate  in August,  after  adjusting  for mark-to-market  accounting  effects,  with  both  loans
and securities  posting  sizable  gains.  Business loans  grew  at  a  12  percent  pace  in
August,  even  after being  held  down  by  a  large  securitization  early  in the  month.  As
noted  above,  the strength  in business  loans  likely  reflects,  in part,  some  substitution
away  from  market  financing.  Incoming  data  suggest  another  strong  month  for
business  loans  in September.

Consumer  loans  originated  by  banks  expanded  at  only  a  3-1/2  percent  pace  in

August,  as  households  appear  to have  continued  to  substitute  mortgage  and home
equity  debt for consumer  loans.  Growth  of real  estate  loans  picked up  in August  to  a

Part 2: Recent Developments, September 23,  1998

Commercial  Bank Credit
(Percent change;  seasonally adjusted annual  rate)

1997

Q1 

Q2 

Jul 

Aug 

1 

t

Type  of credit

1. Bank  credit:  Reported

2. 

Adjusted 1

3.  Securities: Reported

4. 

5. 

6. 

Adjusted 1

U.S. government

Other2

11.6

11.2

17.2

15.8

9.0 

8.5 

10.3

8.5 

6.2 

1998

Jun

2.8

D.6

5.4 

5.9 

0.6 

-6.8

2.1 

-16.5

Level,
Aug
1998
(billions of  $)
4,331.9

4,230.2

1,148.0

1,046.3

767.3

380.7

16.1 

16.2 

26.4 

27.9 

16.6

46.5

4.7 

4.6 

7.8 

7.7 

6.4 

15.7 

-3.9 

-26.3

20.8 

20.8 

10.6 

35.7

10.9 

7.  Loans 3

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

Business

Real estate

Home  equity 

Other 

Consumer:  Reported 

Adjusted 4

8.5 

9.0

15.4

8.7

-1.5

4.1 

9.7

10.5

7.6

5.4 

7.8 

3.7 

7.1 

5.0 

7.2 

-0.4 

7.9 

1.4 

8.9 

6.3 

13.8

-0.7

-1.2 

-0.4

3.6 

7.2 

1.4 

12.5 

3,183.9

11.9

903.6

6.0 

1,280.0

-3.7 

-1.2

97.3

1.7 

6.6 

1,182.7

-7.8 

-14.3 

-5.8

4.8

2.1 

3.4 

494.1

738.7

506.2

14. 

Other 5

20.4 

29.8 

17.7 

25.9

21.9 

48.8

Note. Adjusted for breaks caused by reclassifications.  Monthly  levels are  pro rata averages of weekly (Wednesday) levels. Ouar-
terly levels (not shown) are simple averages of monthly levels. Annual levels (not shown) are levels for the fourth quarter. Growth rates
shown  are percentage changes in consecutive  levels, annualized  but not compounded.

1. Adjusted to remove  effects of mark-to-market  accounting rules (FIN  39  and FASB  115).
2. Includes securities of corporations, state and local governments, and foreign  governments and any trading account assets that

are not U.S. government  securities.

3.  ExclJdes interbank loans
4.  Includes an  estimate of outstanding loans  securitized by commercial banks.
5. Includes security loans, loans to farmers,  state and local  governments,  and all others not elsewnere classified. Also includes

lease financing receivables.

Domestic Financial Developments

MONETARY AGGREGATES
(Based on seasonally adjusted data)

Aggregate  or component 

Aggregate

1. M1
2. M22
3. M3

Selected Components

4. Currency
5. Demand deposits
6. Other checkable deposits

7. M2 minus M13

8.  Savings  deposits
9.  Small  time deposits
.0.  Retail money market  funds

11.  M3  minus M24

12. 
13. 

14. 
15. 

Large  time  deposits,  net 5
Institution-only money market

mutual  funds

RPs
Eurodollars

Memo

Liquid Deposits 6
Sweep-adjusted M17
Monetary base
Household M28

Memo

Selected managed  liabilities
at commercial banks:

20.  Large  time deposits,  gross
21. Net due to  related  foreign

institutions

22.  U.S. government  deposits
at commercial  banks

1998 

1998 

1997 

Q1 

02 

June 

July 

1997:Q4 
Level
to 
(bil. $)
Aug.  Aug. 98  Aug.  98
(p) 
(p)

(p) 

Percentage  change  (annual rate) 1

3.0
8.0
11.0

.2

7.5
10.0

-3.2 
4.7 
1.0 

-3.6
8.3
12.1

1068.4
4242.0
5701.6

7.5
-2.0

-12.2

8.0 
-1.7 
2.4 

5.1 
-5.6 
1.1 

7.4
-14.8
-4.4

8.2

-16.3

-3.4

6.8

-13.0

-7.8

6.9 
-6.7 
-1.1 

443.7
373.8
243.1

8.5 

9.8 

9.9 
2.3 
16.3 

12.0 
.8 
19.3 

19.6 

20.3 

10.1

13.6
-2.6
21.7

17.7

8.4 

7.5 

12.4

9.9 

3173.7

9.0 
-1.0 
20.8 

14.5 
-1.7 
5.5 

11.7 
-.7 
33.1 

12.7 
-1.1 
21.4 

1517.3
960.4
696.1

8.6 

-9.8 

23.3 

16.0 

1459.6

17.1 

18.8 

15.2 

16.2 

-28.3 

11.4 

11.2 

614.5

21.0 
17.4 
31.2 

18.9 
34.1 
7.6 

36.5
14.6
-18.0

28.7
-32.6
-8.0

-5.3 
17.9 
9.9 

36.5
33.9
13.3

27.1 
20.7 
-1.2 

443.3
265.4
136.4

6.8 
4.6 
5.0 
8.0 

5.0 
2.1 
8.9 
10.4 

7.2 
4.8 
5.9 
9.0 

2134.1
1366.0
497.3
3873.0

Average monthly change  (billions of dollars) 9

11.2

-3.9

4.2 

-18.0 

9.1

. . .

709.8

9.5 

-16.3 

-3.8 

14.0 

15.1

. . .

193.5

.2 

-. 4 

4.3 

-10.5

8.6 

-19.9

S.  19.0

1. For the years  shown,  fourth  quarter-to-fourth quarter percent change. For  the quarters  shown, based  on

quarterly averages.

2. Sum of seasonally  adjusted Ml,  retail  money market  funds, savings  deposits,  and small  time deposits.
3. Sum of  retail money  funds,  savings deposits,  and small time deposits,  each seasonally adjusted separately.
4. Sum of  large  time deposits,  institutional money funds,  RP  liabilities  of  depository  institutions,  and

Eurodollars held by U.S.  addressees, each seasonally adjusted separately.

5. Net of  holdings of  depository institutions, money market mutual  funds,  U.S.  government, and  foreign banks

and official  institutions.

6. Sum of  seasonally adjusted demand  deposits,  other  checkable  deposits, and savings  deposits-
7. Sweep  figures  used  to  adjust these  series are the  estimated national  total  of  transaction account

balances  initially  swept into MMDAs  owing to  the  introduction of new sweep programs,  on the  basis  of monthly
averages of  daily data.

8. M2  less  demand deposits.
9. For  the years  shown,  "average monthly change"  is  the  fourth  quarter-to-fourth quarter dollar change,

divided by  12.  For  the quarters shown,  it  is  the  quarter-to-quarter dollar  change, divided by  3.

p--Preliminary.

Part 2: Recent Developments, September 23,  1998

6  percent  rate,  but  in light of  low  mortgage  rates  and a  robust housing  market,  the
amount  of credit  that banks  originated  during  the month  was likely stronger  than  the
reported  number,  which  was held  down  by  securitizations.  Early  indications  for
September  suggest  that real  estate  loans  are  growing  at about  the  same pace  registered
in  August.

Growth  in  M2 and M3  picked  up  in August  to annual  rates  of  about  8  percent
and  12  percent,  respectively,  returning  to the  pace  of the  first quarter  of  the year  after
a  lull in  early  summer.  M2 was  boosted  by  inflows  to  retail  money  market  funds,
which  surged  to an  annual  growth  rate  of about  33  percent  in August  and constituted
two-thirds  of  the increase  in seasonally  adjusted  M2.  Preliminary  data  indicate that
the  sizable  inflows  continued  in the first weeks  of September  when  the equity  market
continued  to  experience  sizable  gyrations.  Other components  of the  monetary
aggregates,  which  are  less  likely to  receive  outflows  from  equity  mutual funds,  did not
show unusual  growth in  August.  Within  the non-M2  components  of M3,  institution-
only  money  funds  grew  at  an  annual  rate  of nearly  37  percent  in August,  a  sharp
turnaround  from  July but  not  higher than  the  growth  rates  seen  in many  recent  months.
Growth in  large time  deposits  and RPs  was  also  robust, helping  to fund  the  rapid
expansion  in  bank credit.

INTERNATIONAL  DEVELOPMENTS

International Developments

U.S.  International Trade in Goods  and Services

In July, the U.S. nominal  trade deficit in goods  and services  was $13.9  billion,

only fractionally larger  than in June and smaller than the second-quarter  average.  In the
second quarter, NIPA real net exports made  a negative contribution to  the annual rate of
growth of real GDP of 2.1  percentage  points.  Trade data for August will be released on
October 20.

NET  TRADE  IN  GOODS  &  SERVICES

(Billions of  dollars,  seasonally adjusted)

1997 

Annual  rates 

1997 
Q4 

1998 

Q1 

Q2 

Monthly  rates
1998

May 

Jun 

Jul

Real  NIPA  1/
Net exports of G&S 

-136.1 

-149.0  -198.5  -246.3 

....

Nominal  BOP
Net  exports  of  G&S 

Goods,  net 
Services, net 

-110.2 
-198.0 
87.7 

-113.8  -140.0  -174.3 
-199.4  -222.8  -257.8 
83.5 

82.8 

85.5 

-15.8 
-13.6 
-22.6  -20.5  -20.9
7.0

6.9 

6.8 

-13.9

1.  In  billions  of  chained  (1992)  dollars.

Source. U.S.  Dept.  of  Commerce,  Bureaus  of Economic Analysis  and  Census.

The value of exports dropped  1.3  percent in July,  primarily a result  of decreases  in

the value  of automotive products to Canada and  Mexico  (a temporary move largely  in

response to the strike  at GM).  While exports  of consumer goods and industrial  supplies
moved below  average levels  recorded  in the second quarter, deliveries  of aircraft picked
up in  July to the highest level  recorded  in more than a year.  Exports of machinery  held at
about June  (and Q2 average)  levels.  There  was little change  in July in the level  of
exports  to most key countries in Asia.

The value of imports declined 0.8  percent in July.  A sharp decrease  in imports  of
vehicles and parts  from Canada and Mexico  (also a temporary  effect of the  strike at GM)
accounted  for much  of the decline.  Imports of automotive products  from other  countries

declined as well, helped by a sharp  drop in imports  from Korea (the result of a strike

there).  Imported consumer goods held at  second-quarter  average  levels in July  as did
non-oil industrial  supplies.  For industrial supplies,  strengthening  imports of steel  were

offset by reductions  in other materials.  The value of imported  oil in July was less than in
June  (and the Q2  average); the decline  in July was attributable to a drop in price that

exceeded the increase in quantity.

IV-2 

Part 2: Recent Developments, September 23,  1998

U.S.  International  Trade  in Goods  and Services

Net Exports

Billions of dollars, SAAR

Contribution of Net Exports to Real GDP  Growth
Percentage points

120 

1990 

1992 

1994 

1996 

1998
Bil$,  SAAR

140

160 

180 

200

220 

240 

Net Automotive Trade
with Canada  and  Mexico

-

Net Trade in Computers
and Semiconductors
I 
I 
14 
I 
1990 
1994 

I 
I 
1992 
1992 

16
.1990 
1996 

1998

1990 

1992 

1994 

1996 

1998

Selected  Imports

Bil$,  SAAR

Selected  Exports

Bil$,  SAAR

1990 

1992 

1994 

1996 

1998

1990 

1992 

1994 

1996 

1998

1/ Excludes agriculture and  gold.
2/  Excludes computers  and semiconductors.

1/ Excludes oil and  gold.
21 Excludes computers  and  semiconductors.
3/ Excludes Canada  and Mexico.

International Developments

IV-3

U.S.  EXPORTS AND  IMPORTS OF  GOODS  AND SERVICES
(Billions of dollars,  SAAR,  BOP  basis)

Levels 

1998 

01 

Q2 

Jun 

Jul 

1998 

Amount  Change  1/

1998 

1998

Q1 

02 

Jun 

Jul

Exports  of G&S 

946.2 

921.2 

916.5 

905.0 

-11.7 

-25.0 

-0.3 

-11.5

Goods  exports 
Agricultural 
Gold 
Other  goods 

Aircraft  & pts 
Computers 
Semiconductors 
Other  cap  gds 

Automotive 
to  Canada 
to Mexico 
to ROW 

685.9 
56.4 
5.3 
624.2 

48.8 
45.5 
37.8 
168.5 

77.7 
40.8 
13.2 
23.7 

659.3 
52.0 
4.2 
603.0 

44.8 
44.8 
35.5 
162.8 

72.2 
39.0 
12.3 
20.8 

657.2 
52.7 
4.8 
599.7 

48.6 
46.0 
35.3 
162.4 

67.2 
33.9 
10.7 
22.5 

643.2 
52.9 
2.7 
587.6 

54.8 
44.8 
35.7 
161.7 

56.9 
27.9 
8.2 
20.8 

Ind  supplies 
Consumer  goods 
All  other 

138.8 
78.3 
28.8 

134.1 
80.1 
28.8 

129.8 
82.4 
27.9 

129.1 
79.9 
24.8 

-11.3 
-4.1 
1.9 
-9.0 

-26.6 
-4.4 
-1.1 
-21.2 

5.3 
-3.6 
-1.0 
-5.1 

1.1 
-0.5 
-0.1 
1.7 

-5.7 
-0.4 
0.4 

-4.1 
-0.7 
-2.3 
-5.6 

-5.5 
-1.8 
-0.9 
-2.9 

-4.7 
1.7 
0.0 

0.6 
2.4 
0.4 
-2.2 

2.0 
2.0 
0.5 
2.3 

-4.6 
-7.2 
-0.9 
3.4 

-7.4 
3.6 
-7.1 

-14.0
0.3
-2.1

-12.2

6.2
-1.3
0.4
-0.8

-10.4
-6.1
-2.5
-1.8

-0.8
-2.5
-3.1

Services  exports 

260.3 

261.9 

259.3 

261.8 

-0.4 

1.6 

-0.9 

2.5

Imports  of  G&S 

1086.2  1095.4  1080.2  1072.1 

14.5 

9.2 

-25.9 

-8.1

Goods  imports 

Petroleum 
Gold 
Other  goods 

Aircraft & pts 
Computers 
Semiconductors 
Other  cap  gds 

Automotive 

from Canada 
from Mexico 
from ROW 

Ind  supplies 
Consumer  goods 
Foods 
All  other 

908.7 
54.9 
6.7 
847.1 

17.9 
72.4 
36.9 
141.8 

148.0 
53.1 
27.2 
67.7 

144.5 
209.1 
41.7 
34.8 

917.1 
53.9 
5.5 
857.7 

22.4 
71.7 
33.5 
142.9 

146.0 
49.0 
28.5 
68.5 

147.3 
217.4 
41.8 
34.7 

903.6 
49.5 
5.7 
848.4 

23.7 
69.5 
32.3 
140.6 

141.3 
43.4 
27.0 
70.9 

146.2 
218.1 
43.1 
33.7 

894.5 
48.9 
5.1 
840.5 

23.5 
71.0 
31.2 
141.1 

127.2 
39.8 
20.3 
67.1 

146.7 
218.6 
41.2 
40.1 

Services  imports 

177.5 

178.4 

176.6 

177.5 

12.2 
-13.7 
2.9 
23.0 

-0.2 
1.5 
-0.9 
3.7 

6.9 
3.1 
-0.7 
4.5 

2.2 
7.1 
1.5 
1.2 

2.3 

8.4 
-1.0 
-1.2 
10.6 

4.6 
-0.7 
-3.3 
1.1 

-2.0 
-4.0 
1.3 
0.8 

2.9 
8.2 
0.0 
-0.1 

-24.0 
-6.3 
0.2 
-17.9 

-0.1 
-5.1 
-1.3 
-4.9 

-9.2 
-6.4 
-2.7 
-0.1 

-2.8 
3.4 
1.6 
0.6 

-9.0
-0.6
-0.5
-7.9

-0.2
1.4
-1.1
0.5

-14.1
-3.6
-6.7
-3.8

0.5
0.6
-1.9
6.5

0.8 

-1.9 

0.9

Memo:
Oil  qty  (mb/d) 
Oil  price  ($/bbl) 

10.83 
13.90 

11.80 
12.51 

11.12 
12.17 

11.47 
11.67 

0.13 
-3.77 

0.98 
-1.39 

-0.83 
-0.59 

0.34
-0.50

1.  Change from  previous  quarter or month.

Source.  U.S.  Dept.  of  Commerce, Bureaus  of Economic

Analysis  and  Census.

IV-4

Part 2: Recent Developments, September 23,  1998

Oil imports and prices.  The quantity  of imported  oil rose between June and July
to a rate that was just under the average  recorded in the second quarter.  Imports  had risen
9 percent  during  1998-Q2  to a rate of 11.8 mb/d primarily  due to an acceleration in
stockbuilding,  strong consumption  and a decline  in production.  Preliminary  Department
of Energy  statistics  indicate that oil  imports remained robust in August, primarily
reflecting strong consumption.

The price of imported oil increased  0.3  percent  in August, the first rise since May.

The import price had risen  slightly in April and May, following  cuts in  production by
OPEC and non-OPEC  countries, and dropped  significantly in June and July following
reports of surprisingly high levels of oil stocks  and a sharp  downward revision in
estimates of Asian oil consumption.  For July-August  combined, prices  of imported oil
declined 21  percent  at an annual  rate,  somewhat less than the decline  recorded in the
second  quarter.

The spot price for WTI  fell back below $13/b  in mid-August because of larger-

than-expected  shipments from Iraq and market  disappointment over the pace of
production  cutbacks from the other OPEC producers.  Weak oil demand, particularly  in
Asia, also  contributed  to the soft market.  Spot WTI has risen thus far  in September  as
OPEC  further tightened its  production restraints and Iraq announced  that it will be unable

to maintain its August pace  of oil shipments.  Several temporary factors  have lifted oil

prices as well.  Storms in the Caribbean and the Gulf of Mexico  have  shut down oil

production  intermittently, disturbances  in Nigeria have forced cut-backs  in liftings,  and
the maintenance  season  in the North  Sea has resulted in larger production cutbacks of

longer  duration than the market expected.

Prices of non-oil  imports and exports decreased  0.3  percent  in August.

Declines were recorded  in prices of all  major categories of imports,  with the greatest
declines  in prices of foods and  computers.  For July-August  combined, the decline  in
prices  of non-oil imports was  4.1  percent  at an  annual rate,  a bit more than  in the
preceding  quarter.  Notable price  declines were recorded  in all major trade  categories with
the exception  of imported  consumer goods  and automotive  products, each  of which
decreased  only  1.3  percent  at an annual  rate.

Prices  of agricultural exports  resumed  declining in August.  For July-August

combined,  agricultural export prices decreased  5 percent at an annual  rate,  a smaller  rate

of decline  than in the preceding  four quarters.  Sagging  demand from  foreign customers
and robust world production  have placed  downward pressure  on prices of agricultural
exports.

International Developments

IV-5

PRICES  OF U.S.  IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS

(Percentage change  from previous  period)

Merchandise imports

Oil
Non-oil

Core  goods*

Foods, feeds,  bev.
Ind  supp  ex  oil
Computers
Semiconductors
Cap.  goods  ex  comp  & semi
Automotive products
Consumer goods

Merchandise  exports

Agricultural
Nonagricultural

Core  goods*

Ind  supp  ex ag
Computers
Semiconductors
Cap.  goods  ex  comp  & semi
Automotive products
Consumer  goods

Annual  rates 

Q1 

1998 
Q2 

Monthly  rates
1998

Q3e/ 

Jun 

Jul 

Aun

----------- BLS

-11.6 
-61.5 
-5.3 
-3.8 

-5.1

-11.1
-17.3
-17.2

-3.2
-0.1
-1.1

-5.0

-15.6
-3.7
-3.5

-9.0

-10.5
-6.8
0.0
-0.1
-0.5

-5.9
-31.7
-3.7
-2.5

-0.1
-4.0
-19.2
-5.1
-2.6
-0.8
-2.7

-3.4
-7.0
-2.8
-2.0

-5.2

-11.8
-9.8
-0.3
0.3
-1.4

prices
-5.3
-21.1
-4.1
-3.2

(1995=100)-----------
-0.6 
-0.3
-3.1
0.3
-0.3
-0.5
-0.5
-0.2

-0.8 
-4.5
-0.4
-0.2

-6.9
-7.2
-8.8

-14.6
-3.6
-1.3
-1.3

-3.1
-4.9
-2.9
-2.3

-7.9
-12.7
-4.4
-0.3
0.4
-0.9

0.7
-1.1
-0.9
-2.6
-0.3
-0.1
-0.1

-0.6
0.0
-0.5
-0.2

-0.9
-3.4
-2.0
-0.2
0.0
-0.4

-0.7
-1.0
-0.6
-1.8
-0.6
-0.1
-0.2

-0.1
0.3
-0.3
-0.4

-1.1
-0.4
0.6
0.1
0.1
0.0

-2.4
-0.4
-1.1
-0.8
-0.1
-0.2
-0.1

-0.6
-3.7
-0.1
0.0

-0.6
-1.2
-0.4
-0.1
0.0
0.0

---Prices  in the  NIPA accounts  (1992=100)--

Chain-weight
Imports  of  gds  & serv.
Non-oil merchandise

Core goods*

Exports  of  gds  & serv.
Nonag merchandise
Core  goods'

-10.4

-5.6
-3.3

-3.4
-3.5
-2.4

-4.6
-3.7
-1.9

-1.9
-2.8
-1.7

n.a
n.a
n.a

n.a
n.a
n.a

*/  Excludes  computers  and
e/ Average  of  two months.

semiconductors.

Oil Prices

Dollars per barrel

Spot West Texas intermediate

1988 

1989 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998

IV-6

Part 2: Recent Developments, September 23,  1998

The price of nonagricultural  exports decreased marginally  in August.  For July-

August combined, these prices  declined at a 3 percent annual  rate, about the same rate of
decline recorded  in the second  quarter;  the sharpest decreases  were in industrial supplies,
computers, and  semiconductors.  Price declines for exported consumer goods and  "core"
capital  goods were  less than  1 percent at an  annual  rate.  Prices  of exported automotive
products increased  slightly in July-August.

U.S.  Current Account.  The U.S.  current account deficit widened to $226.1

billion (SAAR) in the second quarter.  The bulk  of the increase was due to a substantially

larger deficit on goods  and  services, as exports  fell sharply and imports  continued to rise.

The deficit on investment  income also  rose; income receipts  on U.S.  assets abroad were

unchanged,  while income  payments on foreign  assets increased  modestly.  Net unilateral

transfers rose slightly, as U.S.  government grants  edged down.

U.S.  CURRENT ACCOUNT
(Billions of  dollars,  seasonally  adjusted  annual  rates)

Goods  & services 
balance 

Investment 
income,  net 

Transfers, 
net 

Current acct
balance

Years
1996 
1997 

Quarters
1997-1 
2 
3 
4 

1998-1 
2 

Memo:
$  Change
Q4-Q3 
Q1-Q4 
Q2-Q1 

-108.6 
-110.2 

-112.5 
-106.1 
-108.4 
-113.8 

-140.0 
-175.8 

-5.4 
-26.2 
-35.8 

14.2 
-5.3 

0.1 
1.8 
-6.2 
-17.0 

-9.0 
-13.0 

-10.8 
8.0 
-4.0 

-40.6 
-39.7 

-35.5 
-36.1 
-37.8 
-49.3 

-37.9 
-37.3 

-11.5 
11.4 
0.6 

-134.9
-155.2

-148.0
-140.4
-152.4
-180.2

-186.9
-226.1

-27.8
-6.7
-39.2

Source.  U.S.  Department  of  Commerce, Bureau  of Economic Analysis.

International Developments

IV-7

U.S.  International Financial Transactions

Foreign official reserve assets  in the United  States declined further in July,
accelerating the outflow seen in the second quarter  (line 1 of the Summary  of U.S.
International  Transactions table).  Declines by China-both Mainland  and Hong
Kong-and  Singapore  more than account  for the nearly $6  billion reduction shown for
"other"  countries in  line  1c.  OPEC reserves  in the United  States also  declined
significantly  in July.

Partial  data for August and the first half of September from the FRBNY  show a

significant  further decline-of approximately  $30 billion-in  foreign  reserves in the United

States.  With the exception of most industrialized  countries  in Europe, nearly  all countries

registered some  reduction.  The largest of these were in OPEC,  greater China, and Russia.

Net foreign private purchases  of U.S.  securities  slowed markedly  in July as

Treasury transactions  swung to net sales  and net bond purchases  slowed  (line 4).  Most of

the net sales  of Treasuries  in July (line 4a) were  attributable  to transactions with  financial
centers  in the United Kingdom  and the Caribbean.  There were small net purchases  of
Treasuries  recorded  against most Asian economies  with the exception of Japan, which

registered  small  net sales.

Reduced  foreign purchases  of bonds  (line 4b) reflect declines  in foreign purchases

of both corporate  and government-sponsored  agency bonds.  Foreign purchases  of
agencies,  which had averaged  more than $6  billion per month during the first half of the
year, dropped to $1 billion in July.  Foreign net purchases  of U.S. equities in July were

little  changed from  June (line 4c);  continued  net sales from Asia were more than offset

by  continued net purchases  from Europe.

U.S.  net purchases  of foreign  securities  slowed markedly in July (line 5),  as bond

transactions  swung from significant net purchases to net sales.  The swing  in bond
transactions was widespread throughout  Europe and Asia.  The only region recording  an

increase  in net purchases  was Latin America and the Caribbean.  In contrast to bonds,
U.S. transactions in foreign equities swung from  net sales in June to net purchases in July
(line 5b).  Transactions  in Europe  account for most of this swing; however, U.S. residents
also resumed  purchasing  equities in Japan in July,  after recording  net sales in June.

Net capital  inflows through bank transactions picked  up further  in July (line  3).

The inflow was  more than attributable  to interbank transactions with unaffiliated

foreigners.  On a monthly  average basis, banks'  net claims on own foreign offices  and
IBFs were little changed in July (See  line  1 of the International  Banking Data table).

IV-8

Part 2: Recent Developments, September 23,  1998

SUMMARY OF U.S.  INTERNATIONAL  TRANSACTIONS
(Billions  of dollars,  not seasonally adjusted except  as noted)

Official capital

1. Change  in foreign  official

assets in U.S.  (increase, +)

a.  G-10 countries

b.  OPEC countries

c.  All  other countries

2.  Change in US.  official  reserve

assets  (decrease, +)

Private capital

Banks

3.  Change in net foreign  positions,
of banking offices  in the U.S.

Securities 2

4.  Foreign net purchases of
U.S.  securities  (+)

a  Treasury  securities

b.  Corporate  and other bonds 4

c.  Corporate  stocks

5.  US.  net  purchases (-) of
foreign  securities

a.  Bonds

b. Stocks

Other flows (quarterly  data, s.a.)

1996 

1997 

1997 

1998

Q3 

Q4 

Q01 

Q2 

June 

July

127.7 

19.9 

24.0 

-263 

12.4 

-9.9 

-5.1

-12.6 

4.0 

-10.0 

36.6 

15.4 

75.7 

6.7 

1.8 

13.0 

2.1 

4.7 

-..9 

5.1 

17.1 

-12.7 

-1.0 

-.7 

-4.5 

-.5 

8.9 

-.4 

.2 

-.1 

-1.9 

.2

-.6

-4.8

-.7

-50.1 

34.6 

-8.5 

461 

-5.7

5.6 

6.5 

14.2

28.2 

346.6 

103.8 

71.2 

773 

97.1

25.9 

8.2

155.6 

118.9 

147.2 

40.3 

128.1 

36.3 

35.5 

25.8 

-1.5 

47.7 

12.7 

71.3 

27.2 

9.8 

31.1 

25.9

57.0

14.2

-110.6 

-89.1 

-39.0 

-8.8 

-12.5 

-26.4

2.6

19.3

3.9

-8.8

-51.4 

-59.3 

-48.2 

-24.6 

-9.1 

40.9 

-14.4 

.3 

-9.7 

-2.8 

-25.4

-11.3

-1.0

2.5

6.  U.S.  direct investment  (-)  abroad 

-81.1 

-121.8 

-27.5 

-35.5 

-34.3 

-40.3 

7.  Foreign direct investment in US. 

8.  Foreign holdings  of U.S.  currency 

77.6 

174 

93.4 

19.0 

28.5 

25.9 

22.0 

24.8 

6.6 

9.9 

.7 

9.  Other  (inflow,  +) 

-80.3 

-50.9 

-19.0 

14.9 

-13.6 

U.S.  current account balance (s.a 

-134.9 

-155.2 

-38.1 

45.0 

-46.7 

-56.5 

Statistical  discrepancy  (s.a-) 

-59.6 

-99.7 

-20.0 

-52.0 

-3.1 

-9.4 

2.3 

17.4 

n.a 

n.a 

n.a 

n.a 

n.a 

n.a 

n.a

n.a

n.a

n.a

n.a

n.a

Note.  The sum of official  capital,  private capital,  the current account balance,  and  the statistical  discrepancy is zero.  Details  may not sum to

totals because  of rounding.

1.  Changes  in dollar-denominated  positions of all  depository institutions  and bank  holding  companies plus  certain  transactions between  broker-
dealers and  unaffiliated  foreigners  (particularly  borrowing and  lending under  repurchase  agreements).  Includes  changes in  custody liabilities other
than  U.S.  Treasury  bills.

2.  Includes commissions on securities transactions and therefore  does not match exactly  the data on U.S.  international  transactions  published by

the Department  of Commerce.
3.  Includes Treasury  bills.
4.  Includes  U.S.  government agency  bonds.
5.  Transactions by  nonbanking concerns  and other banking  and official transactions  not shown elsewhere

plus  amounts  resulting from adjustments made  by the Department  of Commerce  and revisions  in lines  1
through 5 since publication of the quarterly  data in the Survey of Current Business.
n.a. Not available.  * Less than $50  million.

International Developments

IV-9

INTERNATIONAL  BANKING  DATA  1
(Billions of  dollars)

1995 
Dec. 

1996 
Dec. 

1997 
Dec. 

Mar.  May 

1998
June 

July 

Auga

-260.0 

-231.2  -195.8  -196.8  -188.0  -183.3  -182.5  -192.7

-86.1 

-66.4  -69.8  -78.0  -83.9

-84.1 

-77.1  -90.1

-173.9  -164.8  -126.0  -118.8  -104.1

-99.2  -105.4 -102.6

26.5 

31.9 

34.4 

35.2 

36.0 

36.2 

35.5 

35.6

86.3 

79.4 

90.1  107.0

n.a 

108.8

n.a 

n.a

94.6 

119.5  151.1  142.0  140.7  138.6 

137.1  140.1

92.3 

122.2  115.0  119.1 

n.a  119.8 

n.a 

n.a

1. Net  claims  of U.S. 
banking  offices
(excluding IBFs)
on  own foreign
offices  and  IBFs
a.  U.S.-chartered

banks

b.  Foreign-chartered

banks

2. Credit  extended  to  U.S.
nonbank  residents

a. By  foreign branches

of U.S.  banks

b. By Caribbean

offices  of foreign-
chartered  banks

3. Eurodollar  holdings  of
U.S.  nonbank residents

a.  At  all  U.S.-

chartered  banks  and
foreign- chartered
banks  in Canada  and
the  United Kingdom

b.  At  the  Caribbean

offices of  foreign-
chartered banks

MEMO:  Data  as  recorded  in
the U.S.  international
transactions  accounts
4. Credit  extended  to  U.S.  212.8

nonbank residents

239.0  287.2  309.2

n.a  322.2

n.a 

n.a

5.  Eurodeposits of  U.S. 

nonbank residents

275.8

336.7  415.2  436.9

n.a  425.2

n.a 

n.a

1.  Data  on  lines  1 through  3 are from Federal  Reserve sources  and sometimes

differ  in  timing  from the banking  data  incorporated  in the  U.S.  international
transactions  accounts.

Lines  la,  lb,  and 2a  are averages  of  daily data reported  on the  FR  2950  and

FR2951.

Lines  2b  and  3b  are end-of-period  data  reported  quarterly  on the  FFIEC 002s.
Line  3a  is  an  average of daily  data  (FR 2050)  supplemented  by the FR 2502  and
end-of-quarter  data  supplied by the  Bank of  Canada  and  the Bank of  England.  There
is  a break  in  the  series  in April  1994.

Lines  4 and  5 are end-of-period  data estimated  by BEA on  the  basis  of  data
provided by the  BIS,  the  Bank of England,  and  the FR  2502  and  FFIEC  002s.  They
include  some  foreign-currency  denominated deposits  and  loans.  Source:  SCB

IV-10

Part 2: Recent Developments, September 23, 1998

In August, however,  U.S.  banking offices reduced  their net claims on  own foreign  offices
and IBFs by about  $10  billion.

Recently  released balance  of payments  data for the second  quarter show a slight

slowing  in foreign  direct investment  into the United  States (line 7 of the  Summary table).
Nevertheless,  the pace of direct investment inflows  remains near last year's  record pace.
Boosted by several  large takeovers,  U.S. foreign  direct investment abroad  picked up even

further in the second quarter (line  6)  and remains well  above  last year's record  pace.

The  statistical discrepancy  in the U.S.  international  accounts was negative  $9 1/2

billion  in the  second quarter, indicating some combination of over-recorded  net capital

inflows or under-recorded  net exports (last line of the Summary table).  Though still
significant, the discrepancy  so far this year is much  smaller than that recorded  in the

previous two years.

Foreign Exchange  Market

Volatility  in world financial markets  has risen further  since the August  18  FOMC

meeting.  The August  17  announcement by the Russian government of a suspension  of
payments  on ruble-denominated  debt and of an effective  devaluation  of the ruble ushered

in a period  of turmoil  that spread to other emerging-markets.  The protracted debate

between the LDP and opposition parties in the face of deteriorating  domestic  economic
conditions  in Japan also contributed to  an overall concern about the depth of the

economic slowdown in Japan and elsewhere.  Equity prices in most industrialized  and

developing  countries declined  sharply.  The price of emerging  market debt issues,
particularly  in Latin America,  fell precipitously,  as investors  sought refuge in government
bonds  of major industrial countries;  as a result, government bond yields fell to new

historical lows in most industrial countries.  There was also increased  pressure on many

currencies,  first in the Asia-Pacific  region and later in Latin America and Northern

Europe.  Towards the end of the period, widespread  speculation about the timing of

possible actions to  ease monetary policy by the United  States  and other major  industrial

countries  appeared  to be the main factor driving asset price movements.  Numerous

rumors,  also towards  the end of the period, of possible aid packages  for Latin  American

countries led to a partial  recovery  in the value  of Latin American assets.

Since the August FOMC meeting, the trade-weighted  foreign  exchange  value  of
the dollar has depreciated  4 percent, on average,  against the  16  major currencies  in our

narrow index.  Over the same time period, the dollar  has appreciated  1/2 percent, on

average,  against the currencies  of other  important trading partners  in our 29-currency

broad index, yielding an overall  depreciation  of 2 percent  in the broad index.  With

International Developments

IV-1

Exchange  Rate  Indexes

Exchange  Rates
(Daily data)

Index, August  18,  1998  =  100

FOMC 
Aug.18 

,'
,' 

"" 

"-

\

,; 

\ 

., 

Other Currency

Ipt

IBra

I

fBo

Broad

10 

,17
July

24 

31 

7 

1.4 
August

21

4 

11 

18

September

i  94

-
25

Financial  Indicators  in  Major  Industrial Countries

Three-month  rates 

Ten-year yields 

Sept  23 

Change 

Sept  23 

Change 

Equity  prices

Change P

Canada 
Japan 
Germany 
United  Kingdom 
France 
Italy 
Switzerland 
Australia 

Weighted-average

foreign 

United  States 

5.62 
0.35 
3.38 
7.31 
3.44 
4.76 
1.44 
4.98 

3.65 

5.43P  

0.44 
-0.35 
-0.06 
-0.32 
0.02 
0.02 
-0.27 
-0.11 

0.00 

-0.16 

5.11 
0.80 
3.96 
5.04 
4.13 
4.43 
2.79 
5.25 

3.64 

4.74P  

-0.45 
-0.41 
-0.45 
-0.57 
-0.43 
-0.34 
-0.07 
-0.30 

-0.38

-0.66 

-8.42
-6.79
-12.44
-10.45
-14.99
-18.78
-16.76
1.45

-5.30

Note.  Change  is  in percentage  points from August  17  to  September 23.  p Preliminary.

IV-12

Part 2: Recent Developments, September 23, 1998

respect to specific  currencies,  the dollar depreciated 6  1/2 percent in terms of the yen, 6

percent in terms of the mark, and 4 percent  against sterling.

Three main factors  are thought to have influenced  the exchange  value of the dollar

during  the intermeeting  period.  First, the exposure of the United States  to Latin
American  markets was seen  as greater than that of other major industrial nations.
Second, particularly after Chairman  Greenspan's  September 4 speech,  most market

participants  seemed  to believe that the  Federal  Reserve was likely to move to  lower

interest rates before the end of the year.  The central  banks of other industrial  nations
appeared either less likely to match the rate cut or, at the very least, less  likely to match
the timing  of the Federal  Reserve.  Consistent with that view, the spread between  U.S.

and German  10-year bond yields declined  21  basis points in the intermeeting  period.
Third, uncertainty about President  Clinton's political future appeared  to weigh on the
dollar  in the later  part of the period.

While concerns  about trade imbalances  in the United  States and Japan  may

have  arisen at times  during the period,  the extent of the appreciation  of the yen against the
dollar  was somewhat puzzling in light of the deepening  recession of the Japanese
economy  and of the severity of its banking  sector crisis.  Market commentary  cited
threats  of intervention in support of the yen by various Japanese  government  officials,
rumors  that Japanese  companies were repatriating  large amounts  of assets in preparation
for the end  of the fiscal  half-year  on September  30, and other rumors  that many  investors
who had financed their investments  in emerging  markets by borrowing  yen were  closing
their positions and buying yen to repay their loans.  The  surprise  announcement  on
September  9 by the Bank of Japan that they would guide  their overnight call rate from

percent to 

percent resulted in only a temporary  reversal  of the yen's

slightly  below 
trend.  The  yen's rise in value against the dollar appeared  to be an important factor in the
diminishing pressure on some of the pegged  currencies  in Asia, particularly  the Hong
Kong  dollar and the Chinese renminbi, towards  the later part of the period.  The exchange
value of the dollar against other floating  currencies in Asia was  mixed, as the dollar
appreciated  5 percent against the Korean  won but depreciated  3 1/4 percent  against the Thai
baht.  On September  1, Malaysia chose to  adopt capital controls  and to peg the value of
the ringgitt to the dollar; there  were concerns that other countries  in the region may

follow suit.

Contributing  to the dollar's depreciation  against the mark were  statements by
several  Bundesbank officials,  in the weeks  following  Chairman  Greenspan's  September 4
speech,  indicating that they did not believe  a German  rate cut to be  warranted.  Most

International Developments

IV-13

market analysts also came  to believe that the effective exposure  of German banks to the
Russian  crisis was not as large as had been feared  initially.  Other euro-zone  currencies
followed  the mark's movement, with the strain on currencies  reflected in a few sporadic
intervention  operations  and in small  movements  in spreads of government  bond yields
relative  to German bunds.  The exchange value  of the British pound, which rose  less
against the dollar than most European  currencies,  was affected by the release  of data

showing slower growth and a diminished inflation threat in the United Kingdom; this

increased the perceived  likelihood of a future monetary  easing by the Bank of England.

Some other European currencies  outside of the euro-zone, particularly  in Scandinavia,

also came under pressure.  The Norwegian krone,  which was affected by  low oil prices,
depreciated  about 4 percent  against the mark

dollar in terms of the  Canadian dollar was little changed on balance.

The exchange  value of the

Moody's  September  3 downgrade  of the foreign-currency  debt ratings  of Brazil

and Venezuela and its placement  of the debt of Mexico  and Argentina on review
reinforced the already  pessimistic outlook about the region's financial  stability.  The
Mexican  peso, affected by  low oil  prices and concerns  about neighboring  Latin American
economies,  found little  support in soaring  cete rates and repeated auctions  of dollars by

the central bank, with the  dollar up  8 1/2  percent  against the peso during the period.

.Vast  capital outflows  were

reported in Brazil despite large  increases in policy interest rates;  Brazil's daily capital
outflows  at times  topped $2 billion but slowed  significantly by the third week of
September,  as numerous unconfirmed  rumors circulated  of a large international  lending
package prepared  by G-7  nations, led by the United  States, and  international  financial
organizations.  Columbia and Ecuador devalued  their currencies  on September  2 and 13,

respectively.  There was widespread  market commentary that the Venezuelan  bolivar,
under additional pressure from low  oil prices  and a difficult political situation,  would
soon have to  be devalued.

IV-14

Part 2: Recent Developments, September 23,  1998

In Russia, the exchange  rate of the ruble was  difficult to assess with certainty

since quotes  originated in a very  illiquid market,  but a depreciation of at least  50 percent
versus the dollar since August  17  was evident.

Equity prices in many  of the world's markets have  fallen significantly  since the
last FOMC  meeting,  in sessions often  marked by extreme volatility.  Immediately  after

the Russian  debt problems intensified,  share prices of financial  sector firms in most

industrial  economies  declined, as investors  attempted to gauge the exposure  of various

institutions.  Later, concerns about future  earnings  of corporations  faced with declining

world demand  appeared  to be  driving  equity prices  lower.  In Asia, Japanese  share prices
declined more than 6 1/2 percent from  already  extremely  depressed  levels.  Hong  Kong
share  prices rose 4  percent,  supported  by unusual equity purchase  operations  by the Hong

Kong Monetary  Authority.  Share prices in many other Asian markets fell, particularly  in
Indonesia and the Philippines.  European  equity indexes  fell  10 1/2 percent (United
Kingdom) to 19  percent  (Spain -- where prices were most affected  by losses in Latin
America).  Canadian  share prices  fell  8 1/2 percent.  Latin American  equity price were  the
most volatile; the  Brazilian Bovespa  and the Argentine  Merval  lost over 21  percent, but

the Mexican Bolsa gained 2 1/2 percent.

Nowhere  was the flight-to-quality  theme more evident than in bond markets,  with

soaring yields on most emerging-market  sovereign  issues standing in contrast to record-
low yields  on Japanese,  Canadian,  European  and U.S.  government bonds.  The yield
spreads  over  Treasury securities  of most Latin American Brady bonds had widened over
500  basis points by mid-September,  but bond prices retraced  some of their losses  late in
the period.  Yield  spreads of Asian dollar-denominated  debt also widened  to levels
exceeding  those of last fall.  The collapse of Russian financial  markets was evidenced  by
an increase  in the yield spread of the Russian dollar-denominated  Prin bond of more  than
3000  basis points.  In the major foreign  industrial economies, yields on bellwether
government bond issues  generally fell 25 to 55 basis points.  German and Japanese bond
yields  fell 45 and 41  basis points, respectively,  reaching  new historical lows  during the
period.  In addition, the yield spreads  between  core  and periphery euro-zone  countries
widened during the intermeeting period; the spread  between Italian and German  10-year

bellwether issues increased  11  basis points to 47 basis points.

.The Desk did  not intervene  for the accounts  of the System or the Treasury.

Financial  Indicators  in  Latin America,  Asia,  and  Russia

Currency/US  dollar 

Short-term 
interest rates 

Dollar-denominated
bond spread 

Sept. 23 

Change 

Sept. 22/23 

Change 

Sept. 22/23 

Change 

Equities

Change

10.1050

1.1834

.9998

466.00

581.75

8.2785

1404.00

34.61

1.7290

7.7477

3.7998

40.45

10925

44.40

8.64

0.89

0.05

1.75

-0.38

5.17

-0.46

-1.98

-0.03

-10.44

-3.23

-13.98

2.66

38.00

38.00

15.93

15.50

18.30

8.23'

8.30

6.65

4.38

8.18

7.40

11.50

70.26

-1.80

-0.20

-0.25

-2.79

-2.50

-2.50

1.26

11.42"

15,09"
10.76b

18.1 3 b

9.09'

7 .9 8y

13.90'

7.00'

3.68

5.75

2.98

-7.78

3.60

0.23

2.96

3.56'

3.65"

2.80

1.88

2.6

-21.4

-21.7"

-16.3

-17,6

14.9

-3.2

-4.3

-0.0

3.9"

19.0

-1.7

-36.8'

-13.2

Mexico

Brazil

Argentina

Chile

Venezuela

China

Korea

Taiwan

Singapore

Hong  Kong

Malaysia

Thailand

Indonesia

Philippines

Russia 

15.00 

130.77 

48.28 

2.90' 

55.36 b  

33.06 

-56.2

Note.  Change  is in percentage  points from  Aug.  17  to Sept.  22  or 23.  b Stripped  Brady  bond yield  spread  over U.S.  Treasuries.
9 Global  bond  yield spread.  * Eurobond  yield spread.  Y Yankee  bond  yield spread.  *Change from  August  14,  "  August 11.

IV-16

Part 2: Recent Developments, September 23, 1998

Developments  in Foreign Industrial Countries

Data on second-quarter real  activity show that the Japanese economy contracted

for the third consecutive  quarter, hit once again by declining  business fixed investment.
Available current-quarter  data indicate further contraction.  European  economies  felt the

effect of the Asian crisis in the second quarter, as a deterioration in net exports  offset

continued strength in domestic  demand.  German economic  activity  slowed sharply  in the

second quarter, but the  slowdown was  exaggerated by temporary  factors that had raised
first-quarter growth  at the expense of the second  quarter.  July orders data indicate a

forthcoming  deterioration  in export  growth.  Canadian economic  activity  slowed  in the

second quarter, partly  from the effects  of the GM strike and Canadian construction
strikes.  Recent data on employment  and retail sales  are also  consistent with a slowing

economy.

Inflation pressures  have eased further in most foreign industrial  countries,  with

inflation falling to zero  in Japan.  U.K. inflation has met the government's  inflation target
of 2 1/2 percent for the first time since January.  Easing inflation pressures  and a  slowing
U.K. economy have  contributed  to a recent  indication by the Bank  of England that a
future easing of monetary policy is becoming more likely.

Individual country notes.  In Japan, real GDP  contracted  3.3  percent (SAAR)
during  the second quarter, with total  domestic demand plunging  6.2 percent.  Business
fixed investment  dropped 20 percent for the second consecutive  quarter.  Private

consumption and residential  investment also declined.  Public  demand subtracted another
1/4 percentage  point from growth,  with a 2.6 percent  drop in government  consumption
more than offsetting  a slight increase in public investment.  The decline  in domestic
demand was offset partially  by a 2.9 percentage  point contribution from net exports, as
exports fell but imports collapsed.  GDP during the second  quarter was  down 4.5  percent
from its peak during  the first  quarter of 1997.

Economic  indicators for the third quarter  suggest that the economy  continues to
contract.  Unemployment eased a bit in July,  but the ratio of offers  to applicants  fell to
0.50, the lowest  level  in over 30  years.  Industrial  production in  July declined  0.6 percent
from June  and was down slightly from the very weak second-quarter  average.  Household
expenditure,  retail  sales, housing  starts, and machinery  orders also registered  large

declines  during  July.

International Developments

IV-17

JAPANESE  REAL  GDP
(Percent change  from previous period,  SAAR)

1997 

GDP 

Total Domestic Demand 

Consumption 

Investment 

Government Consumption 

Inventories  (contribution) 

Exports 

Imports 

Net Exports (contribution) 

1.  Annual changes are  Q4/Q4.

1996 

1997 

3.4 

-0.4 

3.3 

2.4 

6.0 

1.8 

-0.2 

8.0 

7.0 

0.2 

-2.0 

-0.9 

-5.4 

0.2 

0.2 

8.5 

-4.5 

1.6 

Q3 

3.2 

3.5 

7.0 

-2.9 

2.8 

0.1 

-5.8 

-4.3 

-0.3 

1998

QI 

|  Q2

-5.2 

-3.3

-3.6 

1.1 

-6.2

-3.1

-12.8 

-12.7

-2.3 

0.0 

-15.8 

-5.4 

-1.7 

-2.6

-0.3

-1.8

-24.5

2.9

Q4 

-1.5 

-3.7 

-4.0 

-4.3 

5.6 

-0.5 

11.3 

-6.5 

2.2 

Japan's current  account surplus  during  the first seven months of the year was

$113.5  billion at an annual  rate, up from $94.2 billion during  1997.  Merchandise  exports
(valued in dollars) are  down 7.5 percent from the  1997 average,  but imports  have fallen

16.6 percent.

On  September  9, the Bank of Japan  (BOJ) cut the overnight call-money  target to
0.25  percent.  The target previously  had been set at "slightly  below the official  discount
rate" of 0.5  percent;  in recent months, the BOJ had allowed the call-money  rate to
fluctuate  between 40-45  basis points.  In a statement  explaining  the action, the BOJ
indicated the rate cut was necessary  "to ensure the economy  does not worsen further  and
to prevent  the economy from falling into a deflationary  spiral."  The BOJ also indicated
that if circumstances  in financial  markets were to become  more severe, the BOJ would
provide large liquidity injections,  even if such action caused the call-money  rate to  fall

below the announced  target.

The ruling Liberal Democratic  Party (LDP) has conducted  extended negotiations

with the major opposition parties regarding  the content  of banking  legislation.  Both  sides
agree that  depositors  should be protected  using public funds  and that efforts should be

made to minimize systemic  consequences  from bank failures.  In particular,  there is
agreement that healthy  customers of insolvent banks  should continue  to have access to

liquidity.  In  addition, the  two  sides have determined  to establish an "emergency financial

IV-18

Part 2: Recent Developments, September 23, 1998

sector rehabilitation  committee"  that would be  given power to identify  failed banks and to
respond  either by appointing a receiver  or by "nationalizing"  the bank through the
purchase  of outstanding shares.  On September  18,  the two sides  announced  the outline  of

a compromise  that would  place LTCB under state  control  (rather than injecting  capital
into the bank),  scrap  previous legislation that allocated ¥13  trillion for open bank
assistance,  and strip the Ministry  of Finance of its policymaking  functions with respect to
the financial  sector.  The  agreement, however,  was subsequently  called into question as
some LDP officials  suggested that LTCB might be  given public funds before the new
legislation  is actually approved.  The two  sides will continue negotiations  in an  effort to
resolve remaining  points of dispute.

JAPANESE  ECONOMIC INDICATORS
(Percent  change from previous  period except where noted,  SA)

Industrial  Production 

Housing Starts 

Machinery  Orders 

New  Car Registrations 

Unemployment Rate (%) 
Job Offers  Ratio 1  
Business  Sentiment2  
CPI (Tokyo area)3  
Wholesale Prices 3  

1997 

Q4 

-2.5 

0.2 

-10.2 

-0.0 

3.5 

0.69 

-11 

2.1 

1.4 

Q 

-1.2 

1.1 

-4.2 

-7.5 

3.6 

0.61 

-31 

2.1 

-0.4 

Q2 

-5.1 

-6.2 

-6.5 

-3.4 

4.2 

0.53 

-38 

0.6 

-1.6 

1998

May 

Jun 

Jul 

-0.6 

-9.3 

-9.4 

0.8 

4.1 

1.7 

-3.1 

12.5 

-1.8 

4.3 

Aug

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

-3.5

n.a.

n.a.

0.51 

0.50 

... 

... 

.

0.4 

-0.3 

0.0 

-0.3 

n.a.

-0.2

-2.0 

1.1 

-5.2 

8.7 

4.1 

0.53 

.. 

0.8 

-1.7 

1.  Level  of indicator.
2. 

Percent of large  manufacturing  firms having a favorable  view of business  conditions  less those
with an unfavorable  view (Tankan survey).
Percent  change  from  previous year, NSA.

3. 

The Obuchi administration  announced that in January it will submit to the Diet ¥4

trillion of permanent personal  income  tax cuts and at least 12 trillion  of permanent  corporate
tax cuts.  The government in January  also will  submit  a second supplementary  budget  for
FY  1998 that should include at least ¥4 trillion of new  "real water"  expenditures.  Early
indications  suggest, however, that the initial  FY  1999 budget  may be as contractionary as the

original  FY  1998  budget.

International Developments

IV-19

Real economic  activity  in most of the eleven countries  scheduled to enter European

Monetary Union next year continued  to expand in the second quarter,  although more  slowly

than in the first quarter.  The average  unemployment rate  continued to fall  in most countries,

and  consumer price inflation remained  quiescent across  the EMU  area.  Third quarter

indicators,  which are  scant, point to modest growth.  In July,  both consumer confidence  and

business  sentiment remained  close to their averages  in the second  quarter.

EURO-11  ECONOMIC INDICATORS 1
(Percent change  from previous period except where  noted,  SA)

GDP 
Industrial  Production2  
Unemployment  Rate3  
Business Confidence 4  
Consumer Confidence 4  
Consumer Prices5  

1996 
1996 

1997
197 

1.9 

-0.2 

12.1 

-16.0 

3.0 

6.3 

12.1 

-4.0 

1997 
Q3  1  Q4 

0.8 

0.2 

12.1 

-2.0 

0.6 

2.3 

12.1 

1.0 

-20.0 

-15.0 

-15.0 

-11.0 

2.0 

1.4 

1.5 

1.4 

1998

Q2 

0.5 

-0.3 

11.6 

2.0 

-5.0 

1.5 

Ql 

0.8 

0.9 

11.9 

2.0 

-8.0 

1.2 

Jul

...

n.a.

n.a.

1.0

-4.0

n.a.

1.  Weighted  by GDP shares,  except as otherwise  noted.
2.  Excludes Austria, Belgium,  Luxembourg, Portugal  and  Spain.
3.  Excludes Luxembourg  and  Portugal.
4.  Levelof index.
5.  Harmonized CPI;  percent change from previous  year, weighted by shares in private final domestic

consumption  expenditure.

Real  GDP growth  in Germany dropped back sharply in the second quarter to 0.4

percent  (SAAR) from  an upwardly  revised  5.9 percent pace in the first quarter.  Domestic

demand also was nearly flat during the second quarter, as private  consumption  and

investment  expenditure  declined.  Industrial  production, excluding  construction,  was
unchanged,  following a  strong surge in the first quarter;  including  construction, industrial

production fell 0.7 percent  in the second quarter.  Both exports  and imports expanded

sharply,  but their net contribution to second-quarter  growth was  zero.  Government
consumption  and inventories, a residual, were the only components that made positive

contributions  to GDP  in the second  quarter.

IV-20

Part 2: Recent Developments, September 23, 1998

GERMAN  REAL  GDP
(Percent change  from previous period,  SAAR)

GDP 

Total Domestic  Demand 

Consumption 

Investment 

Government Consumption 

Inventories  (contribution) 

Exports 

Imports 

Net Exports (contribution) 

1.  Annual  changes  are  Q4/Q4

1997 

1998

1996 
2.1 

1997 
2.3 

1.2 

1.4 

2.3 

0.8 

-0.2 

8.5 

5.1 

0.9 

1.5 

1.0 

-0.8 

-2.9 

1.7 

11.1 

8.2 

0.8 

Q3 
2.3 

-0.7 

-2.0 

3.0 

-5.0 

0.8 

23.5 

12.1 

3.1 

Q4 
1.2 

3.2 

2.3 

0.5 

-11.5 

4.1 

-1.0 

5.4 

-1.9 

Q1 
5.9 

6.9 

3.5 

13.5 

15.9 

-0.9 

0.8 

3.9 

-0.9 

Q2
0.4

0.4

-2.7

-16.5

5.0

4.7

10.2

10.5

0.0

The  marked slowdown in  second-quarter  growth has been attributed  to two factors.

First, in anticipation  of an increase  at the beginning  of April in the value-added  tax (by

1 percentage point),  consumption  expenditures were shifted forward.  Second,  unusually

warm first-quarter weather boosted  construction, but led to  a payback in the second quarter.

Nevertheless,  construction  spending  averaged over the first half of the year was below  1997

levels  and continues  the downtrend  seen since  1995.  Although July construction,  as

measured  by the IP  index,  has rebounded  smartly, the government  cautioned that the most

recent IP  estimate likely  is biased upward  by a seasonal  adjustment problem.

Forward-looking  indicators  suggest some slowing of export growth ahead.

Manufacturing  orders  by foreigners  (not shown in table) edged  down a bit in July and have

been  roughly constant  since the second  half of last year.  Other indicators  are mixed.

Business confidence (as measured by the IFO survey)  has been falling over the past several

months, but domestic manufacturing  orders  (not shown) in the first half of 1998  are up over

3  percent  from the  second half of 1997,  and capacity  utilization  -- already  high -- has risen

further over the past half year.

The August CPI showed inflation  (on a 12-month basis) at less than  1 percent, a bit

lower than in July.  The deceleration was more pronounced  in  Western  Germany.  Producer

prices  (not shown)  have  fallen nearly  0.4 percent over the year ending July.

International Developments

IV-21

Industrial Production 

Orders 
Unemployment Rate  (%) 

Western Germany 

Eastern Germany 
Capacity  Utilization 1  
Business Climate 1'2  
Consumer Prices 3
All-Germany 
Western Germany 

1997 

Q4 

0.6 

0.1 
11.8 

9.9 

19.5 
87.0 

17.3 

1.8 

1.7 

Q1 

1.9 

2.5 
11.5 

9.6 

19.2 
87.3 

18.3 

1.2 

1.1 

Q2 

-0.5 

0.0 
11.2 

9.4 

18.5 
87.2 

15.3 

1.3 

1.3 

1998

May 

Jun 

1.0 

-0.4 
11.2 

9.4 

18.5 
... 

16.0 

1.3 

1.3 

-1.2 

-0.6 
11.0 

9.3 

18.0 
... 

15.0 

1.2 

1.1 

Jul 

3.8 

1.0 
10.9 

9.2 

17.8 
.

12.0 

0.9 

0.9 

Aug

n.a.

n.a.
10.9

9.2

17.7

n.a.

0.8

0.7

1.  Western  Germany.
2. 

Percent of firms  citing  an improvement  in business  conditions  (current and expected  over the next
six months) less those citing a deterioration.

3.  Percent change from previous year.

In France, real GDP rose 2.8 percent  (SAAR)  in the  second quarter,  after increasing
2.4 percent in the first quarter.  Domestic  demand remained robust with private consumption
contributing  a surprisingly  strong  2.4 percentage  points.  However, much  of the  strength in
private consumption is  attributed to the volatile  food and energy  sectors.  Although  housing
investment took off, fixed investment slowed  considerably to 3.7  percent growth  from the
exceptionally  strong 7.8 percent growth registered in the first quarter.  Housing seems poised
for continued  strength during the remainder  of the  year, given historically  low interest rates
and higher real  incomes.  A rundown in inventories  contributed  negatively  following the first
quarter's significant build-up, possibly  due to the phase-out of the tax incentive on auto
purchases.  The data are also  consistent with  continued transition from export-oriented  to
domestic  demand-led  growth:  Exports  stalled  in the third quarter,  and despite a slowdown  in
imports, net exports  subtracted almost a full  percentage point from  growth.

Third-quarter  data are very  limited but suggest  continued growth;  in July consumer

confidence  reached  record-high  levels,  and the business  outlook remained  optimistic.

IV-22

Part 2: Recent Developments, September 23,  1998

FRENCH REAL GDP

(Percent  change)

GDP

Total Domestic Demand

Consumption

Investment

Government  Consumption

Inventories  (contribution)

Exports

Imports

Net Exports  (contribution)

I.  Annual  changes are  Q4/Q4.

2.4 

1.3 

1.8 

-0.2 

2.6 

-0.3 

10.4 

6.4 

1.1 

3.0

1.6

2.6

0.8

0.9

-0.3

13.3

9.0

1.4

3.8

3.7

5.7

2.6

1.0

-0.4

13.4

13.8

0.2

Inflation remains near 40-year lows.  Consumer prices  in August rose 0.7  percent

on a year-over-year  basis, down slightly from the 0.8 percent rate  recorded  in July.

FRENCH ECONOMIC  INDICATORS
(Percent  change  from previous  period except  where noted, SA)

Consumption  of Manufactured 
Products

Industrial Production 

Capacity  Utilization 

Unemployment  Rate  (%) 

Business Confidencel 
Consumer Prices2  

1997 

Q4 

1.4 

1.0 

81.2 

12.4 

17.7 

1.2 

1998

Q2 

1.0 

May 

0.4 

Jun 

0.2 

Jul 

n.a. 

1.0 

0.7 

-0.3 

n.a. 

84.7... 

11.9 

19.7 

1.0 

11.9 

20.0 

1.0 

11.8 

22.0 

1.0 

11.8 

19.0 

0.8 

Aug

n.a.

n.a.

.

n.a.

n.a.

0.7

Q1 

1.4 

0.8 

84.8 

12.2 

19.7 

0.7 

1. 

2. 

Percent balance of manufacturing  firms  citing an improvement  in the  outlook versus  those  citing a
worsening.
Percent change  from previous year.

On September  9,  Finance Minister  Strauss-Kahn presented  his  1999  draft budget
to the cabinet.  With an  assumption of 3 percent real  GDP growth next year,  the budget

International Developments

IV-23

projects a deficit of 2.3  percent of GDP.  Spending would increase  by  1 percent in real
terms, whereas  receipts would  increase  roughly by  1 1/2 percent  (despite  a projected  1/2
percent cut in taxes).  Achieving  the 1999  deficit target not only will  require tight control
over social security  spending  (this year's social  security budget has overshot and
emergency  measures  have  been  agreed upon),  but also will  require the economy  to
escape  with relatively  minor effects  from the current  global financial  market turmoil.
In Italy, real  economic activity rose modestly in the second quarter.  Available

data indicate that household  consumption,  business fixed investment  and net exports,  as
well as calendar  effects,  contributed  positively to  second-quarter growth.  The rise in
private consumption  likely reflects the transition to  durable  goods  consumption from
non-durables (which were stimulated by the  government's  recently expired tax-incentive
scheme  on auto purchases).  The rise in net exports  suggests that stronger foreign
demand  from Europe offset, to some degree, the negative effects  of weaker  demand from
Asia.  Third-quarter  data are limited and mixed;  consumer  confidence  declined in July-
September while  industrial  production rose  in July.

ITALIAN  REAL GDP
(Percent change  from previous  period,  SAAR)

1996 

1997 
_6  19 

1997 
1997 

Q3 

GDP 

Total Domestic Demand 

Consumption 

Investment 

Government Consumption 

Inventories  (contribution) 

Exports 

Imports 

Net Exports  (contribution) 

1.  Annual  changes are Q4/Q4.

-0.2 

-1.1 

0.9 

-2.7 

-0.3 

-1.1 

3.8 

0.6 

0.8 

2.8 

3.8 

2.1 

2.9 

-0.1 

1.9 

8.9 

14.4 

-0.9 

2.2 

-1.1 

1.3 

3.4 

0.7 

-2.6 

31.2 

18.1 

3.3 

1998
1998

Q1 

-0.5 

3.2 

0.3 

1.9 

2.1 

2.2 

-5.2 

9.3 

-3.6 

Q2

1.7

0.8

1.4

0.6

1.4

-0.5

10.2

6.6

1.0

Q4 

1.2 

4.4 

-0.0 

3.9 

0.5 

3.5 

-5.6 

6.4 

-3.1 

IV-24

Part 2: Recent Developments, September 23, 1998

ITALIAN  ECONOMIC INDICATORS
(Percent change  from previous  period except where  noted, SA)

Industrial Production 
Cap. Utilization 1  (%) 

Unemployment Rate (%) 
Consumer Confidence 2  

Bus.  Sentiment3  (%) 
Consumer Prices4  

1997 

Q4 

1.3 

79.0 

12.1 

Ql 

-0.1 

78.2 

12.1 

Q2 

-0.2 

79.5 

12.3 

1998

June 

July 

-2.2 

......

.. 

... 

...

Aug 

n.a. 

Sep

n.a.

0.9 

115.3 

118.6 

122.7 

123.3 

118.9 

117.0 

115.2

17.0 

1.6 

32.0 

1.7 

11.7 

1.8 

3.0 

1.8 

8.0 

1.8 

n.a. 

1.9 

n.a.

1.8

1.  NSA.
2. 
3.  Percent of manufacturing  firms having a favorable view of business  conditions minus those with an

Level of index, NSA.

unfavorable  outlook.
Percent change from  previous  year.

4. 

Inflation remains  low and stable.  Data from eleven cities indicate  that consumer

price inflation  was  1.8  percent in September, unchanged from  its second-quarter
average.

On September  12,  Treasury Minister Ciampi  announced that the government's
1999 budget would not be revised  despite less optimistic  growth projections this year.
(The government forecasts  a 2 1/2 percent  (yr/yr) increase in real  GDP this year, although
most consensus  forecasters  now view  that figure as unattainable.)  With next year's
budget, the government hopes to improve  fiscal  balances by  $7.7 billion equivalent
(approximately  1/2 percent  of GDP),  about two-thirds  of which will  come from spending
cuts and one-third from new revenue.  Prime Minister Prodi  aims to  present the  1999
budget to parliament on September  29.  The parliament  will have until the end of the
year to ratify  the government's proposal.

In the United Kingdom, real GDP  expanded  2 percent (SAAR)  in the second

quarter,  little changed from the pace  in the first  quarter.  Consumption  expenditures
increased  3 percent,  somewhat weaker than in the first quarter and well  below  the
average quarterly  increase  last year.  Investment spending  declined, after surging the
previous quarter.  Net exports subtracted  from growth as imports grew more rapidly than

exports, and inventory accumulation  contributed  1 percentage point to growth.

Indicators  for the third quarter are  limited but suggest that growth has been

slowing.  Industrial  production picked up  somewhat in July,  but manufacturing  output

International Developments

IV-25

UNITED  KINGDOM REAL GDP
(Percent  change from previous  period,  SAAR)

1996 

1997

1996 19 

GDP 

Total Domestic Demand 

Consumption 

Investment 

Government  Consumption 
Inventories  (contribution) 

Exports 

Imports 

Net Exports  (contribution) 

Annual  changes  are Q4/Q4.

2.9 

2.8 

4.3 

2.6 

1.4 
-0.6 

7.1 

8.0 

-0.3 

2.9 

4.3 

5.1 

6.5 

0.2 
-0.1 

6.5 

10.0 

-1.1 

1997 

1998

Q3 

3.0 

2.7 

2.8 

3.0 

7.4 
-1.0 

5.7 

3.9 

0.5 

Q4 

3.1 

5.1 

5.9 

4.3 

-0.3 
0.7 

-0.2 

8.3 

-2.7 

Q1  I  Q2

2.2 

5.4 

3.5 

16.3 

-1.8 
0.8 

-9.3 

-2.2 

-2.3 

2.0

2.3

3.0

-7.5

4.4
1.0

n.a.

n.a.

-0.5

was essentially  unchanged.  Business confidence  in manufacturing,  as measured  by
output expectations  from the Confederation  of British Industry's  Industrial  Trends
Survey,  has fallen sharply  in recent months to levels last seen in  1992, reflecting
concerns  about both domestic and export demand.  Survey  data suggest that service
industries  continued to  expand in July and August,  but at a slower pace than in the first
half of the year.  The average  volume  of retail  sales in July and August was up 0.8

percent  from the second  quarter.

Conditions  in the labor market have continued  to tighten in recent  months.  The

official  claims-based  unemployment  rate moved  lower to 4.6 percent in August.
Average  annual  earnings  growth fell back to 4.7 percent in June, after peaking  at
5.4 percent  in April.  Although some of the recent  increase  in earnings reflects  bonus
payments that are spread  unevenly through the year, the Bank  of England noted  in the
August Inflation Report that recent earnings  data suggest that  "unemployment has
reached  a level  likely to prove  incompatible  with price stability."  The twelve-month  rate
of British retail price inflation  (excluding  mortgage interest payments) was 2.5 percent
in August,  meeting the inflation target for the first time since January.

IV-26

Part 2: Recent Developments,  September 23,  1998

UNITED  KINGDOM ECONOMIC  INDICATORS
(Percent change  from  previous period  except where  noted,  SA)

Industrial Production 

Retail  Sales 

Unemployment Rate (%) 
Business  Confidence 1  
Consumer Prices2  
Producer  Input Prices3  
Average Earnings3  

1997 

Q4 

-0.9 

1.4 

5.1 

13.0 

2.8 

-8.9 

4.6 

Ql 
-0.3 

0.9 

4.9 

10.7 

2.5 

-10.0 

5.0 

1998

Q2 

1.1 

0.3 

4.8 

-0.7 

3.0 

-8.9 

5.0 

May 

-1.3 

1.7 

4.8 

-2.0 

3.2 

-8.6 

5.0 

Jun 

0.9 

-1.3 

4.8 

-3.0 

2.8 

-8.9 

4.7 

Jul 

Aug

0.4 

0.9 

4.7 

-8.0 

2.6 

-8.8 

n.a. 

n.a.

0.4

4.6

-15.0

2.5

n.a.

n.a.

1.  Percent of firms expecting  output to increase  in the next four months minus those expecting  output

to decrease.

2.  Retail  prices excluding mortgage  interest payments.  Percent  change from previous year.
3.  Percent  change  from previous  year.

In  Canada, recent data indicate  a slowing in growth.  GDP in the second  quarter

was  up only  1.8 percent  (SAAR).  Some of this slowdown reflects the  impact of the  GM
shutdown as well as construction  strikes in Ontario.  Resolution  of these strikes  should

lead to a shift  in production  into the third  and fourth quarters  of this year, but other
factors suggest  a more pervasive  slowdown.  These include weak retail sales in June, a
slight drop in personal income  after taxes in the second quarter, and declines  in

manufacturing  shipments and new orders throughout the  summer.

Recent employment data also indicates  slower growth.  Employment through

August  was up only 0.4 percent (SAAR)  from its level in April.  While  manufacturing

employment has been particularly weak,  fairly  strong employment growth in  service

sector jobs, most likely  due to the upturn in tourism, has offset declines  in
manufacturing.  As  a result of these overall  modest employment  gains, the
unemployment  rate fell  slightly in August to  8.3 percent.

The trade  surplus fell  to $2.9 billion in the second quarter from $3.2  billion in the

previous  quarter, despite the past year's  depreciation of the Canadian  dollar.  While

exports remained  flat in the second quarter, imports experienced  modest gains.

International Developments

IV-27

CANADIAN  REAL GDP
(Percent change  from  previous period,  SAAR)

GDP 

Total  Domestic Demand 

Consumption 

Investment 

Government  Consumption 

Inventories  (contribution) 

Exports 

Imports 

Net Exports  (contribution) 

1.  Annual  changes are  Q4/Q4.

1996 
996 

1997
1997 

2.0 

4.1 

3.0 

13.8 

-0.8 

0.1 

2.6 

7.8 

-1.6 

4.0 

4.5 

4.3 

6.6 

0.4 

0.6 

11.1 

13.5 

-0.7 

1997 

1998

Q3 

4.3 

6.7 

5.0 

12.5 

2.1 

0.9 

13.6 

23.6 

-3.0 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2

2.8 

3.0 

2.7 

0.3 

-0.7 

1.5 

7.3 

9.2 

-0.6 

3.4 

0.3 

0.6 

2.9 

-0.7 

-0.5 

6.3 

0.1 

2.3 

1.8

3.1

5.5

5.9

2.9

-1.9

5.3

6.1

-0.2

For the first half of 1998 compared  with the first half of 1997,  roughly two-thirds of the
$10  billion (AR) narrowing in the Canadian trade surplus represents  a deterioration  in
trade with Asia (primarily  Japan).

Although declines in the Canadian  dollar have  created some additional  upward
price  pressure  in recent  months, inflation  in Canada remains subdued  and at the bottom
of the Bank of Canada's  1 percent to 3 percent target range.

Despite the  low inflation  outlook and slower  growth, the Bank of Canada raised

its Bank Rate  100 basis points on August 27.  The Bank's decision was driven  by the
Canadian  dollar's fall to record lows in August against the U.S.  dollar.  Another factor
contributing  to the Bank's decision  was a broad  selloff of Canadian assets  in August that
led to  a sharp  rise in the spread between Canadian  and U.S. long-term rates.  Although
the rate hike is expected  to be a further drag on an already  slowing economy, it has
contributed to a moderate  turnaround of the  Canadian  dollar and a reduction  in long-
term rates relative to U.S.  rates.

IV-28

Part 2: Recent Developments, September 23, 1998

CANADIAN  ECONOMIC INDICATORS
(Percent change from  previous period  except where noted, SA)

GDP at Factor  Cost 

Industrial  Production 

Manufacturing  Survey:
Shipments 

New Orders 

Retail  Sales 

Housing Starts 

Employment 

Unemployment Rate (%) 

Consumer Prices 1  

Consumer Attitudes2  

Business  Confidence 3  

1998

Q2 

I  May 

1997 

Q4 

0.6 

0.6 

0.9 

1.5 

1.7 

0.1 

0.4 

8.9 

1.0 

Q1 

0.7 

-0.3 

-0.5 

-1.7 

0.3 

1.8 

0.7 

8.7 

1.0 

0.4 

0.7 

-0.7 

-0.7 

1.5 

-8.7 

0.7 

8.4 

1.0 

117.0 

118.4 

115.8 

159.2 

155.0 

148.9 

Jun 

-0.1 

-0.3 

-3.4 

-2.5 

-1.8 

-4.6 

-0.3 

8,4 

1.0 

...

... 

Jul 

Aug

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

0.3

8.3

0.8

n.a. 

n.a. 

-2.4 

-1.4 

1.4 

-6.6 

0.2 

8.4 

1.0 

..

-0.3 

-0.4 

-1.0 

-0.6 

0.3 

-4.1 

-0.0 

8.4 

1.1 

... 

... 

1.  Percent change from  year earlier.
Level  of index,  1991  = 100.
2. 
Level  of index,  1977 = 100.
3. 

International Developments

IV-29

EXTERNAL  BALANCES
(Billions of U.S.  dollars,  SAAR)

Japan: 

trade

current account

Germany: tradel

current account

France:  trade

current account

U.K.: 

trade

current account

Italy: 

trade

current account'

Canada:  trade

current account

1997 

Q4 

98.8

112.9

75.8

12.8

31.4

43.9

-28.1

0.3

28.9

37.6

11.2

-13.2

Q1 

98.0

115.9

65.4

-16.0

26.8

35.7

-31.5

-21.2

25.2

10.3

13.1

-12.0

1998
I  May 
:40.2

133.5

95.8

8.3

26.2

45.1

Q2 

114.0

111.8

81.8

15.4

28.0

36.8

Jun 

89.9

125.3

74.7

23.4

29.3

22.3

-31.2

-37.3

-28.5

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

9.6

-11.7

34.7

35.4

11.2

Jul

114.3

111.9

94.8

-8.7

28.0

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

7.4 

12.5

1.  The current  account  includes goods,  services, and private  and  official transfers.

IV-30

Japan

... 

,I  I  I 
1993 

France

Industrial Production in Selected Industrial Countries

Part 2: Recent Developments, September 23,  1998

1991=100

-a  120

Germany

1991=100

1 
1994 

I..  1,.1. 
1996 

1  1 1 I  I  I 
1995 

SA100

90

...

.

,, 
a  6  1 
1997 

.

1  L -
1998

go

-

United Kingdom

-, 120

K>'
r

1993 

1994 

Italy

I 

l 
. 1 .
1995 

.. 
1996 

I 

.I 
1997 

.
1998

I..  I  I 
1993 

I  I  I 

1994 

1995 

I 

1996 

Canada

I I  l 

I  1  .1  I
1998

1997 

-

130

, , I s .

I  , ,  l , 

, , , , l , ,

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996

1997 

1998

* 

1993 

i 

i 
1994 

1 

Ii 
1995 

1996 

II 

.
1997

i 
1998

90

International Developments

Consumer  Price Inflation in Selected  Industrial Countries
(12-month  change)

Japan 

Percent

Germany

IV-31

Percent

France

Percent

7

- 6

5

4

3

United Kingdom

Percent

--

-

[ 

,

Vy

2
n^^r^ 
1

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

I 

.

.

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996 

1997 

-o

a  I
1998

1 
I 
1993 

I  1111111 
1994 

1995 

1 

111 
1996 

1 

111 

1997 

I
1998

Italy

1 

Percent

7

6

5

4

3

2

Canada

Percent

191 

- V

9

limI. 
1993 

l 
1994 

.iI 
I 
1995 

lil 

1996 

Il  I  m.
1997 

1998

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998

IV-32

Part 2: Recent Developments, September 23,  1998

Economic  Situation in Other Countries

Economic  activity has weakened  in most emerging  market economies,  with

output declining  in Korea, Hong Kong, Russia, and the ASEAN countries  and the pace
of growth slowing in Mexico  and Argentina.  Inflation remains  low to moderate  in most
countries,  with notable  exceptions  being Indonesia and Venezuela,  and,  since August,
Russia.  The general  adjustment toward surpluses in external balances in Asia continued,
whereas  in Latin America external deficits have  generally widened.

In mid-August, the Russian ruble was devalued,  and the government announced
a restructuring  of its short-term debt and a 90-day moratorium on private  external  debt
service.  Subsequently, turmoil  spread  to Latin American  financial  markets:  Latin stock
markets have tumbled,  and Brady spreads and domestic interest rates have  risen sharply
since mid-August.  The contagion effects  from the Russian devaluation  have  fueled

currency  pressures  in several  Latin American  countries,  especially  Brazil, as well as in
Hong  Kong.  In several  other Asian countries,  currencies have  stabilized.

Individual country notes.  In Korea, real  GDP extended  its first-quarter

decline in the  second quarter, and preliminary  indicators  suggest further  deterioration  in
the third quarter.  Real  GDP fell 6.6 percent  in the  second  quarter from a year earlier,
compared  with a 3.8  percent drop  on this basis  in the first quarter.  The decline  in the

second quarter from the previous quarter is  estimated at about 3.5  percent (SAAR),

considerably  slower than the estimated  23 percent  rate of decline  in the first quarter.

Early indicators  point to  further weakness  in the third quarter.  In July,  industrial
production  fell nearly  13  percent from a year earlier, and the average factory  operation
rate dropped to 64 percent as domestic  construction  orders and retail  sales also continued

to weaken.  In August, heavy flooding  and a strike at Hyundai motors  likely further

depressed  activity.  Reflecting this weak activity, the inflation rate  has continued to  ease,
with  the  12-month  consumer price inflation rate  moving below 7 percent in August.
Korea's  current account was in surplus by $44 billion (AR)  in the first seven

months of the year.  This  rise represents  a positive swing of $62 billion from the $18

billion deficit rate  recorded  in  the corresponding  period last year.  The won's relative
strength, along with the continued weakness  of activity, has  led the monetary  authorities
to lower interest rates  further, with the overnight  rate moving down to about  8 percent.

International Developments

IV-33

KOREAN  ECONOMIC INDICATORS
(Percent change from  year earlier except where noted)

1996 

1997

6.8 

7.1 

4.9 

-15.0 

-23.0 

5.5 

6.7 

4.4 

-3.2 

-8.2 

Q1 

-3.8 

-7.8 

8.9 

38.2 

42.7 

1998

Jun 

......

Q2 

-6.6 

Jul 

Aug

-11.7 

-13.2 

-12.9 

8.2 

45.6 

46.4 

7.5 

38.4 

42.0 

7.3 

44.4 

46.8 

n.a.

6.9

n.a.

n.a.

Real GDP 

Industrial Production 

Consumer Prices 
Trade Balance 1  
Current Account 1  
1. Billions of U.S. dollars,  AR, NSA.

Additional  actions toward  restructuring the banking  system have  been made in

recent weeks.  Two new bank mergers have  been announced, including  one which would
create the country's  largest bank.  In addition, the Financial  Supervisory  Commission
has  indicated that the government would  provide $3.3  billion (in the form  of increased
capital  and purchases  of bad loans)  to support a previously  announced bank merger.
Despite these actions, it is still unclear if the government's  overall provision of resources
to facilitate bank restructuring  will be adequate, especially  given the limited role up to

now of the private  sector-especially  foreign-in bank recapitalization.

In the ASEAN region, weakening  domestic demand,  tight credit conditions,  and
Japan's  worsening economy continued to dampen economic  activity.  Malaysia's  GDP is
estimated  to have fallen  7.4 percent  in the second quarter of 1998  (SAAR),  although this
represents a much slower decline than in the first quarter.  Industrial production fell
steeply  in Singapore  in July, although in Malaysia and Thailand, seasonally  adjusted
figures indicate  that industrial production  may have bottomed  out.

IV-34

Part 2: Recent Developments, September 23, 1998

ASEAN  ECONOMIC  INDICATORS:  GROWTH

Real GDP,  SAAR

Indonesia

Malaysia

Philippines

Singapore

Thailand

Industrial  Production

Indonesia

Malaysia

Philippines

Singapore

Thailand

4.7 

7.8 

5.2 

7.7 

-0.4 

-28.9 

-25.6 

-0.8 

1.4 

n.a. 

-31.6

-7.4

-7.4

-2.6

n.a.

-7.1

-0.8

-7.0

6.1

-19.3

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

-6.1

-2.1

-1.0

-8.3

-2.1

-4.3

-6.0

-8.0

1.2

n.a.

-0.8

-6.2

-16.9

-15.7

-17.3

-13.5

n.a.

Consumer prices, particularly  for food,  continued to rise rapidly  in Indonesia,

prompting the government  to  abolish restrictions  preventing  private traders  from

importing  rice.  Elsewhere,  inflationary  pressures  eased, as domestic demand weakened

and currencies  stabilized.

ASEAN  ECONOMIC INDICATORS:  INFLATION

1998

Consumer Prices

Indonesia

Malaysia

Philippines

Singapore

29.7 

52.2 

52.2 

59.5 

72.0 

81.0

4.3 

7.0 

1.0 

5.7 

9.0 

0.3 

5.4 

9.1 

0.4 

6.2 

9.9 

-0.2 

5.8 

10.1 

-0.4 

n.a.

9.5

-0.8

All the ASEAN countries  are now running trade  surpluses, reflecting  sharply

lower  imports  compared to this time last year,  rather than improvements  in export

International Developments

IV-35

revenues.  Trade surpluses narrowed  in July in most ASEAN countries,  as demand  for
exports from within the region  weakened.

ASEAN  ECONOMIC  INDICATORS:  TRADE  BALANCE 1

1996 

1997 

Indonesia 
Malaysia 
Philippines 
Singapore 2  
Thailand 

6.9 
-0.1 
-11.9 
-5.9 
-16.1 
1. Billions of U.S. dollars, AR, NSA.
2. Non-oil trade balance.

11.9 
-0.2 
-10.5 
-5.8 
-4.6 

1998

Q2 

May 

24.8 
13.8 
-1.0 
9.5 
10.1 

24.1 
11.8 
-2.5 
10.0 
11.5 

Jun 

28.2 
18.2 
1.5 
10.5 
11.1 

Jul 

n.a. 
11.7 
0.4 
7.5 
12.0 

Aug

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
11.7

Q1 

20.3 
8.9 
-4.9 
4.0 
12.5 

On September  1, Malaysia introduced  exchange controls  and put in place

measures requiring  ringgit held overseas to be returned to Malaysia before the end of the
month.  The new rules mean that non-residents  who purchased ringgit securities  before
September  1 of this year will have  to keep their funds in Malaysia until at least

September  1, 1999.  Non-residents  who purchase  a ringgit security  after September  1 of
this year will have to keep their funds in Malaysia for at least one year after the date of

purchase.  Shortly  after introducing  controls, Malaysia fixed its exchange  rate at 3.8
ringgit per dollar, and Finance Minister  and Deputy Prime  Minister Anwar  Ibrahim was

sacked from government by Prime Minister Mahathir,  and later arrested.

Indonesia and Thailand announced  major plans for bank restructuring, including

the closing  of some banks and nationalizing  of others.  A  new tougher bankruptcy  law

went  into effect in Indonesia which is designed  to give creditors  more power to  force

debtors  to restructure  and pay off their debts.  Thailand's government,  along with major
foreign and domestic creditors,  agreed upon a framework  for restructuring  corporate  debt
with  an emphasis on rehabilitating  debtors.

In Hong Kong,  government officials  have indicated that they expect  GDP  in the

second quarter  of 1998 to be  about 5 percent below its year-earlier  level,  which staff
estimates is consistent with decline  of 3 to 4 percent SAAR.  Unemployment  continued

to rise, reaching  5 percent  in the June-August  period.  Reflecting  weak imports,  Hong

Kong's merchandise  trade deficit in the first seven months of 1998  has narrowed to

$15  billion from $20 billion over the same period of 1997.  Data released in August on

the components  of GDP  in the first quarter  do suggest, however,  that the improvement in

merchandise  trade has been offset somewhat  by a deterioration  in net services  exports.

IV-36

Part 2: Recent Developments,  September  23, 1998

In mid-August, Hong  Kong's currency  peg came under renewed  speculative

pressure,  and  stock prices  declined sharply.  Hong Kong authorities  attributed  the
declines to a so-called  "double-play"  by speculators  who  simultaneously shorted the
stock market and sold the currency.  The speculators'  hope was that the currency  attack
would force  interest rates upwards,  causing the stock market  to fall, even  if the currency
peg was maintained.  In response, the Hong Kong Monetary  Authority  (HKMA) spent
an estimated  $10-15  billion buying stocks  in the  second half of August, hoping to ensure
that speculators  lost money when most of their  short-sales contracts  expired on
August 28.  Between August  13 and  28, the  stock market rose nearly 20 percent, and
authorities  claimed success over speculators;  recently  the HKMA has ceased
intervention  in the stock market and stock prices have declined  somewhat.  Hong  Kong's
foreign exchange  reserves were  $97 billion at the  end of July, but are now estimated  to

be less than $80  billion.

HONG  KONG  ECONOMIC INDICATORS
(Percent change  from year earlier except where  noted)

1996 

1997

Q1 

Q2 

1998

Jun 

... 

3.9 

Jul 

... 

3.2 

Aug

...

2.7

n.a.

-12.3 

4.9 

n.a. 

3.9 

-16.8 

-18.0 

-10.2 

-6.2 

5.3 

5.0 

Real GDP 1  
Consumer Prices2  
Trade Balance 3  
1. Percent  change  from previous  period,  SAAR.
2. End  of period.
3. Billions  of U.S.  dollars,  AR, NSA.  Imports  are c.i.f.

-20.6 

-17.8 

5.2 

6.5 

In early  September, the HKMA announced a set of technical  adjustments  to the

operation  of Hong Kong's  currency  peg to the U.S.  dollar, which it argues strengthen the
peg by removing some HKMA discretion  and by increasing interbank  activity.  These
adjustments  include  several measures  that appear to make  it easier for banks to borrow
from the discount window.  This increased  access  is expected to make  it easier for banks
to obtain liquidity when needed, thereby limiting  volatility in short-term  interest rates.

Additionally,  all banks will now be allowed  to convert  clearing balances (essentially,
Hong  Kong bank reserves)  into foreign currency with the HKMA, rather than having  to

exchange  currency in the market, and the HKMA has pledged to increase transparency
by making balance-sheet  information  available  as quickly as possible.

International Developments

IV-37

CHINESE ECONOMIC  INDICATORS
(Percent change from year earlier  except where noted)

1996 

1997 
16 

1998
i-
Jun  JJul 

---
Q1 

7.2 

8.2 

0.7 

Q2 

7.0 

8.1 

...

7.9 

-1.3 

-1.3 

Aug

7.9

-1.4

7.6 

-1.4 

8.8 

11,1 

0.4 

40.3 

42.2 

47.4 

45.5 

50.4 

56.4

Real GDP 1  

Industrial Production 
Consumer Prices 2  
Trade  Balance 3  
1. Cumulative  from beginning of year.
2. End  of period.
3. Billions  of U.S.  dollars, AR, NSA.

9.7 

13.0 

7.0 

12.2 

In China, industrial  production remained relatively  weak  in August, and
consumer prices continued to decline.  In recent months,  China has  suffered widespread

flooding,  reportedly the worst since  1954,  and these floods are  expected to have an

adverse effect on output in  1998H2.  Net exports remained strong, reflecting weak
import growth.  In the first eight months,  exports rose 5 1/2 percent  compared  with the
same period in  1997, while  imports rose less  than 
which increased  $33  billion in 1997 before  stabilizing  in the first half of 1998, were

percent.  Total reserves less  gold,

$144  billion in July.

TAIWAN  ECONOMIC INDICATORS
(Percent  change from  year earlier except where noted,  NSA)

1996 

1997 

5.7 

1.8 

2.5 

14.8 

11.0 

6.8 

6.8 

0.2 

7.7 

7.7 

Q\
Q1 
5.9 

4.6 

2.6 

-0.2 

0.1 

1998

Jun 
... 

5.4 

1.4 

6.2 

... 

Q2 
5.2 

4.3 

1.4 

5.4 

3.0 

Jul 
... 

3.3 

0.9 

12.6 

... 

Aug
.

4.6

0.4

15.6

..

Real GDP 

Industrial  Production 
Consumer Prices 1  
Trade Balance2  
Current Account2  
1. End of period.
2. Billions of U.S.  dollars, AR,  NSA.

In Taiwan, the twelve-month  growth in industrial production  slowed

significantly  in July but then rose back in August, and consumer  price inflation has

moderated  from already  low levels.  Consistent with a slowing economy,  the trade

balance  has improved  sharply  in recent months,  primarily reflecting  slowing imports:  In

IV-38

Part 2: Recent Developments, September 23, 1998

the three months to  August, exports rose 3  percent,  and imports  fell 6 percent.  Total
official reserves less gold stood at $84  billion at the end of July.

In Mexico,  economic activity has begun to show signs  of decelerating.  Recent

data indicate  that real GDP growth slowed in the second quarter to 4.3 percent.  The
slowdown was  evident in the construction  sector, which has been hit hard by public
sector budget cuts  and a reduction  in government spending  on investment.

MEXICAN  ECONOMIC INDICATORS
(Percent  change from  year earlier except where  noted)

1996 

1997

Real GDP 

Industrial Production 

Unemployment Rate  (%) 

5.1 

10.4 

5.5 

6.5 

27.7 

Consumer Prices 
Trade Balance 1  
Imports 1  
Exports 1  
Current Account 1  
1. Billions of U.S.  dollars, AR, NSA.

89.5 

96.0 

-2.3 

7.0 

9.2 

3.7 

15.7 

0.6 

109.8 

110.4 

-7.4 

Q1 

6.6 

9.8 

3.5 

15.3 

-7.2 

120.0 

112.8 

-13.8 

Q2 

4.3 

5.0 

3.2 

15.3 

-4.8 

124.0 

119.2 

-13.8 

1998

Jun 

Jul 

Aug

...  ...

7.0 

3.4 

15.1 

-6.0 

5.3 

3.2 

15.4 

-9.6 

n.a.

n.a.

15.5

-8.3

129.6 

123.6 

118.8 

109.2 

119.8

111.5

...  .

The trade deficit was  sizeable again  in August as  oil prices remained  low.

Consumer  prices increased  15.5 percent  in August over a year  ago and inflationary

expectations,  as reported by the Bank of Mexico, have been revised  upward.  The

collapse of the Russian ruble and its reverberations  in international  financial markets

during the past month  has caused sharp  declines in the peso and  stock prices; the 28-day

Cetes interest rate increased by about 25 percentage  points, but  subsequently  receded  10

percentage  points, with the Brady spreads  moving  in tandem.  Continued price pressures
and volatility  in the foreign exchange  market has prompted the Bank of Mexico to

tighten  monetary policy, introducing  several changes  to help control monetary
conditions.

Brazilian  financial markets have  been hit hard over the past few weeks  by

repercussions  from the financial turmoil  in Russia.  Since  mid-August, the spread on
Brazilian  Brady par bonds over U.S.  Treasuries has  increased precipitously.  The
Bovespa stock price index has plunged.  Net private capital  outflows have  been strongly
negative.  To  defend the currency,  the real, the central  bank has  spent at least $20  billion

International Developments

IV-39

of its reserves  since mid-August;  as  of September 20, reserves stood  at an estimated
$47 billion,  down from a peak of $70  billion at the end of July.  In early September, the
central  bank raised  the overnight  borrowing rate  from 20 to 30 percent, and then to
50 percent  on September  10, after witnessing a  15  percent drop for the day  in the
Bovespa index.  Stock market prices and Brady bonds  recovered  some of their previous
losses in mid-September,  fueled  in part by hopes that Brazil will  be receiving

substantial  assistance from multilateral  and bilateral  donors.

BRAZILIAN  ECONOMIC INDICATORS
(Percent change  from year earlier except where  noted)

Real  GDP 1  
Industrial Production 1  

1996 

1997 

Q  1
Q1 

2.9 

5.4 

3.0 

2.0 

-4.3 

-6.6 

1998

Q2 
Jun 
n.a  ... 

10.1 

-16.6 

8.0 

7.6 

5.4 

5.6 

9.4 

Open  Unemployment Rate  (%) 
Consumer Prices2  
Trade  Balance 3  
Current Account 3  
1. Percent-change  from previous period, SAAR.
2. INPC,  Percentage  change from previous  period, AR.  Annual data are Dec/Dec.
3. Billions  of U.S. dollars, AR, NSA.

-24.0 

-31.6 

-33.8 

-29.8 

-24.3 

-8.4 

-6.4 

-5.5 

-1.6 

4.3 

7.4 

2.4 

0.0 

4.1 

7.9 

Jul 
...

-5.7 

8.0 

-3.3 

-4.6 

-24.3 

Aug

n.a.

n.a.

-5.7

-7.9

n.a.

Downward  pressures on the currency  have been  fueled by Brazil's  persistently
large  fiscal deficit (about 7 percent  of GDP)  and  current account deficit (about 3 1/2 - 4
percent  of GDP).  The Brazilian government has announced two budget cuts  for  1998
totaling  about 1/2 percent of GDP  and further  cuts down the road.  These announcements
have  failed to impress market observers, who  want to see more dramatic  steps.  It will  be
very difficult for President Cardoso  to take unpopular steps  to reduce  the budget  deficit
before the October 3 presidential elections, in which he is considered the front-runner.
The interest rate increase, if prolonged,  will further depress the Brazilian
economy, which  has been  struggling to recover from the downturn  in the first quarter  of
1998.  Unemployment  has been high by historical standards,  at  8 percent,  and industrial
output declined considerably  in July.  The interest  rate rise will also greatly increase the

government's cost of servicing  its debt, particularly  since about 70 percent  of the federal

government's  domestic  securities  (or about  $200 billion) are indexed  to the overnight

interbank rate.

IV-40

Part 2: Recent Developments, September 23,  1998

In Argentina, second-quarter real  GDP grew by nearly 7 percent from  a year

earlier.  This represents  only  a slight slowing in the pace  of growth  in the first half of the
year,  compared with last year.  However, industrial production  data indicate  that growth
has decelerated  further  in the second half of the  year;  industrial production  grew only
1.7 percent  and  0.7 percent over the preceding  12-months in July and August,
respectively, compared with an average  of over 5 percent in the  second quarter.  Inflation
remained low and the  12-month consumer price inflation rate  was  slightly over  1 percent
in August.  With exports  falling  nearly  2 percent  from a year ago in July, external
balances,  which had been narrowing  in general  earlier this year, have  widened  again: the
cumulative trade  deficit through  July this  year was about $3 billion (AR), compared  with
slightly over $1 billion (AR) over the same  period in 1997.

Financial markets  in Argentina have  been hit hard  since the August devaluation

of the Russian ruble.  Since mid-August,  Argentine  stocks have plunged  about
25 percent  and Brady  spreads have  increased  sharply; and the rate on 30-day peso
deposits has roughly  doubled.  However,  in contrast to the "Tequila"  crisis of 1995,  so
far at least,  international  reserves and deposits have been almost unaffected:

international  reserves  (excluding  gold) stood at about $24  billion on September  18,
roughly unchanged  from  their mid-August level.

ARGENTINE  ECONOMIC  INDICATORS
(Percent change from year earlier except  where noted)
1998

Real GDP 

Industrial Production (SA) 

1996 

1997

4.2 

3.1 

8.4 

8.6 

Q1 

7.2 

6.8 

Q2 

6.9 

5.1 

Jun 

... 

5.8 

Jul  Aug

... 

.

1.7 

0.7

... 

... 

13.2 

14.9 

17.2 

0.1 

0.3 

Unemployment Rate  (%)2 
Consumer Prices 1  
Trade Balance3  
Current Account3  
1. End of period.
2. Unemployment  figures available  only in May and October  of each year.  The  annual figure  is the
average of the two  surveys.
3. Billions of U.S.  dollars, AR, NSA.

-15.8 

-9.5 

-4.8 

-6.3 

-3.8 

-2.3 

-1.7 

-1.2 

n.a 

n.a.

1.8 

0.8 

1.1

1.2 

... 

1.1 

1.1 

.. 

...

... 

...

The Argentine  congress passed two reform bills in September.  One provides for

tax reforms,  which the IMF  has been pressing for under its  $2.8 billion Extended Fund
Facility  (EFF) with Argentina.  The  second  is a labor reform bill;  this bill falls

International Developments

IV-41

considerably  short of the commitments made  to the IMF  under the  EFF.  The  upper
house of congress  also passed  another landmark measure  dubbed "fiscal  convertibility,"

which would prohibit budget deficits  of more  than 2 percent of GDP  and restrict yearly

growth in domestic debt to  1 percent of GDP.  This bill now awaits approval by the
lower house.

The Venezuelan  economy is moving  into  a sharp recession, as  evidenced  by a

decline in oil exports due to the slump in world oil prices, rising unemployment,  soaring

interest rates, and plunging auto  sales, which declined nearly  30 percent  in August from
a year earlier.  Inflation is running  high, with the  12-month inflation rate in August at
over 35  percent.  Weak oil prices and an overvalued  currency have turned a current
account  surplus of about $6 billion in 1997 to a surplus of only $1.5  billion (AR) in the
first  quarter and a slight deficit in the second  quarter.

VENEZUELAN  ECONOMIC INDICATORS
(Percent change from year earlier except where  noted)

1996 

1997

-0.4 

11.8 

103.3 

-4.9 

13.6 

8.8 

5.1 

11.7 

37.6 

-6.8 

11.4 

6.0 

1998

Ql 

... 

11.6 

38.3 

-7.4 

6.1 

1.5 

Q2 

Jun 

Jul 

Aug

...  ......

11.9 

39.0 

-6.5 

4.8 

-0.3 

.. 

....

39.0 

38.1 

36.5

n.a. 

n.a 

... 

n.a. 

n.a. 

... 

n.a.

n.a.

...

Real GDP 

Unemployment  Rate  (NSA,  %) 
Consumer Prices 1  

Non-oil  Trade Balance" 
Trade Balance 2  
Current Account 2  
1. End of period.
2. Billions of U.S. dollars, AR, NSA.

With an already  troubled economy, an overvalued currency,  a widening fiscal

deficit, and considerable  political uncertainty,  contagion effects arising  since the
devaluation of the Russian ruble have  had a big  impact on Venezuelan financial  markets.
The stock market has declined by about 25 percent  since mid-August.  Brady  spreads
rose  sharply  from 1300  basis points to over 2500 basis points between mid-August and
early  September,  but have recovered  partially since  then.  The domestic  interest  rate on
90-day  commercial  bank deposits has risen nearly three-fold  since the start of the year.
International  reserves (excluding  gold) were  about $10  billion on September  17,  down
by  about $4 billion since  the start of the year.

IV-42

Part 2: Recent Developments, September 23,  1998

Populist candidate  Hugo  Chavez is still comfortably the front-runner  candidate

for the December presidential  elections,  according to polls.  Although  Chavez has

recently  been  toning down  somewhat  his radical and anti-market policy positions, it is
still very uncertain what directions  macroeconomic policy would take  if he is elected.

The Russian economy  entered  a new period of crisis on August  17,  as the

government effectively  devalued the ruble and announced  a 90-day moratorium  on
private external  debt service along  with a unilateral restructuring  of short-term  domestic

debt.  The  debt restructuring,  which  was  supposed  to be  completed by September  26,
offered investors  a  5 percent cash payment along with options for exchanging  the
remaining  debt for a mixture of ruble and dollar-denominated  bonds.  The terms were
widely viewed as implying  sizable  losses for investors.  Foreign investors are  also

concerned  that domestic banks are getting a better deal,  as they will reportedly be
allowed to swap  some of the frozen bonds  to the Central Bank to replenish  reserves
drawn  down under a plan to inject liquidity into  the banking  system.  Acting  Finance
Minister Zadomov  is meeting with foreign  investors this week,  and new terms for the
restructuring  are expected  to be offered  soon.

At the time that the restructuring  was announced,  the government maintained  that

it would continue to  meet all other obligations,  including  sovereign  debt inherited  from
the Soviet Union.  However, last week the government reportedly missed some of its
payments  to Paris  Club members, and concerns have been expressed about its ability to
meet interest payments  due later this year and next, particularly  in the absence  of further
international  assistance.  The IMF  is still considering  what criteria Russia must meet to

obtain a second,  $4.3  billion, tranche  of an IMF-led  $22.6  billion aid package,
$4.8 billion of which was disbursed in July and largely spent in a futile attempt to defend
the ruble.  (The second tranche had  been scheduled  for mid-September.)  Both the IMF
and the G-7  governments have  indicated that any further  aid will be conditioned on
continued  economic reform.

However, recent reports suggest that the  new government will place a higher
priority  on social  welfare and support for domestic  industry than on macroeconomic
stabilization, at least in the short run.  The financial  crisis  led to the ouster of Sergei
Kiriyenko  as prime minister, as well as the resignation of Sergei Dubinin as chief of the
central bank.  Following two  failed attempts  to reinstate Viktor Chernomyrdin  as prime

minister, Yeltsin turned to  foreign minister Yevgeny  Primakov, who  was easily
confirmed  by the Duma.  Although financial markets welcomed  the resolution of the
political crisis, concerns about the future course of economic policy  were raised by the

International Developments

IV-43

appointment of Yuri  Maslyukov, former head  of the Soviet-era Gosplan central  planning

agency,  as the top deputy for economic affairs  and the reappointment  of central  bank

chief Viktor Gerashchenko,  who is widely  blamed for pursuing inflationary  policies

during his  previous tenure.  Statements  by Primakov  and the other appointees  have

indicated that one of the  government's  highest priorities will be  eliminating massive

wage  and other  payments arrears,  which many fear could lead to uncontrolled  money

creation  and result in hyperinflation.

RUSSIAN  ECONOMIC INDICATORS
(Percent change from year  earlier except where  noted)

1996 

1997

1996  1997 
Q 
Q2 

Jun 

1998

Real  GDP 

Industrial  Production 

Unemployment Rate 

Consumer Prices 

Ruble Depreciation 
Trade Balance 1  

-6.3 

-5.2 

9.3 

52.8 

12.5 

25.3 

Current Account 
1. Billions  of U.S.  dollars, AR, NSA.

2.5 

0.4 

1.9 

9.0 

14.8 

12.7 

19.8 

-0.6 

0.0 

1.4 

9.1 

9.3 

6.1 

9.2 

-0.9 

-1.3 

10.0 

7.3 

7.0 

0.1 

n.a, 

n.a......

-1.6 

-2.5 

11.5 

6.4 

7.6 

Jul 

-4.5 

Aug

-8.2

-9.4 

-11.5

11.4 

n.a.

5.7 

7.8 

21.6

28.4

-3.6 

n.a. 

n.a.

The  financial  crisis has  already had repercussions  for the real  economy.  Real

GDP  was  down  8 percent  in August relative  to a year earlier,  and industrial production

was  down over  11  percent.  The  sharp depreciation  of the ruble since mid-August  has

also resulted in a surge  in inflation to over 20 percent in August from  a little under

6  percent in July (12-month  change).




==== GREENBOOK | 1998-09-29_fomc19980929gbsup19980925.txt ====

Prefatory Note 

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 

available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain. 

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 

gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.    

1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
CONFIDENTIAL  (FR)
CLASS  II  - FOMC

September  25,  1998

SUPPLEMENT

CURRENT  ECONOMIC  AND FINANCIAL CONDITIONS

Prepared for the
Federal  Open Market  Committee

By the Staff
Board of Governors

of the Federal  Reserve  System

TABLE OF  CONTENTS

THE DOMESTIC  NONFINANCIAL  ECONOMY

.........................................

Gross  Domestic  Product 
Personal  Income  and Outlays  ....................................... 
Orders  and Shipments  of Durable  Goods 
Existing  Homes  Sales 

....................... 

............................ 

.................... 

Tables

Real  Gross  Domestic Product  and Related  Items  .......  ............... 
Personal  Income  ................. 
Orders  and Shipments  of Durable  Goods 
Private Housing  Activity  ....................................... 
Changes in  Manufacturing  and Trade Inventories 

........ 
......... 
............................. 

...................... 

..

....  ...... 

Chart

Recent  Data on Orders  and Shipments 
Inventory-Sales  Ratios, by Major Sector  ................................. 
Labor Market Indicators  .................. 

............................. 

.................  ....... 

THE FINANCIAL ECONOMY

Special Senior Loan  Officer Opinion  Survey  on Bank Lending

Practices  ................................................ 

Tables

Selected Financial  Market  Quotations  ................................ 

Chart

Page

1
2
. 3

7
. 8
9
11
12

10
13
14

4

15

Measures  of Supply  and Demand  for C&I Loans, by Size  of Firm

Seeking Loan  ..... 

........ 

.

............................ 

Measures  of Supply and Demand  for Loans to Households 

.............. 

. 16
17

SUPPLEMENTAL  NOTES

THE DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL  ECONOMY

Gross Domestic  Product

According to BEA's final  release, real GDP increased  at an  annual  rate of  1.8 percent  in

the second quarter, up 0.2 percentage  point from the preliminary  estimate.  As  was the case in the

preliminary release,  a large gain  in domestic  final  sales was  partly offset by a sharp  drop in net

exports  and a reduction  in inventory  accumulation.  Net exports reduced  last  quarter's  increase in

real  GDP 2.1  percentage points while  slower inventory  accumulation  subtracted  another

2.7 percentage  points.  For inventories,  about half of the  negative contribution  was from motor

vehicle inventories,  owing to  the effects of the  GM  strike on production  and of coupon  incentive

programs  on sales;  the remainder  reflected a stepdown  in stockbuilding  elsewhere  following  the

outsized accumulation  of the first quarter.

The  upward revision to  second-quarter  GDP was concentrated  in final  sales, particularly

in personal  consumption  expenditures;  inventory  investment was  slightly less  than previously

estimated.  At the same time,  disposable personal  income was  revised down, mostly because of

an upward  revision  to personal tax payments,  and the  second-quarter  saving rate was  revised

down 0.2 percentage point, to 0.4 percent.

BEA estimates  that corporate  profits on an  economic basis  (that is,  including  the

inventory  valuation  and capital consumption  adjustments)  declined  $8.6  billion in the  second

quarter,  a slightly smaller  decline than  in the preliminary  estimate.  The profit share  of GNP

(excluding profits  of Federal  Reserve Banks) is estimated  to  have been 9.5  percent,  down slightly

from  the first quarter.

Personal  Income  and Outlays

Total nominal  personal  income  increased 0.5 percent  ($37.9  billion) in August, following

a 0.4 percent  ($29.8 billion)  gain in July.  Nominal wages  and  salaries  rose a hefty 0.8 percent

($32.3  billion)  in August, boosted by the return  of workers  involved in  the strikes against  General

Motors.  Those  strikes reduced  wages  and salaries  $3.5  billion in June  and $7.5  billion in July.1

Farm proprietors'  income  dropped $3.4 billion  in August,  following a similar decline in July.

1. The BEA did  not provide  an estimate  of the impact  of the return  of striking  workers  on wages

in August.

Elsewhere,  increases  in other components  of personal income  were  similar to that of recent

months.  Disposable personal  income  also rose 0.5  percent  ($28.5 billion)  in  August, and after

factoring  in a small  increase in prices, real  disposable income  climbed 0.4 percent.

Real personal  consumption  expenditures  increased  0.5 percent  in  August.  A jump in real

purchases  of motor vehicles boosted durable  goods outlays and  accounted  for more  than  half of

the increase  in total real  PCE last month. 2  Real  spending  on services rose a strong  0.6 percent  in

August.  As expected, real  outlays  for personal brokerage  services jumped  6.4 percent,  and real

expenditures  for electricity  climbed 5.7  percent.  However,  real  outlays  for transportation  edged

lower in August,  owing in part to a decline  in spending  for air travel.  Real  spending for

nondurable  goods was little  changed last month, held down by  declines  in spending  for food  and

apparel.

With outlays  rising faster than  income in  August, the  personal  saving rate dropped

0.2 percentage  point to  0.3 percent.

Orders  and Shipments  of Durable Goods

New orders  for durable  goods rose  1.6 percent  in August.  However,  a jump  in the

volatile aircraft component  accounted  for  almost all of the increase;  excluding  aircraft,  new

orders  rose only 0.1  percent.  The  staffs  constructed series on real adjusted  durable  goods

orders--which  strips  out nondefense  aircraft,  defense  capital goods,  and industries  for which

reported  orders actually equal  shipments--fell  1.4 percent  in August, after having increased  about

3  percent  in  each  of the  previous  two months.  The decline  in this  series was  due to a drop  in

orders  for electronic  components,  a category that consists primarily of semiconductors.

Bookings  for electronic  components fell  16 percent  in August  after having jumped  27 percent  in

July.  Excluding  electronic  components,  real adjusted  durable  goods orders  rose 2 percent in

June,  0.2 percent  in July,  and 0.4 percent  in August.

Orders for nondefense  capital  goods excluding  aircraft and  parts rose  1.2  percent in

August.  Bookings for communications  equipment  moved up 3.1  percent  following  July's

2.  Real PCE is now estimated  to have declined 0.3  percent in July, 0.1  percentage  point  less than

shown  earlier.  The  increase  in real  PCE in June  was revised  down 0.1  percentage  point.

13.8 percent  decline.  Orders  for office  and computing  equipment declined  1.1  percent, but this

series has little predictive  power for future shipments.  Excluding aircraft  and parts  and high-tech

equipment,  orders  posted a 1.8  percent  increase  in August.  After having  declined  5.4 percent

over the first five  months  of the year,  orders for this category  have rebounded  in recent  months,

advancing  6.9 percent  over the three months ended in August.

Shipments  of nondefense  capital  goods excluding  aircraft  and parts  fell  1.1  percent  in

August.  Shipments  of communications  equipment rose  2.3 percent  in  August,  and July's decline

was  scaled back from -11.3  percent  to -7.9  percent.  Shipments  of computers  fell  2 percent  in

August, a modest decline  compared  with the 4-1/2 percent  drop in producer prices  for computing

equipment last month.  Shipments of equipment  excluding high-tech  and transportation

equipment--on  which  export demand  has  had an important  influence--declined  another

1-1/2 percent  in August.

Existing Home  Sales

Sales of existing homes  decreased  3.7 percent  in August  to an  annual rate of 4.73  million

units  after having  reached 4.91  million units  in July, a record high.  The preliminary estimate  of

existing  home sales in July was  revised down by 20,000 units.  Since February  of this  year,  sales

of existing  homes  have remained  within a fairly narrow  range  around  an average  of 4.81  million

units.

The median price  of existing  homes  increased  4.2 percent in August  compared with a

year earlier,  the slowest year-over-year  rise since early  1997.  The average  sales price  was up

4.3 percent,  the lowest increase in the  past year.  These price  series do not  adjust for

compositional  changes in the structural characteristics  and amenities  of homes sold.  The  most

recent  data for the repeat-sales  price index  for existing homes  show a 5.3  percent increase  in the

second quarter from  a year earlier. 3

3.  This index  is calculated  by Fannie  Mae  and Freddie  Mac  using price data obtained when

houses are  sold repeatedly or refinanced, and therefore  holds constant  some  of the compositional  shifts
that can  affect the median  and  average prices.

THE FINANCIAL  ECONOMY

Special  Senior Loan  Officer  Opinion Survey  on Bank Lending  Practices

The  Federal  Reserve conducted a special Senior  Loan Officer  Opinion Survey  in mid-

September to  assess the  impact of recent  financial turbulence  on the bank loan market.  In  order

to limit the burden,  the survey was kept rather brief;  questions  focused  only on changes  between

mid-August  and mid-September  in the supply of and demand  for commercial  and industrial  loans

and consumer  installment loans.4

The  survey results  indicate  that there has been a fairly widespread  tightening  of standards

and terms  on commercial  and industrial loans  to large and  middle-market  firms.  However,  the

respondents  reported little change  in standards  and  terms  for commercial  and industrial  loans to

small  businesses,  and they  were  slightly more  willing to provide consumer installment loans than

they had been a  month earlier.  Demand for both business  and consumer loans reportedly  has

softened  recently.

The  domestic responses  to the questions  on business lending  standards  and terms  differed

markedly by size of the borrower.  A quarter of the domestic  respondents,  on net, reported  that

standards  for  loans to large and  middle-market  firms had been tightened  over the past  month.

Somewhat  smaller, but still substantial,  shares reported tighter loan terms--including  the sizes of

credit lines, fees,  and loan  spreads.  A few  banks,  on net, reported  having tightened

collateralization  requirements  and loan covenants  on loans  to larger customers.  The survey has

not  shown  such broad  evidence  of banks pulling  back from this type of lending  since  1991.  By

contrast,  there  was little net change  reported  in standards  for commercial  and industrial  loans to

small businesses.  Most terms  on these loans were also little changed,  on net, although  maximum

sizes  of credit  lines were trimmed  by a substantial  fraction of banks.  However,  even the  relative

stability  of the terms  on small loans  marks  a departure from recent  surveys,  which  have  generally

shown  some easing.

The  domestic  responses  also  differed  substantially by bank  size.  Larger banks were

considerably  more likely than smaller banks  to  report having  tightened  standards  and  terms.

4.  This summary is based  on responses  from 51  of the 58 domestic  banks and from 21  of the 24

U.S.  branches  and  agencies  of foreign banks  on  the survey  panel.

Thirty percent of the large banks  on the panel  (those with  assets  greater  than $15  billion)  reported

having  tightened  lending standards  on  loans to large and middle-market  firms, while  only about

ten percent  of the smaller banks,  on net, had  done so.  Similarly,  a larger share of the large  banks

generally  reported having tightened  terms  on such loans;  the only  exception was  maximum credit

line size, which was tightened  by a somewhat  larger fraction  of the smaller respondents.

The banks  that had tightened  lending standards  and  terms most commonly  attributed  their

decision to  a less  favorable  economic  outlook, and  a worsening of industry-specific  problems,  as

well as a reduced  tolerance  for risk.  The banks  indicated that the reduced  tolerance  for risk did

not  stem from concerns  about foreign losses  or exposures,  but rather from other causes.

Several  of the domestic respondents,  on net, noted weaker  demand  for commercial  and

industrial  loans.  They attributed  this decline  primarily to decreased  demand  for merger and

acquisition financing  and, to  a lesser extent, to reductions  in their customers'  investments in

plant and equipment.  In their comments,  a few banks  noted  that loan  demand had been boosted

by a shift from the  securities  markets,  especially the junk bond market,  toward bank  finance.

However,  it appears that this substitution was generally more than offset by other factors that

weakened  demand.  A couple of banks  noted  that a shift from the capital  markets  might be in the

works,  but  that it had not yet occurred.

Responses  from the branches and  agencies of foreign banks  showed a continuation  of the

trend, visible  in the last few surveys,  toward tighter standards  and terms  on commercial  and

industrial  loans.  Like their  domestic  counterparts,  the  foreign respondents attributed  the

tightening to a less favorable  economic  outlook, a worsening  of industry-specific problems,  and

reduced  tolerance  for risk (although  they were  more  likely than the domestic banks to  attribute

their reduced  tolerance for risk to  heightened concerns  about  their losses  or exposures  outside the

U.S.).  In addition,  many  of the Japanese  branches  and agencies  again pointed  to a  deterioration

in their parent bank's capital position.  The branches  and agencies  reported a modest  decline, on

net, in the demand  for business  loans,  attributing the weakness primarily  to a decline  in merger

and acquisition  financing.

Because  larger banks and foreign  branches  and agencies  are more  likely to be involved in

the market for large  syndicated  credits, the pattern of tightening reported  on the survey  is

-6-

consistent  with anecdotal  reports  suggesting  that conditions  in that  market have  deteriorated  in

recent  weeks.  Indeed,  a couple  of the large  domestic respondents  indicated in their comments

that they were  tightening  terms  in order to  be able  to  syndicate the  loans.  In contrast, the  survey

suggests that the troubles  in this  sector have  not  greatly affected  lending to  small  businesses.

Only  two of the  domestic  banks indicated  that their willingness to  make consumer

installment loans  had risen  over the past month.  The  other respondents  reported no change.  In

August,  a somewhat  larger fraction  of the respondents  reported  increased willingness  to make

such loans.  Demand for consumer loans  reportedly  eased  a bit,  on net, since  mid-August.  By

comparison,  demand was  unchanged, on net,  in the August  survey.

9-24-98

Real  Gross Domestic  Product and  Related  Items
(Percent change from  previous period  at compound  annual  rates;
based on seasonally adjusted data, chain-type indexes)

1996:Q4 to 
1997:Q4 

1998:Q1 
Final 

1998:Q2

Preliminary 

Final

1.  Gross  domestic  product 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 
14. 

Final  sales 

Consumer  spending 

Durables 

Nondurables 

Services 

Business fixed investment 

Producers'  durable  equipment 

Nonresidential structures 

Residential investment 

Federal government  consumption
expenditures and investment 

State and local government  consumption

expenditures and investment 

Exports  of goods and services 
Imports  of goods  and services 

ADDENDA:

15.  Nonfarm inventory investment  1 
16. 
17. 

Motor vehicles ' 
Excl.  motor vehicles  1  

18.  Farm  inventory investment  1 

3.8 

3.4 

3.7 

7.4 

2.0 

3.8 

9.8 

12.7 

2.5 

4.2 

.6 

2.6 

9.6 
14.0 

58.82 
3.22 
55.52 

4.32 

5.5 

4.3 

6.1 

15.8 

7.4 

3.5 

22.2 

34.3 

-4.9 

15.6 

-8.8 

2.1 

-2.8 
15.7 

85.9 
2.4 
83.5 

5.3 

1.6 

4.4 

5.8 

11.1 

5.0 

5.2 

12.6 

18.1 

-1.6 

14.8 

6.6 

2.1 

-7.4 
10.0 

1.8

4.6

6.1

11.2

5.3

5.4

12.8

18.8

-2.3

15.0

7.3

1.8

-7.7
9.3

30.7 
-22.2 
52.9 

8.8 

29.9
-22.5
52.4

8.7

19.  Net exports of  goods and services ' 

-136.12 

-198.5 

-246.3 

-245.2

20.  Nominal GDP 

21.  GDP price index 

22.  Profit share 3 
23. 

(Excluding  FR  banks) 

24.  Real  disposable personal  income 

25.  Personal saving  rate (percent) 

Level, billions of chained (1992) dollars.

1. 
2.  Annual average.
3.  Economic profits as a share of nominal GNP.

5.6 

1.7 

10.12 
9.82 

2.9 

2.12 

6.4 

.9 

9.9 
9.6 

4.0 

1.2 

2.5 

.8 

9.7 
9.4 

2.9 

.6 

2.7

.9

9.7
9.5

2.6

.4

PERSONAL  INCOME
(Average monthly change at  an annual rate;  billions  of dollars)

-8-

1997 

1998 

1998

1996 

1997 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

July 

Aug.

Total personal  income 

30.9 

28.6 

26.1 

35.2 

23.5 

29.8 

37.9

Wages and salaries 

Private 

20.6 
19.0 

21.4 
19.5 

23.5 
22.1 

23.9 
21.0 

17.2 
15.0 

22.8 
20.8 

32.3
30.5

Other labor income 

-. 6 

1.1 

1.5 

1.4 

.9 

.9 

.9

Proprietors' income 

Farm 

Rent 
Dividend 
Interest 

2.4 
.4 

1.2 
3.6 
1.3 

2.0 
-. 5 

-. 7 
-2.0 

.2 
.1 
1.9 

.1 
.2 
.5 

3.8 
-. 8 

-. 2 
.1 
2.0 

2.0 
.5 

1.4 
.2 
1.9 

.3 
-3.7 

1.1
-3.4

2.4 
.1 
2.5 

1.7
.4
2.7

1.3

Transfer payments 

3.8 

3.5 

2.6 

6.7 

1.2 

2.3 

Less:  Personal  contributions

for social insurance 

1.3 

1.7 

1.7 

2.4 

1.3 

1.7 

2.3

Less:  Personal  tax and nontax

payments 

8.6 

8.8 

9.1 

12.8 

9.4 

5.3 

9.5

Equals:  Disposable personal income  22.3 

19.8 

16.9 

22.4 

14.2 

24.4 

28.5

Memo:  Real disposable incomel 

10.9 

12.0 

11.9 

21.0 

8.2 

13.3 

19.1

1.  Billions  of chained  (1992) dollars.

REAL  PERSONAL  CONSUMPTION  EXPENDITURES
(Percent change from the preceding period)

1997 

1998 

1998

1997 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

July 

Aug.

- - - Annual  rate  - - -

Monthly rate

3.7 

7.4 
9.4 

2.0 
2.1 

3.8 
3.9 

2.8 

3.1 
6.4 

-.4 
-. 3 

4.3 
4.3 

6.1 

6.1 

-. 3 

15.8 
19.8 

11.2 
7.1 

7.4 
7.9 

3.5 
4.9 

5.3 
5.8 

5.4 
4.6 

-4.6 

.4 

.5 
.6 

.3 
.4 

.5

1.4

.8

-. 0
-. 3

.6
.5

2.1 
2.9 

1.7 
2.9 

1.2 
4.0 

.4 
2.6 

.5 
.2 

.3
.4

Personal  consumption

expenditures 

Durable  goods 

Excluding motor vehicles 

Nondurable  goods 

Excluding gasoline 

Services 

Excluding energy 

Memo:

Personal  saving rate

(percent) 

Real  disposable  income1  

1.  Percent changes  derived from billions  of chained  (1992) dollars.

ORDERS AND SHIPMENTS  OF DURABLE GOODS
(Percent change from comparable previous period,
seasonally adjusted)

1997 

1998 

1998

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

June 

July  Aug.
(r) 

(a)

Nondefense capital goods

Orders 

Aircraft and parts 
Excluding aircraft  and parts 

Office and computing 
Communications  equipment 
All  other 

7.8 

-. 1 
.4 
-1.9 
4.6  -14.7 
59.8  -27.4 
-. 9 
4.2 
3.2 
7.3 
12.1 
4.3 
21.8  -4.9 
-1.8 
-2.5 

-. 1 
-1.7 
-4.7 
1.6 

-. 8 
6.1 
-1.8 
-. 5 
-5.7  -13.8 

4.1 

Shipments 

Aircraft  and  parts 
Excluding aircraft  and parts 

Office  and computing 
Communications equipment 
All other 

.1 
-3.1 
.6 
-1.1 
-. 3 
1.5 

4.6 
10.0 
3.7 
9.5 
4.4 
1.4 

1.4 
.3 
1.6 
4.7 
.8 
.6 

3.6 
-2.8 
4.7 
7.4 
4.8 
3.6 

7.7
47.8
1.2
-1.1
3.1
1.8

-. 5
2.9
-1.1
-2.0
2.3
-1.5

.9 

-2.2 
-2.8 
-2.1 
-.4 
-7.9 
-1.3 

Supplementary orders series

Durable  goods* 

Industries with unfilled

orders 

Capital  goods 
Nondefense 
Defense 

2.2 

-. 8 

-. 8 

.1 

1.9 

1.6

3.0 

-. 9 

-. 7 

1.0 

2.3 

.6

7.6 
7.8 
6.2 

-. 7 
-1.9 

-. 6 
-. 1 
9.9  -4.8 

.8 
.4 
4.8 

-.9 
-. 8 

5.9
7.7
-2.2  -10.7

Real adjusted durable goods 

1.1 

2.1 

.7 

3.1 

2.9 

-1.4

r--Revised.
a- -Advance.
*--Contains industry detail not  shown separately.

-10-

RECENT  DATA  ON  ORDERS  AND  SHIPMENTS

Office and  Computing  Equipment

-
-

-

Orders
Shipments

Billions  of  Dollars

.

i 

-

.

.

.

.

.

1y95

.

i 

1998

.

.

. i.  .

I 

.

,  .

-

, 

.

65

Communications  Equipment

-
-

-

Orders
Shipments

Billions of Dollars

- Aug

1995

1996

Other Equipment  (excl.  aircraft, computers, and  communications  eq.)

Billions of Dollars

-
-

-

Orders
Shipments

SZ  /Aug.

1995

.. 

,

1997

1998

Z 

-11-

Private Housing Activity
(Millions  of units; seasonally adjusted  annual  rate)

All units
Starts 
Permits 

Single-family units
Starts 
Permits 
Adjusted permits 1  

New home  sales 
Existing  home sales 

Multifamily units
Starts 
Permits 

Mobile homes
Shipments 

1997 

1997 

Q4 

Q1 

1.47 
1.44 

1.13 
1.06 
1.14 

.80 
4.22 

.34 
.39 

.35 

1.53 
1.48 

1.14 
1.10 
1.18 

.83 
4.38 

.39 
.38 

.35 

1.58 
1.59 

1.24 
1.15 
1.24 

.86 
4.68 

.34 
.44 

.37 

1998

June r  

Julyr 

Aug.P

1.62 
1.52 

1.27 
1.13 
1.23 

.90 
4.74 

.35 
.39 

.36 

1.71 
1.58 

1.30 
1.17 
1.26 

.89 
4.91 

.41 
.41 

1.61
1.62

1.25
1.17
1.25

n.a.
4.73

.37
.44

.36 

n.a.

Q 2 r 

1.57 
1.53 

1.24 
1.14 
1.23 

.89 
4.78 

.33 
.38 

.37 

Note.  p Preliminary.  r  Revised.  n.a.  Not  available.
1. Adjusted  permits equals permit  issuance plus total starts  outside of permit-issuing areas,  minus a correction for
those starts in permit-issuing places that lack a permit.

Private  Housing Starts
(Seasonally adjusted annual rate)

Millions of units

Total

m

I 

I 
1977 

I 
I 
1979 

I 

I 
1983 

I 
I 
1985 

I 
I 
1987 

I 
I 
1989 

I 
I 
1991 

1981 

I 
I 
1993 

I 
I 
1995 

I 
I
I 
• ! ] I I I I
1997

CHANGES  IN MANUFACTURING AND  TRADE  INVENTORIES
(Billions of dollars  at  annual rates;
based  on  seasonally adjusted data)

Book value basis

Total 

Excluding wholesale  and

retail motor vehicles 

Manufacturing 

Excluding aircraft 

Wholesale 

Excluding motor  vehicles 

Retail 

Auto  dealers 
Excluding auto  dealers 

1997 

Q4 

1998 

1998

Q1 

Q2 

May 

June 

July

39.8 

62.7 

7.0 

-6.4 

5.9 

.9

40.2 
15.6 
15.0 
18.1 
19.5 
6.0 
.9 
5.1 

55.3 
23.3 
19.2 
17.3 
11.5 
22.1 
1.6 
20.5 

35.0 
19.0 
6.9 
-.4 
10.9 
-11.5 
-16.6 
5.0 

23.9 
12.7 
6.9 
21.2 
28.9 
-40.3 
-22.6 
-17.7 

44.3 
11.7 
1.9 
-2.2 
6.3 
-3.6 
-29.9 
26.3 

22.2
15.0
9.0
-7.4
.1
-6.7

-13.7
7.0

SELECTED  INVENTORY-SALES  RATIOS
(Months' supply, based  on  Census book-value data,  seasonally adjusted)

Manufacturing and trade 

Less wholesale and  retail

motor  vehicles 

Manufacturing 

Primary metals 
Nonelectrical machinery 
Electrical machinery 
Transportation equipment 

Motor  vehicles 
Aircraft 

Nondefense  capital goods 
Textiles 
Chemicals 
Petroleum 
Home  goods  & apparel 

Merchant wholesalers 

Less motor vehicles 

Durable  goods 
Nondurable goods 

Retail trade 

Less  automotive dealers 
Automotive  dealers 
General merchandise 
Apparel 
GAF 

Cyclical
reference points 
1990-91 
high 

1995-96 
low 

Range  over

preceding  12  months 

High 

Low 

1.58 

1.55 

1.75 
2.08 
2.48 
2.08 
2.93 
.97 
5.84 
3.09 
1.71 
1.44 
.94 
1.96 

1.36 
1.31 
1.83 
.95 

1.61 
1.48 
2.22 
2.42 
2.53 
2.42 

1.38 

1.35 

1.38 
1.49 
1.77 
1.41 
1.51 
.56 
4.44 
2.27 
1.42 
1.25 
.80 
1.63 

1.26 
1.22 
1.55 
.91 

1.50 
1.43 
1.69 
2.20 
2.27 
2.23 

1.39 

1.36 

1.40 
1.64 
1.75 
1.39 
1.83 
.64 
5.12 
2.33 
1.54 
1.41 
.89 
1.69 

1.30 
1.28 
1.62 
.96 

1.50 
1.42 
1.77 
2.11 
2.45 
2.15 

1.37 

1.34 

1.36 
1.53 
1.61 
1.30 
1.57 
.54 
4.34 
2.12 
1.40 
1.30 
.83 
1.59 

1.26 
1.23 
1.56 
.92 

1.45 
1.40 
1.56 
2.00 
2.32 
2.06 

July
1998

1.38

1.36

1.39
1.65
1.62
1.29
1.85
.62
4.96
2.19
1.48
1.41
.89
1.64

1.29
1.28
1.58
.96

1.45
1.40
1.60
2.03
2.42
2.08

-13-

Inventory-Sales Ratios, by Major Sector
(Book value)

Manufacturing

1979 

1981 

1983 

1985 

1987 

1989 

1991 

1993 

1995 

1997

Wholesale Excluding  Motor Vehicles

1979 

1981 

1983 

1985 

1987 

1989 

1991 

1993 

1995 

1997

Retail

.

.

GAF group (left scale)

* 

ru-

,t 
\ 

4,,

-

i

1979 

1981

1983 

1985 

1987 

1989 

1991

1993 

1995 

1997

Ratio

2.15

1.9

1.65

1.4

1.15

Ratio

1.5

1.4

1.3

1.2

1.1

1

Ratio

1.7

1.6

1.5

1.4

-14-

Labor Market Indicators

Initial Claims for Unemployment  Insurance

Net  Hiring  Strength

Thousands

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994 

1996 

1998

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994 

1996 

1998

Note.  State programs,  includes  EUC adjustment.

Note. Percent planning  an increase  in  employment  minus percent

planning  a reduction.

Reporting  Positions Hard  to Fill

Reporting  Positions  Hard to  Fill

Percent

Percent

BNA's Survey  of Personnel  Executives

-- 

Technical/Professional
Production/Service

-

- - - - Office/Clerical

Q3

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994 

1996 

1998

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994 

1996 

1998

Help Wanted  Index

Current Job Availability

Index, 1990=100

Percent  of households

1988  1990 

1992 

1994 

1996 

1998

1988 

1990 

1992 

1994 

1996 

1998

Note. Series has been adjusted  to take account of structural  and
institutional changes,  including  consolidation of newspaper  industry
and tendency to increase  hiring through personnel supply  agencies.

-15-
Selected  Financial Market Quotations
(One-day  quotes in percent  except as noted)

1997 

1998 

Change  to Sept. 24  from
selected dates  (percentage  points)

Instrument 

_Sept.  30 

Dec. 31 

FOMC* 
Aug.  18 

Sept. 24 

Sept. 30 

Dec. 31 

FOMC*
Aug.  18

Short-term
Federal  funds

FOMC intended rate 
Realized rate  ' 

Treasury bills 2
3-month 
6-month 
i-year 

Commercial paper

1-month 
3-month 

Large negotiable CDs  2

1-month 
3-month 
6-month 

Eurodollar deposits  3

1-month 
3-month 

Bank prime rate 

Intermediate- and long-term
U.S.  Treasury (constant  maturity)

2-year 
10-year 
30-year 

U.S.  Treasury  10-year indexed  note 

Municipal  revenue  (Bond Buyer) 4  

Corporate  bonds, Moody's seasoned  Baa 

High-yield  corporate  5  

Home mortgages (FHLMC  survey rate)  6

30-year fixed 
1-year adjustable 

5.50 
5.51 

4.93 
5.08 
5.18 

5.51 
5.48 

5.59 
5.67 
5.72 

5.56 
5.63 

8.50 

5.80 
6.12 
6.41 

3.61 

5.63 

7.66 

9.02 

7.28 
5.51 

5.50 
5.44 

5.22 
5.23 
5.22 

5.65 
5.57 

5.65 
5.72 
5.74 

5.63 
5.72 

8.50 

5.66 
5.75 
5.93 

3.70 

5.40 

7.28 

9.06 

6.99 
5.53 

5.50 
5.55 

4.93 
4.98 
4.98 

5.50 
5.48 

5.57 
5.59 
5.62 

5.50 
5.56 

8.50 

5.34 
5.40 
5.56 

3.82 

5.34 

7.14 

9.53 

6.91 
5.60 

5.50 
5.42 

4.44 
4.39 
4.32 

5.44 
5.20 

5.45 
5.34 
5.23 

5.38 
5.31 

8.50 

4.43 
4.64 
5.15 

3.62 

5.17 

7.06 

10.48 

6.66 
5.43 

.00 
-.09 

-.49 
-.69 
-.86 

-.07 
-.28 

-.14 
-.33 
-.49 

-.18 
-.32 

.00 

-1.37 
-1.48 
-1.26 

.01 

-.46 

-.60 

1.46 

-.62 
-.08 

.00 
-.02 

-.78 
-.84 
-.90 

-.21 
-.37 

-.20 
-.38 
-.51 

-.25 
-.41 

.00 

-123 
-1.11 
-.78 

-.08 

-.23 

-.22 

1.42 

-.33 
-. 10 

.00
-.13

-.49
-.59
-.66

-.06
-.28

-.12
-.25
-.39

-.12
-.25

.00

-.91
-.76
-.41

-.20

-. 17

-.08

.95

-.25
-. 17

Record high 

1997 

1998 

Change  to Sept. 24
from selected dates  (percent)

Stock  exchange  index 

Dow-Jones  Industrial 
S&P  500 Composite 
NASDAQ  (OTC) 
Russell 2000 
Wilshire 5000 

Level 

Date 

Dec..3I 

9,337.97 
1,186.75 
2,014.25 
491.41 
11,106.10 

7-17-98 
7-17-98 
7-20-98 
4-21-98 
7-17-98 

7,908.25 
970.43 
1,570.35 
437.02 
9,298.19 

FOMC* 
Aug.  18 

8,574.85 
1,083.67 
1,818.04 
403.96 
10,064.79 

Sept. 24 

8,001.99 
1,042.72 
1,720.34 
370.25 
9,566.24 

Record 
high 

-14.31 
-12.14 
-14.59 
-24.66 
-13.86 

Dec. 31 

1.19 
7.45 
9.55 
-15.28 
2.88 

FOMC*
Aug.  18

-6.68
-3.78
-5.37
-8.34
-4.95

1.  Average  for two-week  reserve maintenance period ending on or before date shown.  Most recent

observation is  average for current maintenance period to  date.

2.  Secondary  market
3.  Bid rates for Eurodollar  deposits collected  around  9:30 am. Eastern  time.
4.  Most  recent Thursday  quote.
5.  Merrill  Lynch Master  11  high-yield bond  index composite.
6.  For week ending Friday previous to date shown.
*  Data are  as of the close  on August  17,  1998.

-16-
Measures  of Supply and  Demand  for C&I  Loans,  by Size  of Firm Seeking  Loan

Net Percentage of  Domestic Respondents Tightening  Standards for C&I  Loans

Percent

--- 
S..... *  Small

Large and Medium

1990 

1991 

1992 

+ Indicates data from the special September  BLPS

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998

Net Percentage of Domestic  Respondents  Increasing Spreads of Loan  Rates over Banks'  Cost of Funds

Percent

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993

+ Indicates  data from the special September  BLPS

Net Percentage  of Domestic Respondents Reporting  Stronger Demand  for C&I  Loans

1998

Percent

+ Indicates data from  the special September BLPS

Measures  of Supply and  Demand  for Loans to Households

Net  Percentage of Domestic  Respondents Indicating More Willingness to Make Consumer  Installment Loans

Percent

S- 

-

-

80

60

40

20

0

-20

-40

-60

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

1966 

1970 

1974 

I 

1978 

+ indicates data from  the special September BLPS

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

-

-80

1982 

1986 

1990 

1994 

1998

Net Percentage  of  Domestic Respondents Reporting  Stronger  Demand for Consumer  Loans

Percent

1991 

1992 

1993

1994 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998

+  Indicates data from the  special  September BLPS




