2005-07-26  - 100080 - 002

FEDERAL  RESERVE  press  release

For Use  at 4:10  p.m. 

April  2, 1982 

The  Federal Reserve  Board  and  the  Federal  Open Market 

Committee today released  the  attached  record  of policy  actions 

taken by  the  Federal Open  Market  Committee at  its  meeting on 

February 1-2,  1982.  

Such  records  for each meeting of  the  Committee are  made 

available  a few days  after  the  next  regularly scheduled meeting 

and  are  published  in  the Federal  Reserve  Bulletin and  the  Board's 

Annual Report.  The  summary descriptions of  economic and  financial 

conditions  they contain  are based  solely on  the  information  that 

was  available  to  the  Committee at  the  time  of  the  meeting.

Attachment

RECORD OF  POLICY  ACTIONS  OF  THE 
FEDERAL  OPEN MARKET  COMMITTEE 

Meeting held  on  February 1-2,  1982 

1.  Domestic policy directive 

Preliminary  estimates  of  the  Commerce Department  indicated  that 

real  gross  national  product  had  declined  at  an  annual rate  of  about  5-1/4 

percent  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  1981.  Average  prices,  as  measured  by 

the  fixed-weight  price  index for  gross  domestic business  product,  increased 

at  an  annual  rate  of  about  7  percent, much less  rapidly  than  over  the  first 

three  quarters  of  the year.  During  1981,  real GNP  and  nominal  GNP  grew 

about  3/4  percent  and  9-1/4  percent respectively, and  the  price  index 

referred  to  above  rose about  9  percent.  

The  index  of industrial  production fell  2.1  percent  further  in 

December, for  a  cumulative  decline  of  about  7  percent  over  the  last  five 

months  of  1981.  The decline  in December  again was  broadly  based,  reflecting 

output  reductions  for  nearly  all major  product groupings,  and  it  was  particularly 

sharp  for  durable  consumer goods  and  both  durable  and nondurable  goods  materials.  

Available  data,  notably for  the  automotive and  steel  industries,  suggested  further 

production  cutbacks  in  January.  

Total  nonfarm payroll  employment  declined  sharply  in December  for 

the  third  consecutive month.  Job  losses  in manufacturing  continued  sizable, 

totaling  more  than 700,000  in  the  fourth quarter.  The unemployment rate 

rose  an  additional  0.5  percentage point  in December  to  8.9  percent.

2/1-2/82

The  nominal value  of  retail  sales  increased  somewhat  further  in 

December,  but  the  level  remained  below  the  average  for  the  third  quarter.  

Sales of  new domestic  automobiles  fell  to  an  annual  rate  of  4.9 million 

units  in December,  the  lowest  monthly  pace  in  22  years.  Auto sales  picked 

up  in  the  first  few weeks  of  January but  continued  at  an  exceptionally low 

rate.  

Private housing  starts  rose  13  percent  in  December  from the  de

pressed  rate  in  November, but  remained  below an  annual  rate  of  1 million 

units.  Nearly  all  of  the  increase  was  in multifamily units.  Sales  of 

existing homes  picked  up  somewhat  in  December,  as  had  sales  of  new homes 

in November;  nevertheless,  total  home  sales  in November were  about  one

third  below  their  year-earlier  level.  

The  producer  price  index  for  finished goods  rose  0.3  percent  in 

December, compared  with  0.5  percent  in  November.  During  1981  the  index 

rose  7 percent,  compared  with the  increase  of  nearly  12  percent  over 

1980.  Producer  prices  of  consumer  foods  rose  only a little  during  1981, 

and  the  rise  in  energy  prices  moderated, as  a surge  early in  the  year 

after  decontrol  of  oil prices  was  followed  by  some decline  in  the  second 

half.  Producer  prices  of  other  consumer goods  and  capital equipment  also 

rose  less  rapidly  in  1981  than in  1980.  The  consumer  price  index  rose 

0.4  percent  in  December;  over the  year  the  index  increased  about  9 percent, 

compared  with a rise  of about  12-1/2  percent  over  1980.  Increases were 

smaller  in  1981  than in  1980  for  all major  components  of  the  index.

2/1-2/82

The  rise  in  the  index  of  average  hourly earnings  slowed  consider

ably  in  the  final  three  months  of  1981  from  the  pace earlier  in  the  year.  

Over  the  year,  the  index  rose  about  8-1/4  percent,  compared  with  an in

crease  of  about  9-1/2  percent  over  1980.  

In  foreign  exchange markets  the  trade-weighted value  of  the  dollar 

against  major  foreign  currencies  rose about  4  percent  during January,  re

flecting primarily  responses  to  the  widening  differential  between  U.S.  and 

foreign  interest  rates.  Foreign monetary authorities  intervened  considerably 

to  resist  the  depreciation of  their  currencies.  The  U.S.  trade  deficit  in

creased  in  the  fourth quarter  from  the  rate  in  the  previous  two  quarters,  as 

nonagricultural  exports  declined  and  non-oil  imports  rose.  

At  its  meeting  on December  21-22,  1981,  the  Committee had  decided 

that  open  market operations  in  the  period  until  this  meeting  should  be 

directed  toward  behavior  of  reserve  aggregates  consistent  with growth of 

M1  and  M2  from November  1981  to  March 1982  at  annual  rates  of  around  4  to  5 

percent  and  around  9  to  10  percent  respectively.  In  setting  the  objective 

for  M1,  the  Committee  took  account  of  the  relatively  rapid  growth  that  had 

already  taken  place  through  the  first  part  of  December.  The  intermeeting 

range  for  the  federal  funds  rate,  which provides  a mechanism  for  initiating 

consultation  of  the  Committee  between  regularly  scheduled meetings,  was 

set  at  10  to  14  percent.  

M1  grew at  an  annual  rate  of  11-1/2  percent  in December  and 

accelerated in  January  to  a  rate  estimated  to  be  above  20  percent.  

Expansion  in  checkable deposits  other  than demand  accounts  (other  check

able  deposits,  or  OCDs),  which accounted  for  a  substantial  part  of  the

2/1-2/82

acceleration of  M1  growth  in  November  and  December,  apparently was  even 

more  rapid  in  January.  Growth of  M2  moderated  in  December  to  an  annual 

rate  of  about  7-3/4  percent  but  picked  up  in  January  to  a rate  estimated 

at  about  11  percent;  the  substantial  growth  over  the  two  months  reflected 

strength in  the  more  liquid of  the  nontransaction  components  as  well as 

1/ 

in Ml. 

Some  evidence  suggested  that  the  disproportionate  growth in  NOW 

and  similar  accounts in  recent  months  had resulted  at  least  in  part  from 

a desire  of  individuals  to  hold  liquid  balances  because  of  uncertainties 

about  economic  prospects and  interest  rates.  

The  pace  of  monetary growth in  December and  January raised  re

quired  reserves  and generated  demands  for  reserves  considerably in  excess 

of  the  volume  supplied  during  the  intermeeting period  through  System open 

market  operations.  Consequently,  borrowings  from Federal  Reserve  Banks 

1/  The  growth rates  cited  are based  on  revised data  for  the monetary  aggre
gates,  reflecting new benchmarks  and  revised  seasonal  factors  and  some 
minor  changes  in  the  definition of  M2,  that  were  published  on  February 5.  
As  redefined,  M2  no  longer includes  institution-only money market  mutual 
funds  (which remain  in M3)  and  includes  retail  repurchase  agreements 
(RPs)  in  denominations  of  less  than  $100,000  (which were  already  in  M3).  

M1  comprises  demand  deposits  at  commercial  banks  and  thrift  institu

tions,  currency  in  circulation, travelers  checks,  negotiable  orders  of 
withdrawal  (NOW) and  automatic  transfer  service  (ATS)  accounts  at  banks 
and  thrift  institutions,  and  credit  union  share  draft  accounts.  M2 
contains  M1  and  savings  and  small-denomination  time  deposits  at  all 
depository  institutions,  overnight RPs  at  commercial  banks  and  retail 
RPs  at  all  depository institutions,  overnight  Eurodollars held  at 
Caribbean branches  of  member  banks  by U.S.  residents  other  than banks, 
and  money  market mutual  fund  shares  other  than  those  restricted  to 
institutions.  M3  is  M2  plus  large-denomination  time  deposits  at  all 
depository institutions,  large-denomination  term  RPs  at  commercial 
banks  and  saving and  loan  associations, and  institution-only money 
market mutual  funds.

2/1-2/82

-5-

for  purposes  of  adjusting  reserve  positions  expanded  sharply;  borrowings 

averaged nearly  $1.3  billion  in  the  four  statement  weeks  ending  January  27, 

compared with an  average  of  about  $425 million  in  the  four  weeks  ending 

December  23.  The  federal  funds  rate  rose  from  around  12-1/4  percent  in 

the  days  preceding  the  December  meeting  to  about  14  percent  in the  days 

just  before  this meeting.  

Against  a  background  of  continued  rapid  growth  in  monetary aggre

gates  and  large  prospective  federal  deficits,  market  interest  rates  had  risen 

on  balance  since  the  Committee's meeting  in December:  short-term  rates  in

creased  about  1-1/2  to  2-1/2  percentage  points  and  bond  yields  rose  about 

1/2  to  1  percentage  point.  The  prime  rate  charged by most  commercial  banks 

on  short-term  business  loans  remained  at  15-3/4  percent  during  the  inter

meeting  interval.  Average  rates  on new  commitments  for  fixed-rate  conven

tional  home mortgage  loans  increased  nearly 3/4  of  a  percentage  point.  

Total  credit  at U.S.  commercial  banks,  adjusted  for  shifts  of  assets 

from U.  S.  offices  of  banks  to  recently  established  international  banking 

1/ 

facilities  (IBFs),  expanded  at  an  annual  rate  of  about  11  percent  in  December.  

Growth in  business  loans  accelerated  substantially, and  security,  real  estate, 

and  consumer  loans  also  registered  sizable  gains.  From  the  fourth  quarter  of 

1980  to  the  fourth  quarter  of  1981,  bank  credit  expanded  8-3/4  percent.  

Issuance  of  commercial  paper  by nonfinancial  institutions  was  relatively 

strong  in December,  but  slowed in  early  January.  

1/  International banking  facilities  began  operations  on December  3,  1981.  

The  adjustment  made  in  calculating  growth in  bank  credit  involved  adding 
back assets  estimated  to  have  been  transferred  from U.  S. banking 
offices  to  IBFs.

2/1-2/82

Staff  projections  presented  at  this  meeting  suggested  that  real 

GNP would decline  further in  the  current  quarter and then  begin to  recover 

in  the  second  quarter.  The  unemployment  rate was  expected  to  increase  to 

a peak  in  the  second  quarter, while  inflation,  as  measured by  the  fixed

weight  price index  for gross  domestic  business  product,  was projected  to 

slow further over  the  year.  

Views  of  Committee members  concerning  economic activity and  prices 

during  1982 generally differed  little  from the  staff  projections.  The members 

thought  that  recovery in  activity most  likely would  begin before long,  although 

they differed  somewhat  with regard  to  its  probable  strength.  Their projections 

of  growth in real  GNP over  the  year  ending  in  the  fourth quarter of  1982  ranged 

from 1/2  percent  to  3 percent.  However,  a number  of members  expressed  concern 

about  the  risk  that  the  recession  might  be  prolonged  by  greater weakness  in 

business  capital  investment  than  currently  anticipated or  by other  developments.  

Members  were unanimous  in  the  view that  the  reduction in  the  rise  in prices  was 

likely  to  continue:  their  projections  for  the  increase  in  the  GNP implicit  de

flator over  the  year  ranged  from  6-1/2  and  7-3/4  percent,  compared  with a rise 

of  about  8-1/2  percent  over  the  year  ending  in  the  fourth quarter of  1981.  

At  this meeting,  the  Committee  completed  the  review, begun  at  the 

meeting in December  1981,  of  the  ranges  for  growth of  monetary aggregates 

over  the  period  from  the  fourth quarter of  1981  to  the  fourth quarter  of 

1982  within the  framework  of  the Full  Employment  and  Balanced  Growth Act 

of  1978.  At  its meeting  in July 1981,  the  Committee had  reaffirmed  the 

ranges  for growth  over  the  year  ending  in  the  fourth quarter of  1981  that

2/1-2/32

-7-

it  had  set  in  early February.  These  ranges  were  3 to  5-1/2  percent  for 

Ml-A and  3-1/2  to  6  percent  for  M1-B,  abstracting from  the  impact  of  the 

introduction  of  NOW accounts  on a  nationwide  basis;  6  to  9  percent  for  M2; 

and  6-1/2  to  9-1/2  percent  for M3.  The  associated  range  for  growth  of 

commercial  bank  credit  was  6  to  9 percent.  For  the  year ending  in  the 

fourth  quarter  of  1982,  the  Committee had  tentatively agreed  that  growth 

of  ,M1, M2,  and  M3  within ranges  of  2-1/2  to  5-1/2  percent,  6  to  9 percent, 

and  6-1/2  to  9-1/2  percent  respectively would be  appropriate.  

1/ 

When  the  Committee  reaffirmed  the  ranges  for  1981  at  its  meeting 

in  July,  it  recognized  that  the  divergence  in growth of  the  various  monetary 

aggregates was  proving  to  be  considerably  greater  than had  been anticipated 

at  the  beginning of  the  year, even  after allowance  for  the  effects  of  shifts 

into  NOW accounts.  Thus  it  was  thought  likely  and  desirable  that  growth  of 

M1-B over  the  year would  be  near  the  lower  bound of  its  range  and  that  growth 

of  M2  and  M3  might well  be  around  the  upper ends  of  their  ranges.  

The  divergence  in  behavior between  the  narrow monetary aggregate 

and  the  broader  ones  proved  to  be  even greater  than had  been  expected  at 

midyear.  From  the  fourth  quarter of  1980  to  the  fourth  quarter  of  1981, 

growth of  M1-B  adjusted  for  shifts  into  NOW accounts  was  about  2-1/4 

percent,  approximately  1-1/4  percentage  points  below the  lower  end  of  its 

1/  In  looking  ahead  to  1982,  it  had  been  decided  to  abandon  the  compilation 

of  M1-A and  the  shift-adjusted M1-B  (that  is,  M1-B adjusted  to  exclude 
that  portion  of  flows  into  NOW accounts  in  1981  estimated  to  have  come 
from other  interest-bearing  assets  rather  than  from  demand  deposits).  
The  remaining  aggregate  for  M1  is  the  one  formerly labeled  Ml-B,  which 
includes  the  total  amount  of  NOW accounts.

2/1-2/82

range.  Growth  in  this  aggregate  over  the  year  was  slow in  relation  to  growth 

of  nominal  GNP,  as  financial  innovations  and  high interest  rates  induced 

changes  in  cash-management techniques.  Growth of  M2  and  M3  over  the  year  was 

about  9-1/2  percent  and  11-1/4  percent  respectively,  about  1/2  percentage  point 

and  1-3/4  percentage  points  above  the  upper  ends  of  their  ranges.  The  rela

tively strong  growth of  M2  reflected  in  part  shifts  of  funds  from market 

instruments  to  money market mutual  funds  and  the  expansion of  small  savers 

certificates  at  depository  institutions  in  response  to  liberalization of 

interest  rate  ceilings;  M3  grew more  than  M2  because  of  a substantial expansion 

in  large-denomination  CDs,  as  depository  institutions  increased  their  managed 

liabilities  to  support  expansion  in  loans  and  investments.  

In  contemplating  ranges  for  1982,  the  Committee  continued  to  face 

unusual  uncertainties  concerning  the forces  affecting monetary growth.  It 

seemed  likely  that  the  recent  expansion  in NOW accounts  would  prove  to  be 

mostly  a temporary  aberration in  individuals'  liquidity  preferences  and  that 

the  relationship  between  growth of  money  and  of  nominal  GNP  would  be  closer 

to  historical  patterns.  The  ongoing  changes  in  financial  technology,  which 

had  reduced  demand  for M1  for most of  1981,  were generally  presumed  to  have 

effects  in  1982  consistent with earlier  experience,  unless  such arrangements 

as  "sweeps"  of  individual  checking  accounts  into money market  funds  or  other 

instruments  became widespread.  With respect  to  M2, growth  could  be augmented 

if  the  scheduled  reduction  in  federal  income  taxes  or  other  influences  raised 

the  personal  saving  rate  or  if  depository institutions  attracted  an  excep

tionally large  flow of  funds  into  individual retirement  accounts  (IRAs)  from 

sources  not included  in  M2.

2/1-2/82

In  the  Committee's  discussion of  ranges  for  monetary growth in 

1982,  the  members  were  in  agreement  on  the  need  to  maintain the  commitment 

to  the  long-standing goal  of  restraining  growth of  money and  credit,  thereby 

contributing  to  a  further  reduction  in  the  rate  of  inflation and  providing 

the  basis  for  restoration of  economic  stability  and  sustainable  growth  in 

output.  Nevertheless, members  differed  somewhat  in  their  views  concerning 

the  particular  ranges  most appropriate  for  the  year.  

For  M1, most members  favored  reaffirming  the  range of  2-1/2  to 

5-1/2  percent  that  had  been  tentatively  adopted  at  the  meeting  in July 

1981.  One  member advocated  a  somewhat  higher  range,  with  a view  to  pro

moting more growth of  real  GNP and  a  lower  rate  of  unemployment.  In 

addition,  some  sentiment  was  expressed  for  retaining  the  range  of  2-1/2 

to  5-1/2  percent  but  taking  the  base  level  of  M1l  in  the  fourth quarter  of 

1981  to  be  the  lower  end  of  the  Committee's  range  for  last  year.  Such  an 

adjustment  of  the  base  would  in effect  recognize  that  the  recent  burst  in 

growth  of  M1 had  brought  its  level more  in  line with  the  lower  end  of  the 

1981  range  and,  unless  the  burst  proved  to  be  temporary,  could  provide  a 

more  appropriate  starting  point.  

Members  differed  somewhat more  in  their  views  concerning  the 

broader  monetary aggregates.  Most  desired  to  reaffirm the  tentative  range 

of  6  to  9  percent  adopted  last  July.  However, a  substantial  number  initially 

favored  specification of  slightly  higher  ranges,  largely because  of  their 

assessments  of  the  likely  impact  of  various  developments  that  would  tend  to 

raise  growth of  M2  relative  to  that  of  M1.  One  member  suggested  that  in

2/1-2/82

-10-

pursuit  of  its  objectives  during  the  course  of  the year  the  Committee  give 

more  weight  to  M2  than  to  Ml,  because  of  the  volatility of  the  behavior  of 

the  narrower aggregate  in  the  short  run  reflecting,  among  other things,  the 

response  of  NOW accounts  to  changing  liquidity preferences  and  interest  rates.  

More  generally, it  was  felt  that  considerable weight  should  be  given  to  M2  in 

interpreting developments  during  the  year.  

At  the conclusion  of  the  discussion, the  Committee  decided  to 

reaffirm the  ranges  for  1982  that  had  been tentatively established  in 

mid-1981.  Thus  the  Committee  adopted  the  following  ranges  for  growth 

of  the monetary aggregates  from  the  fourth  quarter  of  1981  to  the  fourth 

quarter of  1982:  for  M1,  2-1/2  to  5-1/2  percent;  for  M2,  6 to  9 percent; 

and  for M3,  6-1/2  to  9-1/2  percent.  The  associated  range  for  commercial 

bank  credit  was  6 to  9 percent.  

In  setting  the  range  for  M1,  the  Committee  recognized  that  the 

recent  rapid  increase  in  that  aggregate  placed  it  in  January well  above 

the  average  in  the  fourth  quarter of  1981  but  that  it  was  too  early  to 

judge  conclusively  the  extent  to  which the  upsurge reflected  temporary 

influences  rather  than  a basic  change  in  the  amount  of  money needed  to 

finance growth of nominal GNP.  On  the  assumption  that  the  relationship 

between growth of  M1  and  the  expansion  of  nominal GNP was  likely to  be 

closer  to  normal  than  it  had  been  in  1981,  the  Committee  contemplated  that 

growth  of  M1  in  1982  might  acceptably be  in  the  upper  part  of  its  range.  

The  lower part  of  the  range was  considered appropriate  to  allow for  the 

possibility  that  institutional  or regulatory  changes would  speed  the  process

2/1-2/82

-11-

of  economizing on  the  cash balances  included  in  M1.  The  Committee  also 

contemplated  that  growth  of  M2  was  likely  to  be  high within  its  range, 

although growth  still would  be  somewhat  below  that  in  1981.  However, 

growth of  M2 might  appropriately reach or  even  slightly  exceed  the  upper 

end  of  its  range  if  personal  savings  grew much more  rapidly  in  relation 

to  income  than  anticipated  or  if  depository institutions  attracted  an 

exceptionally large  flow of  funds  into  IRAs  from sources  outside  measured 

M2.  In  light  of  the  unusual  growth of  NOW accounts  in  recent  weeks,  it 

was  emphasized  that  the  Committee might  wish to  reconsider  the  range  for 

M1  should  evidence  suggest  a  more lasting  change  in  individuals'  liquidity 

preferences;  in  any  event,  it  would  reconsider  the  ranges  in  July  within 

the  framework  of  the  Full  Employment  and  Balanced  Growth Act  of  1978.  

The  Committee  adopted  the  following ranges  for  growth in 

the  monetary aggregates  for  the  period  from  the  fourth  quarter 
of  1981  to  the  fourth  quarter  of  1982:  M1,  2-1/2  to  5-1/2 
percent;  M2,  6  to  9  percent;  and  M3,  6-1/2  to  9-1/2  percent.  
The  associated  range  for  bank  credit  is  6  to  9  percent.  

Votes  for  this  action:  Messrs.  Volcker, 

Solomon, Boehne,  Boykin,  Corrigan,  Gramley, 
Keehn, Partee,  Rice,  Schultz,  and Wallich.  
Vote  against  this  action:  Mrs.  Teeters.  

Mrs.  Teeters dissented  from  this  action because  she  believed  that 

somewhat  higher monetary  growth over  the  year  ahead  was  needed  to  promote 

adequate  expansion in  economic  activity  and  a  reduction  in  the  rate  of  un

employment.  Specifically,  she  favored  a  range  for  Ml  that  was  at  least  1/2 

percentage  point  higher  than  that  adopted  by  the  Committee  and  a  range  for 

M2  that  provided  for  somewhat greater  growth  in  the  broader  aggregate 

relative  to  that  in  Ml.

2/1-2/82

-12-

In  contemplating its  objectives  for monetary growth  over  the 

remainder  of  the  first  quarter of  the  new year,  the  Committee took  account 

of  the  very  rapid  rise  in  M1 in recent  months,  especially in  January.  

Given  the  apparent  persistence of  slow growth in  nominal GNP in  the  first 

quarter,  it  seemed  quite  likely  that  the  demand  for money would abate  sub

stantially over  the  months  ahead.  Even  if  M1  grew no  further  from January 

to  March,  its  income  velocity  on  the  average  for  the  first  quarter  could well 

decline  at  a postwar  record  rate.  While  some  decline  in  M1  seemed  desirable, 

the  Committee did  not  feel  that  much stronger measures  than  those  already in 

place  would  be  necessary  or  appropriate  in  the  period  immediately  ahead  to 

force  such a decline.  

Against  this  background,  the  Committee  decided  to  seek  behavior  of 

reserve  aggregates associated  with  no  further  growth of  Ml  from January  to 

March and with growth  of  M2  at  an  annual rate  of  around  8 percent, with a 

view  to  bringing growth of  both  aggregates  over  time  into  their  longer-run 

target  ranges  for  the  year.  It  was  also agreed  that  some  decline  in  M1, 

which would  be  associated with a faster  return  to  its  longer-run  range, would 

be  acceptable  in the  context  of  reduced pressure  in  the money market.  The 

intermeeting range  for  the  federal  funds  rate,  which provides  a mechanism for 

initiating consultation  of  the  Committee, was  set  at  12  to  16  percent.  

The  following  domestic  policy  directive was  issued  to  the  Federal 

Reserve  Bank  of  New York:

2/1-2/82

-13-

The  information  reviewed  at  this  meeting  indicate,  that 

real  GNP  declined  appreciably in  the  fourth  quarter  of  1981 
and  that  prices  on  the  average  rose  much  less  rapidly  than 
over  the  first  three  quarters  of  the  year.  In  December 
industrial  production  and  nonfarm payroll  employnent declined 
sharply for  the  third  consecutive  month, and  the  unemployment 
rate  rose  an  additional  0.5  percentage  point  to  8.9  Percent.  
The  nominal  value  of  retail  sales  increased  somewhat  further, 
but  the  level  was  still  below  the  average  for  the  third 
quarter.  Although housing  starts  expanded,  they  emained 
at  a depressed  level.  The  rise  in  the  index of  average 
hourly earnings  was  considerably  less  rapid  over  the  fourth 
quarter of  1981  than on  the  average earlier  in  the  year.  

The  weighted average  value  of  the dollar  against major 

foreign currencies  rose  substantially during  January;  foreign 
monetary  authorities  intervened  considerably to  resist  the 
depreciation of  their  currencies.  In  the  fourth  quarter the 
U.S.  foreign  trade  deficit  increased  from  the  rate  in  the 
previous  two  quarters.  

M1 grew  rapidly in  December  and  January,  reflecting 
in  part  rapid  expansion in  checkable  deposits  other  than 
demand accounts.  Growth of  M2 also  was  substantial,  owing 
to  strength  in  the  more liquid  of  the  nontransaction com
ponents as  well  as  in  M1.  Short-term market  interest  rates 
and bond  yields  on  balance have  risen further  in  recent 
weeks,  and  mortgage  interest  rates  have  also  increased.  

The  Federal Open  Market  Committee seeks  to  foster 
monetary  and  financial  conditions  that  will  help  to  reduce 
inflation,  promote  a resumption of  growth  in output  on  a 
sustainable basis,  and  contribute  to  a sustainable  pattern 
of  international  transactions.  The  Committee  agreed  that 
its  objectives would  be  furthered  by  growth of  M1,  M2,  and 
M3  from the  fourth quarter  of  1981  to  the  fourth quarter 
of  1982 within  ranges  of  2-1/2  to  5-1/2  percent,  6 to  9 
percent,  and  6-1/2  to  9-1/2  percent  respectively.  The 
associated  range  for  bank credit  was  6 to  9 percent.

2/1-2/82

-14-

The  Committee  seeks  behavior  of  reserve  aggregates 

over  the  balance of  the  quarter  consistent  with bringing 
M1  and  M2  over  time  into  their  longer-run  target  ranges 
for  the  year.  Taking  account  of  the  recent  surge  in 
growth of  Ml,  the  Committee  seeks  no  further  growth in 
M1 for  the  January-to-March  period and  growth  in  M2  at 
an  annual  rate  of  around 8 percent.  Some  decline in  M1 
would  be  associated with more rapid  attainment  of  the 
longer-run  range  and  would be  acceptable  in  the  context 
of  reduced  pressure  in  the  money  market.  The  Chairman 
may  call  for  Committee  consultation  if  it  appears  to  the 
Manager for  Domestic  Operations  that  pursuit  of  the 
monetary  objectives  and  related  reserve  paths  during the 
period before  the  next  meeting  is  likely  to  be  associated 
with  a federal  funds  rate persistently outside a range 
of  12  to  16  percent.  

Votes  for  this  action:  Messrs.  Volcker, 

Solomon,  Boehne,  Boykin,  Corrigan, Gramley, 
Keehn, Partee,  Rice,  Schultz,  Mrs.  Teeters, 
and  Mr. Wallich.  Votes  against  this  action: 
None.

