FEDERAL  RESERVE  press  release 

For Use  at  4:10  p.m. 

October 8, 1982 

The  Federal  Reserve Board and  the  Federal  Open Market 

Committee  today  released  the  attached  record  of  policy  actions 

taken by  the  Federal  Open Market Committee  at  its  meeting  on 

August  24,  1982.  

Such  records  for each meeting of  the  Committee  are made 

available a few days  after  the  next  regularly  scheduled meeting 

and  are  published  in  the  Federal  Reserve  Bulletin and  the Board's 

Annual  Report.  The  summary descriptions  of  economic  and  financial 

conditions  they  contain are  based  solely  on the  information that 

was  available to  the  Committee  at  the  time  of  the meeting.

Attachment

RECORD OF  POLICY ACTIONS  OF 
THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 

Meeting Held on August  24,  1982 

1.  Domestic policy directive 

The  information reviewed  at  this meeting suggested  that  real  GNP 

would advance  only a  little  further  in  the  current quarter,  following  an 

increase  at  an annual  rate  of  about  1-1/4 percent  in  the  second  quarter.  

Average  prices,  as measured  by the  fixed-weight price  index  for gross 

domestic  business  product, were  continuing  to  rise more  slowly  than  in 

1981.  

The nominal value  of  retail sales  rose  1  percent  in July, 

according  to the  advance report,  recovering  only part of  the  3-1/4  per

cent decline  recorded  in June.  Sales  of  new domestic automobiles, which 

had  dropped  to  an  annual  rate  of  4.8 million units  in June,  rose  a  little 

in July and  early August.  

The  index of  industrial  production was  about unchanged  in July, 

following a  cumulative  decline  of more  than  10 percent  from the  pre

recession  level in  July 1981.  Production  of  business  equipment  continued 

to  drop at  its  recent  pace  of  2  to  3  percent per month, while  output  of 

defense and  space  equipment  continued  to  expand.  Output  of  consumer 

goods  picked  up,  reflecting mainly an increase  in  automobile  assemblies, 

but  automobile  output  in July was at  a  rate  substantially above  the  sales 

pace of  June and  July, and  production schedules  for August were  cut  back.

8/24/82

Nonfarm payroll employment,  after declining  sharply in June, was 

essentially unchanged in July,  as  continued job losses  in manufacturing 

were about offset  by gains  in trade  and  service industries.  The  unemploy

ment  rate  rose 0.3  percentage  point  to  9.8 percent,  as  the  civilian labor 

force expanded and  total  civilian employment  was unchanged.  

Private housing  starts rose  34  percent  in July, more than  reversing 

the decline in June;  but  at  an annual  rate of  1.2  million units,  starts 

remained low by historical  standards.  All of  the July increase was  in 

multifamily units;  starts of  such units more  than doubled, in  part  because 

of  an upsurge in  those qualifying  for  rental  subsidies under  a federal 

government  program terminating  on  September  30.  That  impending  termination 

also  apparently contributed to  a substantial  rise  in July in newly issued 

permits  for multifamily units;  permits  for single-family dwellings declined 

slightly and were  at  about  the  same  pace  as  in  the  second  quarter  as  a whole.  

Combined sales  of  new and  existing homes  in June continued  about  25 percent 

below those  of  a year earlier.  

The  producer price index  for finished goods  and  the  consumer price 

index both  rose  0.6  percent  in July, following increases  of  1.0  percent  in 

June.  At  the  producer level,  prices  of  energy-related items increased  sharply 

in both months  and  in July  accounted  for nearly  all  of  the  rise  in  the  index; 

prices  of  foods  and  food materials  fell  substantially in July.  At  the 

consumer level,  food  prices  edged down  in July, while  increases  in energy 

prices  and  homeownership costs moderated from  the rapid  rates  recorded

8/24/82

-3-

in June.  Over  the  first  seven months of  the  year,  the producer price 

index for finished  goods  and  the  consumer price index  rose  at annual 

rates  of  about  3 percent  and  5-1/2 percent  respectively, compared  with 

increases  of  about  7 percent  and  9 percent in 1981.  The advance  in  the 

index of  average  hourly  earnings also  was considerably less  rapid  through 

July  than during 1981.  

In  foreign exchange markets  the trade-weighted  value  of  the dollar 

against major  currencies, while fluctuating  over a wide  range, had  changed 

little on balance  since  late June despite a sharp  decline in  U.S.  interest 

rates  relative  to  foreign rates.  The  strength  of  the  dollar in  the  face of 

narrowing  interest  rate differentials  apparently reflected  concerns  of 

market  participants about  economic  and  financial  difficulties  abroad.  The 

U.S.  foreign trade  deficit in  the second quarter was  somewhat below the 

first-quarter deficit,  reflecting  primarily a substantial  drop in petroleum 

imports;  the  total  of  other imports rose  somewhat  and exports  were  about 

unchanged.  

At  its meeting  on June  30 - July 1, the Committee  had  agreed  to 

seek behavior  of  reserve aggregates associated  with growth of  M1  and M2 

from June to  September  at  annual  rates of  about  5 percent and  about  9 per

cent  respectively.  It  had  also  decided that  somewhat  more  rapid growth 

would be  acceptable depending on evidence  that  economic  and  financial uncer

tainties  were leading to  exceptional liquidity demands.  Moreover,  the Com

mittee  had noted  that seasonal  uncertainties,  together with increased social 

security  payments  and the  initial  impact  of  the  tax cut  on cash balances,

8/24/82

-4-

might  lead to  a temporary  bulge in  the monetary aggregates,  particularly Ml.  

The  intermeeting range  for  the  federal  funds  rate, which provides  a mechanism 

for  initiating  further consultation of  the  Committee,  was  set  at  10  to  15 

percent.  

M1  in fact  declined  slightly in July, following  declines  in May and 

June, as  demand  deposits  continued  to  contract  and  growth in  currency slowed 

further.  Growth of M2,  after moderating in  June from a rapid  pace in previous 

months,  accelerated again  in  July.  Small-denomination time  deposits  increased 

sharply during  the month, and  shares  in money market mutual funds  continued 

to  expand  at a relatively  strong  pace;  in  contrast,  savings  deposits  at  all 

depository  institutions declined substantially after growing moderately during 

earlier months of  the  year.  

Total  credit outstanding  at U.S.  commercial  banks  grew at  an  annual 

rate  of  about  6-1/2  percent  in  July, well  below the  pace  in  the  first  half 

of  the year.  Growth in  business  loans  slowed  in  July, but  generally strong 

business  demands  for  short-term  credit were  reflected  in  an increase  in 

loans  booked  at  foreign  branches  of  U.S.  banks  and  in  a sharp  acceleration 

in issuance  of  commercial  paper  by nonfinancial  businesses.  Issuance  of 

publicly offered bonds  rose  in July.  

Nonborrowed  reserves expanded  relatively rapidly in July.  However 

with the  demand  for  reserves  weak, in  part  reflecting  the  sluggishness of 

M1,  adjustment borrowing  by  depository institutions  (including  seasonal 

borrowing) declined  from an average  of  about  $1.1  billion in June  to  about 

$330 million in  the  two  statement  weeks  ending August  18.

8/24/82

-5-

Market  interest  rates  had declined  sharply over  the  period  since 

the  last Committee meeting.  Short-term market  rates  fell  4 to  6 percentage 

points.  The federal  funds  rate,  for  example, declined  from around  14-1/2 

percent at  the  end of  June  to  about  10 percent  in  the  statement week  ending 

August 18  and  to  around  9 percent  in  the days  immediately preceding  this 

Committee meeting.  Bond  yields  declined  about  1-3/4  to  2 percentage points.  

A substantial part of  the decline  in long-term rates  occurred  in  an unusually 

strong rally in  debt  markets around  mid-August, when record  price  increases 

also  occurred  in  the  stock market.  The  strength  of  the  downward movement 

in  interest  rates  apparently reflected  a shift  in market  sentiment  about 

the outlook for  interest rates  against  the  background  of  strains in  financial 

markets,  relatively weak economic indicators,  and  legislative action  on  the 

federal budget.  Over  the intermeeting  interval,  the  prime  rate charged  by 

commercial banks  on short-term business  loans  was  lowered  from 16-1/2  per

cent  to  13-1/2  percent.  In  conjunction with the  decline  in  short-term market 

rates,  the  Federal Reserve discount  rate was  reduced  in  three  steps  from 12 

percent  to  10-1/2  percent over the  period.  In  home  mortgage markets,  average 

rates  on  new commitments  for  fixed-rate  conventional  loans  at  savings  and 

loan  associations  declined  about  1/2  percentage point  on balance.  

The  staff  projections  presented at  this meeting  suggested  that 

real  GNP would  grow at  a moderate pace over the  year ahead  but  that  the 

unemployment  rate  would remain near its  recent  high level.  Inflation, 

as measured  by  the  fixed-weight  price index  for gross domestic  business

8/24/82

-6-

product,  was  expected  to  pick up somewhat  over  the months  ahead  from  the 

substantially reduced pace  in  the  first  half  of  1982, but  continued  improve

ment  in  the underlying trend  was anticipated.  

In  the Committee's  discussion of  the  economic  situation and 

outlook,  several members commented  that  the  timing  of an  economic  recovery 

was subject  to  considerable uncertainty, but no member expressed  disagreement 

with the general  character  of  the  staff  projection.  As  at  other  recent 

meetings,  some  Committee members  suggested  that  the  principal risks  of  a 

deviation  from the projection were  on the  down side.  Reference  was made 

to  the growing expressions  of  concern in the  business community and  to 

financial  strains being  experienced  by many business  firms,  financial 

institutions,  and others.  In  this  situation,  spending might well remain 

weak in key sectors of  the  economy.  Business  capital  spending was  cited 

as  especially vulnerable  to  remaining  depressed, particularly in  the  event 

of  renewed upward  pressure  on  long-term interest  rates.  On  the other  hand, 

it was observed,  continued  success  in  the  fight  against inflation would 

over time  ease  pressures  in  long-term debt markets,  improve business  con

fidence,  and strengthen business  capital  spending.  

Some members  commented  that  to  date  the midyear reduction in 

federal  income  taxes  and  the  concurrent  cost-of-living increase  in  social 

security payments  appeared  to  have had  little  impact on  consumer  spending.  

The  view was expressed, however,  that  the midyear tax actions  were likely 

to  exert  a positive  influence  on  a delayed basis.  It was  also  noted  that 

the  recently reduced  levels  of  interest  rates,  if  they were  sustained,  would

8/24/82

help  to  relieve  financial pressures  throughout  the  economy  and  thereby con

tribute  to  improvement  in economic  activity  over  the months  ahead.  

At  its meeting on  June  30  - July 1, the  Committee had begun a 

review of  the monetary growth objectives  for the period  from  the  fourth 

quarter of  1981  to  the  fourth quarter  of  1982  that  it  had  set  in  early 

February.  Subsequently, at  a meeting on  July 15,  the  Committee had  reaf

firmed  those objectives, which included  ranges  of  2-1/2  to  5-1/2  percent 

for M1, 6 to,9  percent for M2, and  6-1/2  to  9-1/2  percent for M3.  The 

associated range  for  bank credit  was 6 to  9 percent.  At  the  same  time  the 

Committee  agreed  that growth  in  the monetary  and credit  aggregates around 

the  top of  the  indicated  ranges would  be  acceptable  in  the light  of  the  rela

tively low base period for  the M1  target  and other  factors,  and that  it  would 

tolerate  for  some period  of  time  growth somewhat  above  the  target  range  should 

unusual  precautionary demands  for money and  liquidity be  evident  in  the  light 

of  current economic  uncertainties.  The Committee  also  indicated  that  it  was 

tentatively planning  to  continue  the  current  ranges  for  1983  but  that  it  would 

review that  decision carefully  in  the light  of  developments  over  the  remainder 

of  1982.  

At  this  meeting the Committee  reviewed  the  short-run  objectives 

that  it  had  established  at  the previous  meeting calling  for  expansion at 

annual  rates  of  about  5 percent for  M1  and  about  9 percent for M2  over  the 

three months  from June  to  September.  Data available  through mid-August 

indicated  that  growth in  M1 was  running  below the Committee's  objective, 

while  partial  data suggested  that  growth in  M2  had moved  above  the  objective

8/24/82

-8-

for  the  three-month period.  In  relation to  the  Committee's  objectives  for 

the year  as a whole, the  latest  staff  estimates  indicated  that  the expansion 

of M1 was  within its  longer-run  range, while  that  of M2  was somewhat  above 

its  1982 range.  

During  the  Committee's  discussion, most  of  the members agreed 

that  the  short-run growth objectives  adopted at  the previous meeting remained 

appropriate under current  economic and  financial  conditions and  should be 

retained.  The  view was  expressed  that  the  substantial  recent decline  in 

interest  rates,  which in  part  reflected  growing public awareness  of  the 

progress  that had  been made  in curbing  inflation, provided welcome  relief 

in easing financial  strains  throughout  the  economy.  A number  of members 

expressed  concern, however, about  the volatility of  interest  rates  and  some 

commented  that further sharp movements  in either  direction over the  near 

term might have  damaging consequences.  Some members  emphasized  that  a pro

nounced  increase  from  current  levels would  aggravate  financial  strains and 

inhibit  recovery in interest-sensitive  sectors  of  the economy.  Some members 

also  suggested that  a large  further decline might  foster  a resurgence of in

flationary expectations  and  could  prove to  be  unsustainable and  therefore 

unsettling  to  financial markets.  Several  members  expressed  the view that 

the  Committee should  review its  policy if  reserve provision  to meet monetary 

growth objectives  was fostering  a substantial  change  in pressures  on bank 

reserve positions  and  in  credit markets.  

Reference was made  to  the  relative  strength in M2 over  the  course 

of  recent  weeks that  appeared to  be  related  in part  to  unusual demands  for

8/24/82

liquid  investments,  such as  money market  funds,  at  comparatively  attractive 

yields.  The  members  agreed  that under prevailing  circumstances,  M2 growth 

somewhat  above  its  short-run  target would be  acceptable  over  the  period 

immediately ahead.  

At  the conclusion of  the  discussion the  Committee agreed  to 

reaffirm the  objectives  for monetary growth established at  the June  30 

July 1 meeting for  the  June  to  September  period.  The Committee  decided 

that  somewhat  more rapid growth in  the monetary aggregates would be 

acceptable  depending upon evidence that  economic and  financial  uncertainties 

were  fostering  unusual liquidity  demands  for monetary assets  and were  con

tributing  to  substantial  volatility in interest rates.  The  intermeeting 

range  for  the  federal  funds  rate, which provides  a mechanism for  initiating 

further  consultation of  the  Committee, was set  at  7 to  11 percent.  

The  following domestic policy directive was  issued  to  the  Federal 

Reserve  Bank of New York: 

The  information reviewed at  this meeting suggests 

only a little  further advance  in  real  GNP in  the  current 
quarter, following  a relatively small  increase in  the 
second quarter, while prices  on  the  average  are  continuing 
to  rise more  slowly  than in 1981.  In July the nominal 
value of  retail  sales  rose  somewhat  from  a sharply  reduced 
June level;  housing starts  increased  substantially, though 
from a relatively low rate;  and  industrial  production and 
nonfarm payroll employment  were  essentially unchanged.  
The  unemployment  rate rose  0.3  percentage  point  to  9.8 
percent.  Over  the  first  seven months of  the  year  the 
advance in  the  index of  average hourly earnings was 
considerably less rapid  than during  1981.

8/24/82

-10-

The  weighted average value of  the dollar against 

major foreign currencies,  while  fluctuating over  a wide 
range,  has  changed  little  on balance since  late  June 
despite a sharp  decline in U.S.  interest  rates  relative 
to  foreign rates.  Demand  for dollars  appeared  to  reflect 
concern  about  economic  and financial  difficulties  abroad.  
The  U.S.  foreign trade  deficit  in  the  second  quarter was 
somewhat  below the  first-quarter deficit,  with petroleum 
imports  down substantially.  

M1  declined  slightly  in June and  July, while growth of 

M2 moderated  somewhat  from its average pace earlier in  the 
year.  Business demands  for  credit, especially short-term 
credit,  remained  generally strong.  Market  interest rates 
have  declined  sharply  since around  midyear, reflecting 
a shift  in market  sentiment  about  the outlook  for interest 
rates  against  the  background of  strains in  financial 
markets,  relatively weak economic indicators,  and  legis
lative  action on the  federal budget.  The  Federal  Reserve 
discount  rate was  reduced  in  three  steps  from 12  percent 
to  10-1/2  percent during  the period.  

The Federal Open Market  Committee  seeks  to  foster 
monetary and  financial  conditions  that will  help  to  reduce 
inflation,  promote a resumption  of  growth in  output  on  a 
sustainable  basis,  and  contribute  to  a sustainable pattern 
of  international  transactions.  At  its  meeting in  early 
February, the  Committee had  agreed  that  its  objectives  would 
be  furthered  by growth of  M1,  M2,  and M3  from the  fourth 
quarter of  1981  to  the fourth quarter  of  1982  within ranges 
of  2-1/2  to 5-1/2  percent,  6 to 9 percent,  and 6-1/2  to 
9-1/2  percent  respectively.  The  associated  range  for  bank 
credit was  6 to  9 percent.  The  Committee  began a review 
of  these  ranges  at  its meeting  on June 30  - July 1, and 
at  a meeting on July 15,  it  reaffirmed  the  targets  for  the 
year  set in  February.  At  the  same  time  the  Committee 
agreed that  growth in  the monetary and  credit  aggregates 
around  the  top of  the indicated  ranges  would be  acceptable 
in  the  light  of  the  relatively  low base  period  for  the 
Ml  target and  other  factors,  and  that  it would  tolerate 
for  some  period  of  time  growth  somewhat  above  the  target 
range  should unusual  precautionary demands  for money and 
liquidity  be  evident  in  the  light  of  current  economic un
certainties.  The  Committee  also  indicated  that  it  was 
tentatively planning  to  continue  the  current  ranges  for 
1983  but  that  it  would  review that decision  carefully 
in  the light  of  developments over  the  remainder of  1982.

8/24/82

-11-

In the  short  run,  the  Committee  continues  to  seek  behavior 

of  reserve  aggregates  consistent with growth of  Ml  and M2  from 
June  to  September  at  annual  rates  of  about  5 percent  and about 
9 percent  respectively.  Somewhat more rapid  growth would  be 
acceptable depending  on evidence  that  economic  and  financial 
uncertainties are  leading  to exceptional  liquidity demands 
and  changes  in financial  asset  holdings.  The  Chairman may 
call  for Committee consultation if  it  appears  to  the Manager 
for Domestic  Operations  that pursuit  of  the monetary objectives 
and  related reserve  paths  during  the  period before  the  next 
meeting is  likely  to  be  associated with a federal funds 
rate persistently outside a range  of  7 to  11 percent.  

Votes  for  this  action:  Messrs.  

Volcker, Solomon,  Balles,  Black, Ford, 
Mrs.  Horn, Messrs.  Martin, Partee, 
Rice,  and  Mrs.  Teeters.  Vote against 
this  action:  Mr.  Wallich.  Absent  and 
not voting:  Mr.  Gramley.  

Mr.  Wallich dissented  from this  action  because  he  favored  an 

approach to  operations  early in the  period  that  would lessen the  chances 

of  short-term interest  rates  remaining below the  prevailing  discount 

rate or  falling further below it.  He  was concerned  that  such interest 

rate  behavior would  tend  to  accelerate monetary  expansion  and  that  the 

necessary  restraint of  reserve growth to  curb  such  expansion might  lead 

to  a sizable  rebound  in short-term rates  with adverse implications  for 

business  and  consumer  confidence.  

2.  Authorization for  foreign currency  operations 

At  this meeting  Committee members were apprised  of  the status  of 

ongoing discussions  with  the  Government of  Mexico  regarding  short-term financ

ing arrangements  to  support Mexico's  efforts to  strengthen  its  economic  and 

financial  position.  At  its meeting on June  30  - July 1, the  Committee

8/24/82

-12-

had  agreed,  in  response  to  a request  by officials  of  the Bank of  Mexico, that 

it  would  stand  ready  to  provide  to  the  Bank of Mexico up  to  the  full  $700 

million available under  the Federal Reserve System's  existing  swap  arrangement 

with that  Bank.  Subsequently, on August  4, 1982,  the Bank  of Mexico, which 

had  drawn  on its  swap line on an overnight  basis  on a few occasions  in recent 

months, drew $700  million for  a period of  three months.  

At  the  time  of  this meeting, negotiations were under way among 

Mexico,  the U.S. Treasury, major central  banks,  and  other lenders  to  provide 

multilateral financial  support  to Mexico.  The  purpose  of  the  support was  to 

effect  an  orderly transition to  an  economic  stabilization  program that  the 

Government  of Mexico had  announced was  being  developed.  The Committee author

ized  Federal Reserve participation in  the  proposed multilateral  financing 

package  through  the temporary  establishment of  a special  swap arrangement of 

$325  million with the  Bank of  Mexico in  addition to  the  regular arrangement 

of  $700  million.  Accordingly, paragraph 2 of  the Committee's  authorization 

for  foreign currency operations  was  amended, effective August  28,  1982,  for 

the  period  through August 23,  1983,  to  read as  follows: 

2.  The Federal  Open  Market Committee directs  the Federal Reserve  Bank 

of New York  to  maintain reciprocal  currency arrangements  ("swap"  arrangements) 
for  the  System Open Market Account  for  periods up  to a maximum of 12  months 
with  the  following  foreign banks, which  are among  those designated  by  the  Board 
of  Governors of  the  Federal  Reserve System under  Section 214.5  of  Regulation N 
Relations with Foreign Banks  and  Bankers,  and with  the approval  of  the  Committee 
to  renew such arrangements  on maturity:

8/24/82

-13-

Foreign Bank 

Austrian National  Bank 
National Bank of  Belgium 
Bank of  Canada 
National Bank of  Denmark 
Bank of  England 
Bank of  France 
German Federal Bank 
Bank of  Italy 
Bank of  Japan 
Bank of  Mexico: 

Regular 
Special 

Netherlands  Bank 
Bank of  Norway 
Bank of  Sweden 
Swiss  National  Bank 
Bank for International  Settlements: 
Dollars  against  Swiss  francs 
Dollars  against  authorized  European 
currencies  other  than Swiss  francs 

Amount  of  arrangement 
(millions of  dollars 
equivalent) 

250 
1,000 
2,000 
250 
3,000 
2,000 
6,000 
3,000 
5,000 

700 
325 
500 
250 
300 
4,000 

600 

1,250 

Any  changes  in the  terms  of  existing  swap arrangements,  and  the  proposed 
terms  of  any new arrangements  that  may be  authorized,  shall  be  referred 
for  review and  approval  to  the  Committee.  

Votes  for  this  action:  Messrs.  

Volcker,  Solomon, Balles,  Black, Ford, 
Mrs. Horn, Messrs. Martin, Partee, Rice, 
Mrs.  Teeters,  and  Mr. Wallich.  Votes 
against  this action:  None.  Absent and 
not voting:  Mr.  Gramley.  

On August  30,  1982,  the  U.S.  Treasury and  the  Federal Reserve 

announced  that  they were participating with central  banks of  other Group of 

Ten  countries,  Spain, and  Switzerland,  under  the aegis  of  the  Bank for  Inter

national  Settlements,  in making  available  to  the Bank of Mexico  short-term

8/24/82 

-14

financing  totaling  $1.85  billion.  The  Treasury would  provide $600  million 

through the Exchange  Stabilization Fund,  in conjunction with the  $325 million 

that  the Federal  Reserve  was  making  available  through its  additional  swap 

arrangement.  The multilateral  financing  program provided  that drawings  by 

Mexico would be made  in line  with progress  toward  agreement  between the 

Mexican Government  and  the  International Monetary Fund  (IMF) on  an  economic 

adjustment program  that will  permit  Mexico to  qualify for drawings  under  the 

IMF's  Extended  Fund  Facility.

