FEDERAL  RESERVE  press release 

For Use  at  4:10  p.m. 

July  2, 1982 

The Federal Reserve Board  and  the  Federal Open  Market 

Committee  today released  the  attached  record  of  policy actions 

taken by  the Federal  Open Market  Committee  at  its  meeting on 

May 18,  1982.  

Such  records for  each meeting  of  the Committee  are made 

available  a few days  after  the  next  regularly scheduled meeting 

and  are  published in  the  Federal Reserve Bulletin and  the  Board's 

Annual  Report.  The  summary descriptions  of  economic  and  financial 

conditions  they  contain are  based  solely on  the  information  that 

was  available  to  the Committee at  the  time  of  the meeting.

Attachment

RECORD OF  POLICY  ACTIONS OF 
THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 

Meeting Held on May  18,  1982 

The  information reviewed  at  this  meeting suggested  that  real GNP 

would  change  little  in  the  current  quarter  after declining at  annual  rates 

of  about  4 percent  in  the  first  quarter,  according  to  preliminary estimates 

of  the Commerce Department, and  4-1/2  percent  in the  fourth quarter of  1981.  

In the  current  quarter,  business  inventory liquidation appeared  to  be moderating 

from  the  first quarter's  extraordinary rate.  The  rise  in average  prices,  as 

measured  by  the  fixed-weight price  index  for gross  domestic  business  product, 

appeared  to  be  slowing  somewhat further  from the  annual  rate  of  about  5-1/2 

percent  in  the  first  quarter  indicated by  the preliminary estimates.  

The nominal  value  of  retail  sales increased  appreciably in April, 

according  to  the advance report,  following little  change  on average over  the 

first  quarter.  The  advance  report indicated  especially strong sales gains  in 

the  automotive group, at  stores  selling building materials  and  related  items, 

and  at  furniture and  appliance  stores.  Unit  sales  of  new domestic  automobiles 

were  at  an annual  rate  of  5.5  million units  compared  with a rate of  nearly 6 

million in  March and  in  the  first  quarter as  a whole;  unit  sales  picked  up 

appreciably in  early May, buoyed  by  new purchase-incentive  programs.  

The  index of  industrial  production  fell 0.6  percent in  April, 

following a decline  of  0.8  percent  in March.  In both months  output of 

business  equipment, construction supplies,  and  durable goods materials 

declined  substantially, while  production of  consumer  durable goods  rose

5/18/82

markedly.  In  April,  industrial output was 8-1/2  percent  below its  pre

recession peak  in July 1981.  

Nonfarm payroll employment declined  in March and  April,  reflecting 

continued  sizable  job losses  in manufacturing and  construction  and  smaller 

losses  in other major  sectors.  The unemployment  rate  rose  an additional 

0.4  percentage point  in April  to  9.4 percent.  

Private housing  starts  edged up in March for  the  fifth consecu

tive  month, but  at  an annual  rate  still below 1 million units,  they 

remained  depressed.  Sales  of  new homes declined further, while  sales  of 

existing homes  picked  up slightly.  

The producer price  index for  finished  goods  changed  little  in 

March and April.  Prices  of  energy-related items  declined substantially  in 

March  and  fell even more  sharply  in April.  Prices  of  other nonfood consumer 

goods  and of  capital  equipment  rose in  both months,  and  prices  of  foods  and 

food materials  rose  sharply  in April  following  little  change  in March.  The 

consumer  price  index declined 0.3  percent  in March, largely because of 

substantial  reductions  in costs  of  gasoline and  homeownership, but  declines 

in  food  prices  also had  a moderating influence.  Thus  far  in  1982,  both 

the producer  price index  for  finished  goods  and  the  consumer  price  index 

have  risen at  annual  rates  of  1 percent  or less  on balance, and  the  advance 

in the  index  of  average hourly earnings  has  remained at  a reduced pace.  

In  foreign exchange markets  the  trade-weighted value of  the 

dollar against major foreign currencies  rose  somewhat  further in early 

April but  then  fell about  3-1/4  percent  over  the  following month, reflecting

5/18/82

in  part  a decline in U.S.  interest  rates  relative to  foreign  rates  and 

market expectations  of  further declines.  The U.S.  foreign  trade  deficit 

was  about one-third  less  in  the  first  quarter  than in  the  preceding 

quarter, as  imports  fell more  sharply  than exports.  

At  its  meeting on March  29-30,  the  Committee  had decided  that 

open market  operations  in  the  period until  this meeting  should be  directed 

toward behavior of reserve  aggregates consistent  with growth of  M1 and  M2 

from March  to  June at  annual  rates  of  about  3 percent  and 8 percent re

spectively.  It was  understood  that most,  if  not all, of  the expansion 

in M1  over  the  period might well occur  in  April,  and  within limits, an 

April bulge  in  M1 alone  should not  be  strongly resisted.  In  any  event, 

it was  agreed  that deviations  from those  targets  should be  evaluated  in 

light of  the  probability that over  the  period M2  would be  less  affected 

than M1 by deposit shifts  related to  the mid-April tax  date  and  by changes 

in the relative  importance of  NOW accounts  as  a savings vehicle.  Some 

shortfall in growth  of  M1, consistent with progress  toward  the upper part 

of  the  range  for  the  year  as  a whole, would be  acceptable  in  the  context 

of  appreciably reduced  pressures  in  the money market  and  the  relative 

strength of  other aggregates.  The  intermeeting range  for  the federal  funds 

rate,  which provides  a mechanism for initiating  further consultation of  the 

Committee, was  set  at  12  to  16  percent.  

Growth  of  M1  accelerated  to  an annual  rate of  11-3/4  percent in 

April from 2-1/2  percent  in March.  But  the  expansion was  concentrated  in 

the  first  half  of  the month and was  largely retraced  by month-end.  As  in

5/18/82 

-4

other recent  months, checkable deposits  other  than  demand deposits  (OCDs) 

posted  a sizable  increase.  Growth of  M2 moderated  to  an  annual  rate  of 

about  9-1/2  percent  in April  from  11-1/4  percent  in March,  reflecting  a 

slackening  in  the expansion  of  its  nontransaction component.  

Total  credit  outstanding  at  U.S.  commercial banks  grew  at  an 

annual  rate  of  7-3/4  percent  in  April,  about  the  same  as  in March.  Banks 

added  substantially to  their  holdings  of  Treasury securities,  but  expansion 

in their  total  loans,  including  business loans,  moderated  somewhat  further.  

Business  borrowing from other sources  also  moderated,  as  issuance  of 

commercial  paper by nonfinancial  businesses  slowed  substantially  and 

offerings of  corporate securities declined.  

Nonborrowed  reserves,  adjusted to  include  special  borrowing and 

other  extended  credit  from Federal Reserve  Banks,  changed  little  in April.  

Virtually all of  the  increase  in  total  reserves  associated with  the  expan

sion  of M1  was  provided  through the  discount window.  Borrowing  from Federal 

Reserve Banks  for purposes  of  adjusting reserve  positions  (including  seasonal 

borrowing) rose  to  an  average  of  $1.5  billion in  the  two  statement weeks 

ending April  28  from a weekly average of  about  $1.2  billion in March and 

the  first half  of  April.  Such borrowing  subsequently fell  back to  an 

average  of  about  $1.1  billion in  the  two weeks  ending  May 12.  

The  federal  funds  rate, which had  been about  15  percent  at  the 

time of  the March meeting, generally fluctuated  in  a narrow range  of 

about  14-3/4  to  15-1/2  percent during  the  subsequent  intermeeting period.  

Most other  short-term  interest rates  fell  1/2  to  1 percentage  point  on 

balance over  the  intermeeting  interval,  and  long-term yields  registered

5/18/82 

-5

similar  declines.  The  prime  rate  charged by commercial banks  on  short

term business  loans remained  at  the  16-1/2  percent  rate that has  pre

vailed since  early February.  Average  rites  on new commitments  for 

fixed-rate mortgage loans  at  savings  and loan associations declined 

slightly,  to  about  16-3/4  percent.  

During  the meeting the  Committee was apprised of developments 

in the market for U.S. government  securities  stemming from the  failure 

of  a securities  firm to make  sizable  interest payments  that were due  on 

borrowed Treasury obligations.  System officials were monitoring the 

situation closely and it  was understood  that  they would continue to  do so.  

Staff  projections  at  this meeting  suggested  that  real GNP would 

expand  moderately over  the  balance  of  1982.  Inflation, as measured  by 

the  fixed-weight  price  index  for gross  domestic  business  product, was 

projected  to  remain moderate while  the  unemployment  rate was  expected  to 

remain  near its  April level.  

Views  of  Committee members  concerning prospects  for  economic 

activity and  the  behavior  of  prices  generally differed  little  from the 

staff  projections.  However,  several  members  commented that  the  risks  of 

a deviation from  the  projections were on  the  downside;  they  noted  reports 

of  gloomy sentiment  prevailing among  businessmen and  consumers  and of 

financial  strains  being  experienced by many business  firms,  financial  in

stitutions,  farmers,  and  consumers.  Reduced  economic activity  and  high 

interest  rates  were adversely affecting profits  and  eroding financial 

positions;  the  impact  on  key sectors  of  the  economy such as  capital  invest

ment, housing,  and  spending  on  consumer  durables  could  impede  the  recovery.

5/18/82

-6-

A few members gave more emphasis  to  elements  of  strength in  the 

near-term outlook which, they believed,  reduced  the  risks  of  prolonged 

recession and  enhanced  the  prospects  for  a near-term recovery  in  economic 

activity.  The  favorable  factors included  the  large  tax  cut  at  midyear 

and  the  concurrent increase  in  social  security  payments.  In  addition, 

liquidation  of  business  inventories,  which had  been of  unusual proportions 

in  recent months,  was likely  to  be  reduced  or  reversed,  thereby contributing 

to  economic recovery. 

It  was also  suggested  that  spending  in  interest

sensitive  sectors  of  the  economy was  likely to  revive,  perhaps more  quickly 

than  many anticipated,  if  inflation remained  relatively moderate  and  interest 

rates  declined.  

It  was  emphasized during  the  discussion that  a key  element in  the 

economic  outlook would  be  developments  affecting the  federal  budget  and  the 

size  of  future  deficits.  Significant  progress  in  reducing  prospective deficits 

would serve  to  improve  business  and  consumer  confidence  and  help to  achieve 

and  maintain the  lower  interest  rates  necessary  to  support  a sustained  economic 

recovery.  

It  was  noted  during  the discussion that  considerable  progress  had 

been made  in  the  fight  against  inflation.  Although the  major  price  indexes 

overstated  the  extent  of  the recent  improvement,  the  underlying rate  of 

inflation was  down substantially and  cost  pressures  in general  appeared  to 

be continuing  to  ease.  Inflationary  expectations  also  appeared  to  have 

moderated  somewhat  further, but  they  remained  sensitive  to developments 

in the  fiscal  and monetary policy  areas.

5/18/82

-7-

At  its  meeting on  February  1-2,  1982,  the  Committee had  adopted 

the  following ranges  for growth of  the monetary aggregates  over  the  period 

from  the  fourth  quarter of  1981  to  the  fourth quarter  of  1982:  M1,  2-1/2 

to  5-1/2  percent;  M2,  6 to  9 percent;  and  M3,  6-1/2  to  9-1/2  percent.  The 

associated  range  for bank  credit  was 6 to  9 percent.  

At  this  meeting  the  Committee  reviewed  the  short-run objectives 

for monetary growth that  it  had established  in  late March calling for 

expansion  at  annual  rates  of  about  3 percent for  M1  and  about  8 percent 

for  M2  over the  three months from  March to  June.  The Committee  took note 

of  a staff  analysis  suggesting  that,  despite  the bulge  in April  as  a whole, 

growth of  M1  was generally consistent with the objective  for  the  three

month  period, reflecting weakness  in  late April  and  early May.  Thus  the 

level of  M1, although still  above  a path consistent with the Committee's 

range  for growth  from the  fourth quarter  of  1981  to  the  fourth quarter of 

1982,  had  moved  down toward  that  path  somewhat  more  rapidly than  had  been 

anticipated  earlier.  Growth of  M2  also  appeared  to  be  consistent  with 

the Committee's  objective  for  the  March-to-June period, and  the  level of 

that  aggregate  remained  close  to  the  upper end  of  its  range  for  1982.  

As  at  the previous meeting,  staff analysis  suggested  that  the 

demand  for money, as  defined  by M1, might  moderate significantly  in  the 

current  quarter.  In  the  first  quarter,  growth of  M1  had been considerably 

greater on  average  than  would  have been  expected  on  the  basis  of  the 

actual  behavior  of  nominal GNP  and  interest  rates;  as a result,  the  in

come velocity of  M1 had  shown an unusually large decline.  The great  bulk

5/18/82

-8-

of  the growth in M1  in the  first  quarter, and  indeed in  the  period  since 

October  1981,  had occurred  in its  NOW account  component.  A variety of 

evidence  suggested an increased preference on the  part  of  individuals  to 

accumulate highly liquid  balances  in an environment of  considerable uncer

tainty  about prospects  for  economic  activity and interest  rates.  It was 

thought  that  in the  course of  the current  quarter the  strong savings  or 

precautionary demands for  liquid  balances were  likely to  begin to moderate, 

and  perhaps to unwind,  if economic  prospects  appeared  to be  improving as 

projected  and  if uncertainties  about  financial  conditions were reduced.  

While  considerable uncertainties  remained, the  behavior of  NOW accounts 

in  late April  and early May was consistent with that expectation.  

The  staff  analysis  also  suggested  that  continued  pursuit  of  the 

second-quarter objectives  for monetary growth set  at  the  preceding meeting 

and  the  related provision of  reserves  through  open market  operations would 

be  consistent with at  least modest easing  in  bank reserve  positions.  Such 

easing  in turn  could  be  reflected in  some  decline in  short-term interest 

rates.  Rates  appeared high,  considering  the  recession  in  activity,  the 

slower  rise  in  prices and,  more  technically,  the  degree  of  pressure  on 

bank reserve  positions.  

During  the  Committee's  review of  its  second-quarter objectives, 

almost  all  the members  agreed  that  growth rates  consistent with those  adopted 

at  the previous  meeting  remained appropriate  under current  economic and 

financial conditions.  Some  sentiment  was expressed  for moderately faster 

monetary growth in  the  current quarter  with the  objective  of  improving

5/18/82

-9-

liquidity and  easing  financial  pressures,  but  no member  favored  substantially 

faster monetary expansion.  Pursuit  of  the  latter  policy course,  it was 

suggested, would probably  exacerbate  inflationary expectations,  especially 

in  light of  the outlook for  large  deficits  in  the  federal  budget,  and  thereby 

exert  upward  pressure  on  interest  rates.  

Given the  uncertainties  relating  to  the  public's  demand  for  liquid 

balances,  notably NOW accounts,  most members  continued  to  believe  that  the 

behavior of  M1  should  be  evaluated partly  in  light  of  the  behavior of  M2 

over  the  weeks  ahead.  Thus,  for example,  somewhat more  rapid growth of M1 

might be  accepted  if  it  appeared  to  be  associated with  a continuing desire 

by  the  public  to  build up  liquid balances  and with growth of  M2  near  its 

specified rate.  

At  the  conclusion of  the discussion the  Committee agreed  to 

reaffirm the  objectives  for monetary growth established  at  the  previous 

meeting and  to  seek behavior  of  reserve  aggregates associated with growth 

of  M1  and M2  from March  to  June  at  annual  rates of  about  3 percent  and 

8 percent  respectively.  The  Committee noted  that  deviations  from these 

objectives  should be  evaluated  in  light  of  changes in  the  relative  impor

tance  of  NOW accounts  as  a savings  vehicle.  The  intermeeting  range  for 

the  federal  funds  rate,  which provides  a mechanism for  initiating  further 

consultation of  the Committee, was  set  at  10  to  15  percent.  

The  following domestic  policy directive was  issued  to  the Federal 

Reserve Bank  of  New York:

5/18/82

-10-

The  information  reviewed  at  this  meeting  suggests  that 
real GNP will change  little  in  the  current  quarter after  the 
appreciable  further decline  in  the  first  quarter,  as  business 
inventory  liquidation moderates  from last  quarter's  extra
ordinary  rate.  In  April  the  nominal value  of  retail  sales 
expanded, while  industrial production and  nonfarm  payroll 
employment continued  to  decline.  The unemployment  rate  rose 
0.4 percentage  point  to  9.4 percent.  Although housing starts 
edged up  in March for  the  fifth consecutive month, they  remained 
at  a depressed level.  The  rate  of  increase  in prices  on  the 
average  appears  to  be  slowing somewhat  further  in  the  current 
quarter;  so  far  this  year  both the  consumer  price  index  and 
the  producer price  index  for  finished goods  have  risen  little 
on balance,  and  the  advance  in  the  index of  average hourly 
earnings  has  remained  at  a reduced  pace.  

The  weighted  average value  of  the  dollar  against major 

foreign currencies,  after  rising  somewhat  further  in  early 
April,  has  fallen sharply over  the past  month, reflecting 
in  part  a decline in U.S.  interest rates  relative  to  foreign 
rates  and market expectations of  further declines.  The U.S.  
foreign  trade  deficit  in  the  first quarter was  one-third  less 
than  in  the preceding quarter.  

M1  increased sharply in April,  but  the expansion was 

concentrated  in  the  first half  of  the month and was  largely 
retraced later.  Growth of M2  moderated somewhat,  owing  to  a 
slackening of  the  expansion in  the nontransaction component.  
Short-term market  interest rates  and  bond  yields  on balance 
have  declined  since  the end  of  March, and mortgage  interest 
rates have  edged  down further.  

The Federal Open Market Committee  seeks  to  foster monetary 

and  financial  conditions  that  will help to  reduce  inflation, 
promote a resumption of  growth  in output  on  a sustainable basis, 
and  contribute  to  a sustainable pattern  of  international  trans
actions.  At  its meeting  in  early February, the  Committee  agreed 
that  its  objectives would be  furthered  by growth of  M1,  M2,  and 
M3  from the  fourth quarter of  1981  to  the  fourth  quarter of  1982 
within ranges  of  2-1/2  to  5-1/2 percent,  6 to  9 percent,  and 
6-1/2  to  9-1/2  percent respectively.  The  associated  range  for 
bank credit  was  6 to 9 percent.

5/18/82

-11-

In  the  short  run,  the  Committee  seeks  behavior of  reserve 

aggregates  consistent with growth of  M1  and M2  from March to 
June  at  annual  rates  of  about  3 percent and  8 percent  respectively.  
The Committee  also  noted  that deviations  from these  targets  should 
be  evaluated  in light  of  changes  in  the  relative  importance of  NOW 
accounts as  a savings  vehicle.  The  Chairman may call  for  Committee 
consultation  if  it  appears  to  the  Manager  for Domestic  Operations 
that  pursuit  of  the  monetary objectives and  related  reserve  paths 
during  the  period before  the next meeting  is  likely  to  be  associated 
with a federal  funds  rate persistently  outside a range  of  10  to  15 
percent.  

Votes for  this  action:  Messrs.  Volcker, 

Black, Balles,  Ford,  Gramley, Mrs.  Horn, 
Messrs.  Martin, Partee, Rice, Wallich and 
Timlen.  Vote against  this  action:  Mrs.  
Teeters.  (Mr. Timlen voted as  alternate  for 
Mr. Solomon.) 

Mrs.  Teeters  dissented from  this  action because  she favored 

specification of  somewhat  higher  rates  of monetary growth from March to 

June with the objective  of  improving liquidity  and  easing financial 

pressures.  In her  opinion,  the  time  had  come  to  foster lower  and  less 

variable  interest  rates  in  order  to  enhance  prospects  for significant

recovery in  output  and  employment.

