CONFIDENTIAL  (FR) 

CURRENT ECONOMIC  COMMENT BY  DISTRICT 

Prepared  for  the 
Federal Open  Market  Committee 
by  the  Staff 

May  18,  1983 

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 

PREFACE page i 

SUMMARY page ii 

First District - Boston page I-1 

Second District - New York page II-1 

Third District - Philadelphia page III-1 

Fourth District - Cleveland page IV-1 

Fifth District - Richmond page V-1 

Sixth District - Atlanta page VI-1 

Seventh District - Chicago page VII-1 

Eighth District - St. Louis page VIII-1 

Ninth District - Minneapolis page IX-1 

Tenth District - Kansas City page X-1 

Eleventh District - Dallas page XI-1 

Twelfth District - San Francisco page XII-1 

APPENDIX - Summary of Special Reports on Construction page A-1 

PREFACE 

This  edition  of  Redbook  contains  a  special  section.  In 

addition  to  preparing  their  regular  reports  on  general  economic 

conditions,  District  Bank  staffs  assembled  and  summarized  additional 

information 

on 

conditions 

in 

their 

regional 

construction 

industries. 

The  construction  industry  was  selected  for  special 

attention  because  it  appears  to  be  playing  an  especially  important 

role  in  the  current  economic  recovery  and  because  analysts  have  been 

concerned  about  the  sustainability  of  the  first  quarter's  marked 

pickup  in housing  starts. 

District  Bank  contributions  were  assembled  at  the  Federal 

Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  where  a  summary  was  prepared. 

That 

summary  appears  as  an appendix  to this  Redbook. 

SUMMARY * 

[Asterisk: Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.] 

Overview:  District  reports  suggest  that  the  recovery  is 

gaining momentum.  Consumer  spending  has  strengthened  further  across 

the  nation.  Manufacturing  activity  is  generally  on  the  upswing, 

although  weakness  persists  in  some  industries,  capital  goods  for 

example.  Lending  activity  is  mixed,  with  mortgage  loans  showing  a 

widespread  increase  and  commercial  loans  sluggish. 

Agricultural 

conditions  vary  considerably; 

bad  weather  continues  to  plague 

farmers  and  there  is  no  consensus  on  how  much  the  payment-in-kind 

(PIK)  program  will  help  them.  As  more  signs  of  recovery  have 

emerged,  businessmen  have  gained  confidence  that  economic  activity 

will  continue  to pick up  through  the rest of  the year. 

Consumer  Spending 

The  recovery  in  consumer  spending  intensified  in  recent 

weeks,  expanding  both  geographically  and  across  product  lines.  All 

Districts  reported  continued  or  growing  strength,  except  for  Kansas 

City,  where  gains  over  1982  were  smaller  than  at  last  report. 

Boston  reported  the  largest  sales  growth, more  than  10 percent  above 

1982.  Apparel  and  electronics  continued  to  move  well  in  most 

Districts.  Many  also  noted  increases  in  sales  of  furniture  and 

other  home  durables,  which  some  attributed  to  the  recent  strength 

in housing  demand.  Automobile  sales strengthened  in  seven Districts. 

Retail  inventories  generally  remained  lean,  but  there  were  some 

signs  of  expansion  in  Atlanta,  New  York,  Philadelphia,  and 

Richmond.  Optimism  for  future  sales  growth  is  widespread; 

only 

Atlanta  reported  expectations  of  weakening,  and  only  for  the  short 

term. 

Manufacturing  and Mining  Activity 

District  Banks  reported  that  recovery  in  the  manufacturing 

sector  advanced  broadly,  but  areas  of  weakness  remained.  Substan-

tial  increases  in  orders  have  led  to  backlogs  and  longer  delivery 

times  in  many  regions,  and  production  has  been  stepped  up 

accordingly.  Average  workweeks  have  been  growing,  and  a majority  of 

Districts  indicated  that  employment  was  moving  up  as  well,  albeit 

slowly  in  many  cases. 

Boston,  Richmond,  and  St.  Louis  reported 

broad-based  improvements  affecting  a wide  variety  of  industries  such 

as  inks,  castings,  textiles,  and  furniture. 

In  other  Districts 

however,  strength  was  narrower.  In  Atlanta,  the  signs  were  uneven, 

with  revival  in  lumber  and  phosphates  countered  by  continued  slack 

in  textiles  and  petrochemicals.  The  pickup  in  San  Francisco  was 

confined  to  housing-related  and  defense  sectors,  with  many  others 

still  reducing  production  and  employment.  And  Minneapolis  reported 

that  the  pace  of  improvement  slackened  in all  but  paper  and  building 

input  industries. 

Capital  goods  and  mining  remained  dark  spots.  Producers  of 

machine  tools  and  other  business  equipment  have  seen  no  turnaround 

and  future  prospects  are  uncertain.  Chicago  was  concerned  that  few 

capital  projects  were  being  planned,  and  St.  Louis  and  Cleveland 

also  foresaw  no  improvement  in  the next  few months.  However,  Boston 

and  Philadelphia  noted  that  businesses  were  at  least  beginning  to 

express  some  interest  in  capital  projects.  Mining  also  remained 

depressed,  with  low  energy  prices  hurting  coal  mine  operators  in  the 

Midwest  and  Far  West. 

Finance 

Loan  activity  remained  mixed  in  almost  all  Districts. 

Commercial  and  industrial  borrowing  continued  to  be  weak  across  the 

country;  only  St. Louis  reported  an  increase  in volume.  Demand  for 

consumer  loans  was  somewhat  stronger,  growing  in  St.  Louis, 

Richmond,  Philadelphia,  and  Cleveland.  Mortgage  lending  continued 

to pick up  throughout most  of  the  nation. 

On  the  deposit  side,  funds  continued  to  flow  into  MMDA  and 

Super  NOW  accounts.  The  inflows  appeared  to  be  moderating  in  a  few 

Districts  though.  Banks  are  reported  using  these  accounts  primarily 

to  fund  short-term  or  adjustable  rate  loans,  and  are  selling  off 

fixed  rate mortgages  in the  secondary  market. 

Agriculture 

Agricultural  conditions  varied  among  Districts  in  recent 

weeks.  Unusually  wet  and  cool  weather  continued  in  many  parts  of 

the  country.  As  a  result,  planting  of  corn  is  behind  schedule  in  a 

number  of  areas.  Farmers  in  California  face  additional  losses  due 

to  delays  in  plantings  of  important  crops  such  as  lettuce,  tomatoes 

and  onions.  In  Atlanta,  however,  recent  improvement  in  the  weather 

allowed  farmers  to  make  up  much  of  their  planting.  In  addition, 

Kansas  fanners  are  expected  to harvest  the  second  largest  wheat  crop 

ever. 

There  was  no  consensus  on  the  effects  of  the  PIK  program. 

Dallas,  St.  Louis,  and  Minneapolis  expected  the  resulting  crop 

reductions  to  improve  the  incomes  of  grain  farmers. 

However, 

Atlanta  noted  the  program  was  disrupting  the  poultry  industry  by 

pushing  up  feed  prices.  Some  agricultural  suppliers  were  aided  by 

the  increased  spending  associated  with  higher  farm  incomes,  but 

others  were hurt  by  the  removal  of  land  from  cultivation. 

Outlook 

The  emergence  of  more  signs  of  recovery  has  engendered  a 

climate  of  optimism. 

Businessmen  in  many  Districts  are  now 

confident  that  strong  consumer  spending  and  residential  construction 

will  spur  increases  in  demand  through  the  rest  of  the  year. 

Accordingly,  they expect manufacturers  to continue  expanding  output 

and  employment.  However,  in Boston, New York, and Minneapolis,  there 

still  is  concern  that  the  recovery  will  be  weaker  than  usual.  And 

Chicago  reports  that  much  of  the  ground  lost  during  the  recession 

will  not  soon  be  regained  in  the  Midwest.  On  the  inflation  front, 

the  evidence  is encouraging.  While  prices  are  beginning  to edge  up, 

economists  do  not  foresee  a  significant  acceleration  of  inflation 

over  the next  year. 

FIRST  DISTRICT  -  BOSTON 

The  First  District  is in  the early  stages  of a  recovery.  Retailers 

are  enjoying  stronger  sales  than expected  and  are developing  fairly  optimistic 

plans  for  the future.  Most manufacturers  have  also  seen an upturn  in  orders, 

although,  in contrast  to  the retailers,  several  think  the recovery  is weaker 

than normal.  Interest  in capital  spending  is apparently  quite high  but  firms 

are unwilling  to make  commitments until  the  recovery  is more  clearly 

established. 

Retail 

Retail  sales  in the First  District  continue  to outpace  expectations. 

The  strength  appears to be general;  no  specific  product  lines were  reported  to 

be especially  strong  or weak.  Sunday  retail  openings  in Massachusetts  have 

had  a small positive  effect, on total  sales  in  the  state,  but  the other  New 

England  states are  also doing  well.  Price  increases have  slowed  considerably 

from a year  ago. 

The range  of  sales  increases  reported  for  recent months  compared  to a 

year earlier was  from a  "very  successful"  11 percent  to an  "excellent"  15 

percent.  Two merchants mentioned  that  these results  compare  even more 

favorably  to recent  years  than  the nominal  figures  indicate,  because  inflation 

accounts  for a much  smaller  share  of  the growth  than has been  typical 

recently.  A  pet  store  chain, more cyclically  sensitive  than many  retail 

operations,  said  this pickup was  stronger  than usual  after a  recession,  but 

the  slowdown had  also been more  severe. 

Plans are  fairly  optimistic  over  the  long  run.  The  pet  store  chain 

said  they  thought  sales growth would  slow somewhat  over  the next  six months, 

but  then would  pick up again.  They and  another  contacted  firm  have  new  stores 

in  the  planning  stages and  expressed  confidence  in New England's  continuing 

growth  potential. 

Comparisons with  other  regions were mixed.  A discount  chain with  13 

percent  sales  growth  in New England  in April contrasted  that  result  with  4 

percent  for  the  chain nationwide.  A department  store chain with  affiliated 

chains  in other  regions  said  they no  longer  stood  alone  at  the head  of  the 

pack —  other  regions were  beginning  to catch  up. 

Manufacturing 

Most  of  the manufacturers  contacted  have  seen an upturn  in orders  over 

the  past  several months;  the  products  of  firms  reporting  increases  include 

inks,  adhesives,  specialty  steel,  bearings,  castings,  hardware,  specialized 

industrial machinery  and  process  controls.  The  increase  in demand  is  said  to 

be broadly  based with  no one  industry  or group  of  industries  responsible  for 

the  improvement.  Exceptions  to  the  reports  of  increased  activity  come  from 

two  firms  in the machine  tool  industry;  orders are no  longer declining  but 

they have  not  risen  from  the very  depressed  levels  of year-end.  Opinions 

differed  on how this  recovery  compares with  past  recoveries.  A  large 

manufacturer  of  fabricated  metal  products  and machinery  described  the  upturn 

as  "typical":  orders  for  construction  related  products  picked  up  first, 

automotive  products  followed,  light machinery  is beginning  to show  encouraging 

signs, and heavy machinery  remains depressed.  Several manufacturers  said  the 

recovery has been weaker  than normal;  three,  producing  castings,  bearings and 

control equipment,  said  demand  has picked  up  a little  sooner  than  they 

expected.  A number noted  that  inquiries  about  capital  purchases  have  risen 

sharply  but  customers are  not  following  through with committments.  This 

development  was  interpreted  to mean  that  customers  are  planning  capital 

programs  but are waiting  to see  if  the recovery  will  be  sustained.  One  firm 

said  that when customers  do place  orders  they want  delivery  in an unusually 

short  time  period. 

Several manufacturers  are  starting  to increase  employment.  One,  the 

castings manufacturer,  has  recalled  all  those  previously  laid  off and  is 

planning  to expand.  No  one  plans  substantial  layoffs,  although  two  or  three 

expect  their workforces  to fall  through  attrition. 

In general,  the firms contacted  have  not  seen any  increases  in  the 

prices  of materials  and  components.  However,  one  reported  that  the  prices of 

nickel,  cobalt  and molybdenum  are  rising.  These metals were  selling  at  prices 

below  the cost  of  production. 

Construction 

New England  housing  construction has  improved markedly  in  recent 

months.  Between  December  1982 and March  1983  seasonally  adjusted  housing 

permits  in the region  jumped  89 percent.  Despite  the  sharp  increase, a 

building  goods  supply  house  reported  no  shortage of  supplies  in any major 

category  —  roofing,  insulation,  and  lumber.  Lumber prices  in  the first: 

quarter  of  1983 were  about  5  to 6 percent  above  year-ago  levels. 

Commercial office  building  activity  continues  at a vigorous  rate in 

the major  cities of  the  First  District.  Most  of  the  projects will  become 

available  for occupancy  over  the next  year and  a half.  Very  few  definite 

plans  have  been made  for  the  period  after  1985  but  real estate  brokers  report 

that  interest  in further  building  remains high.  Vacancy  rates  have  increased, 

but are considered  manageable. 

Professors  Houthakker,  Eckstein,  Samuelson,  and  Solow were  available 

for comment  this month.  Their  comments focused  on  the economic  outlook, 

monetary  policy,  and  the  federal  deficit. 

All agreed  that  the  recovery  is weak  and  fragile.  Eckstein  is 

confident  that  consumer  spending  will  pick up  shortly,  assuring  that  the 

recovery  will not  dissipate  later  in the year.  He  is concerned,  however,  that 

high  "real"  interest  rates are  limiting  expansion  of  housing,  auto  sales, and 

capital  spending.  None were  concerned  about  a near-term  resurgence  of 

inflation. 

Nevertheless,  Houthakker  cautioned  against  a  shift  toward  ease in 

monetary  policy.  He  feels  that  technical  factors  are  still  distorting  growth 

in the monetary  aggregates,  depriving  the Fed  of  the  information  needed  to 

determine whether  such a  shift would  be appropriate.  He would  like  to  see 

more  attention  paid  to a credit  target.  When  it was  pointed  out  to him  that 

business  loan demand  has  been weak,  he still  counseled  against  easier money  on 

the grounds  that  it would  take  pressure  off  of Congress  to deal with  the 

deficit  problem.  He  feels  that  by maintaining  its current  stance  the Fed 

props up  interest  rates, which  in turn provides  Congress with an incentive  to 

cut  deficits.  He  is concerned  about  deficits  several years out, not  those 

projected  for  the  short  run. 

Eckstein  feels  that monetary  policy  is pretty much  on  track,  although 

ideally  he would  like  to see  short-term  interest  rates  fall another  100 basis 

points.  Over  the next  several  quarters  he  thinks  the Fed  should  try  to 

stabilize  short-term  "real" interest  rates at  between  3 and  5 percent  in order 

to promote  steady, moderate growth.  He warned  against  the  "excesses  fueled  by 

cheap  credit  of  previous  postwar  expansions."  Like Houthakker  he fears  that 

huge deficits  in  1985 and  beyond  could  cause  interest  rates  to rise,  choking 

off  the  recovery. 

Samuelson also  believes  that  the Fed  is  supplying  just  about  the  right 

amount  of  stimulus  to  the economy,  although  he wishes  that  the  near-term 

prospects  for economic  growth were  better.  Over  1983,  he would  like  to  see 

fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter  growth  of  between  5 and  6 percent  instead  of 

the 4  to 5 percent  currently  predicted.  To  this end  he cautions  the Fed  not 

to adopt  a  tighter  stance, which he  believes monetarist  doctrine would  demand 

at  this  time.  In his opinion  inflation will not  be a problem  in 1983 or  1984 

because  of  the oil glut;  dissonance  in OPEC;  plentiful  crops, meat,  and  fiber; 

weakness  in markets  for primary  metals;  and  decelerating  unit  labor  costs.  He 

believes  that  the growth  rates  of  the monetary  aggregates will  regain  their 

target  ranges without  a change  in course  of monetary  policy.  He urges  the Fed 

not  to try  to  lower  the inflation  rate  by another  1 to 2 percent  at all  costs, 

because  the  sacrifices we have made  over  the  last  few years  in  lost  profits, 

investment,  and  employment  have  been  too  great. 

Solow also  thinks  that  the  rate of economic  growth over  the year 

should  be higher.  He  thinks  that  the Fed  should  insure  the recovery  by easing 

its current  stance.  He doubts  that  a  shift  toward  ease would  fuel  inflation 

down  the road.  He  is not worried  about  the deficit  in the  short  run and  would 

accept measures  to reduce  it  in 1983  and  1984 only  if monetary  policy  were 

much more  lenient.  He concedes  that  three  to five years  from now  deficits 

could  be a problem. 

SECOND DISTRICT—NEW  YORK 

The  Second  District  economy  continued  to  show  evidence  of 

recovery  in  recent  weeks.  Major  retailers  reported  that  consumer 

spending  remained  strong,  and  sales  generally  were  above  plans.  The 

residential  real  estate  market  picked  up  further,  but  some  slowdown 

in  nonresidential  construction  was  anticipated. 

The  upswing  in 

manufacturing  spread  to  more  areas,  and  firms  in  many  industries 

were  increasing  hours  and  workforces.  On  the  financial  side,  retail 

deposits  at  all  classes  of  depository  institutions  have  grown  with 

the  introduction  of  MMDAs  and  Super  NOWs. 

The  consensus  among 

business  leaders  is that  the economy will  continue  to  improve. 

Consumer  Spending 

Retailers  continued  to  enjoy  year-over-year  sales  gains 

over  the  past  two  months,  despite  some  temporary  weakness  in  early 

April.  Business  at  most  department  stores  was  running  ahead  of 

their  plans.  One  respondent  did  note,  however,  that  promotional 

efforts  "light-years  ahead  of  last  year"  were  necessary  to  coax 

shoppers  into  buying.  Soft  goods  and  electronics  continued  to  be 

sources  of  strength.  One merchant  indicated  that  furniture  began  to 

pick  up  as  well.  Inventories  remained  at  desired  levels,  with  one 

store  keeping  them  "aggressively  heavy."  The  outlook  varied  by 

respondent.  One discount  chain was  considering  an upward  revision 

in  its  sales  goals,  while  another  retailer  felt  that  the  general 

optimism  about  the economy was  unfounded. 

Construction  and  Real Estate  Activity 

The 

residential 

real 

estate  market 

showed 

further 

improvement  recently  and  respondents  believe  that  an  upswing  is 

definitely  underway. 

Both  sales  and  starts  showed  healthy 

increases.  Most  of  the  growth  was  limited  to  high  priced  homes, 

however.  Some  contacts  believe  a  further  drop  in  mortgage  rates  is 

needed  before  low-  and  middle-priced  homes  will  move.  While  no  one 

foresees  a  boom,  builders  expressed  a  good  deal  of  optimism  about 

the next  few months. 

The  outlook 

for  nonresidential  construction 

remained 

cloudy. 

Brokers  reported  that  the  absorption  of  office  space 

improved  in  recent  weeks.  A  number  of  major  leases  were  negotiated 

or  signed  in  New  York  City  and  surrounding  suburbs.  But  observers 

see  the  pace  of  construction  slowing. 

With  new  space  being 

completed  and  vacancy  rates  trending  up,  rents  have  been  flat  and 

landlord  concessions  more  prevalent.  Consequently,  new  projects  are 

expected  to be  limited. 

Business  Activity 

The  onset  of  recovery  in  the  manufacturing  sector  was 

confirmed  by  recent  reports  from  business  leaders  around  the 

District.  Areas  hit  particularly  hard  by  the  recession  finally 

noted  signs  of  an  upturn,  and  regions  that  had  remained  relatively 

healthy 

reported 

somewhat 

faster 

growth. 

The 

upswing 

in 

auto-related  industries  has  continued. 

Furniture  orders  finally 

rebounded,  leading  one  supplier  to  that  industry  to  believe  that 

recent  signals  could  foreshadow  one  of  his  best  years  ever.  As 

backlogs  developed  and  delivery  times  lengthened,  firms  picked  up 

production  schedules.  Shortened  workweeks  became  much  less  common. 

While  some  more  layoffs  occurred,  such  diverse  industries  as  autos, 

aluminum,  and  communications  equipment  were  adding  to  their 

workforces. 

Outlook 

Business  leaders  are  virtually  unanimous  in  believing  that 

the  recovery  has  arrived. 

Although  there  is  some  disagreement 

concerning  its  strength,  our  contacts  have  become  more  confident 

that  the upswing  will  be  sustained.  One  respondent  noted  that  while 

businessmen  are  still  cautious,  they  are  expressing  as  much 

enthusiasm  about  the  future  as  he  can  remember.  Another  believes 

prospects  for  economic  growth  look  good  for  the  next  two  or  three 

years.  But  one  state  labor  official  still  fears  that  the  recovery 

will be one of  the  slowest  on  record. 

Financial  Developments 

Reflecting  national  trends,  home  mortgage  rates  offered  at 

banks and  thrifts  in  the  Second  District  have  fallen  by  as much  as 5 

percentage  points  since  last  summer.  While  some  of  the  institutions 

contacted  offer  only  variable  rates  on home  mortgages,  most  of  those 

that  offer  both  fixed  and  variable  rates  report  that  a  very  high 

proportion  of new mortgages  (about  75 percent) have  fixed  rates.  In 

part,  this  reflects  a  narrowing  of  the  spreads  between  the  fixed  and 

variable  rates.  In  addition,  most  said  that  at  least  20%  of  the 

mortgages  now  being  made  represent  refinancings  wherein  households 

prefer  to substitute  one  fixed  rate  instrument  for  another. 

Many  of  the  banks  and  thrifts  contacted  said  that  they  are 

selling  the  bulk  of  their  new  mortgages  in  the  secondary  market. 

One  institution  specified  that  it  is  now  mainly  selling  the  fixed 

rate  mortgages  and  using  MMDAs  to  fund  the  variable  rate  mortgages. 

All  in  all,  the  institutions  appear  aware  of  the  potential  for 

mismatching  assets  and  liabilities  resulting  from  the  inflow  of 

MMDAs. 

Since  the  introduction  of MMDAs  and  Super  NOWs,  all  classes 

of  depository  institutions  in  the  Second  District  have  gained  retail 

deposits.  The  commercial  banks,  however,  were  clearly  the  biggest 

gainers,  in  both  dollar  volume  and  market  share.  According  to  our 

estimates,  between  mid-November  1982  and  mid-March  1983,  Second 

District  commercial  banks  raised  their  share  of  the  retail  deposit 

market  by  as much  as  5  full  percentage  points,  from  30 percent  to 35 

percent.  By  comparison,  in  the  rest  of  the  nation  it  appears  that 

the  commercial  bank  gains  in  retail  market  share  were  considerably 

smaller.  Some  New  York  banks  have  expressed  concern  about  the  need 

to  replace  funding  sources  as  the  market  for  money-center  CDs 

shrinks  along  with  money  market  mutual  funds.  Perhaps  because  of 

this  concern,  competition  for  MMDA money  has  been  particularly  keen 

in  New  York  City,  where  the  rates  offered  on  these  accounts  have 

been consistently  higher  than  the national  average. 

Financial  Panel 

This  month  we  have  comments  from  David  Jones  (Aubrey 

Lanston  &  Co.,),  Donald  Maude  (Merrill  Lynch)  and  Albert  Wojnilower 

(First  Boston  Corp.) 

[Asterisk: Their views of course are personal, not institutional.] 

Jones:  The  "critical  mass"  for economic  recovery  is now  in 

place  and  the  question  now  is whether  the  recovery  will  be  moderate 

or  brisk.  The  seeds of  recovery  were  planted  by  a  sharp  decline  in 

interest  rates  in  the  second  half  of  last  year.  More  recently, 

there  has  been  a  pick-up  in  demand  in  such  interest-sensitive 

sectors  as housing,  autos,  and  other  durable  goods.  In  the  improved 

economic  climate,  businesses  cut  their  rate  of  inventory  liquidation 

roughly  in  half  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  year  and  some  actual 

restocking  may  begin  in  the  second  quarter, 

thus  further 

strengthening  new  orders,  production,  employment  and  income.  The 

recovery  is,  however,  likely  to  remain  moderate  and  uneven  through 

1984.  Serving  to  limit  economic  gains  are  likely  to  be  abnormally 

high  real  rates  reflecting  the  clash  between  recovery-related 

increases  in  consumer  and  business  credit  demands  and  excessive 

Federal  borrowing 

demands 

arising 

from  mounting 

structural 

deficits.  Accordingly,  the  recovery  is  likely  to  stall  from  time  to 

time  as  business  spending  on  new  plant  and  equipment  remains 

depressed  (both  because  of  high  real  rates  and  a  huge  margin  of 

unused  capacity) and as U.S. exports continue weak  (because of a 

strong  dollar).  All  in  all,  real  GNP  might  show  gains  of  5.0 

percent  in  the  second  quarter,  2.0  percent  in  the  third  quarter  and 

4.0  percent  in  the  fourth  quarter.  In  1984,  the  pattern  might  be 

6.0 percent  in  the  first  quarter,  7.0 percent  in  the  second  quarter, 

3.0  percent  in  the  third  quarter  and  4.0  percent  in  the  fourth 

quarter. 

Maude:  While  progressing  at  an  uneven  pace,  as  is  almost 

invariably  the  case  in  the  early  recovery  phase,  the  present 

economic  recovery  should  remain  intact  going  into  1984  in  an 

environment  of  restrained  inflation  and  inflationary  expectations. 

Presently,  we  envision  a  second  half  1983  gain  in  real  GNP  of  5 

percent  and  an  annual  rate  of  increase  of  5.7  percent  in  the 

consumer  price  index.  Under  such  conditions,  private  credit  demands 

throughout  the  remainder  of  the  year  should  remain  sufficiently 

restrained  to  allow  the  Treasury  to  raise  a  projected  110-120 

billion  net  new  cash  over  the  final  two  quarters  of  1983  without 

much  disruption  to  the  financial  markets  on  balance.  However,  even 

a  controlled  slow  growth  recovery  runs  the  risk  of  being  aborted  as 

early  as  the  first  half  of  1984  as  rising  private  credit  demands 

begin  to  clash  with  fiscal  1984  Treasury  financing  requirements 

exceeding  $200 billion  —  potentially  leading  to  a meaningful  upward 

spike  in  interest  rates.  Indeed,  even  at  present  real  interest  rate 

levels,  the  sustainability  of  the  recovery  remains  tenuous. 

However,  monetary  policy  is  once  again  perceived  by  the  financial 

markets  as  credible  and  latitude  for  further  accomodation  in  an 

interest  rate  sense  presently  exists. 

Wojnilower:  Domestic  business  contacts  suggest  that  the 

economic  recovery  is  broadening  somewhat  and  that  confidence  for  the 

longer  pull  has  increased  materially.  At  the  same  time,  the  nearly 

explosive  attitude  displayed  previously  by  executives  in  some 

segments  of  the  department  store,  steel,  and  building  materials 

industries  has  sobered,  as  what  in  their  perception  were  initially 

extraordinary  sales  gains  have  slowed  considerably.  In  the  security 

markets  large  amounts  of  new  issues  of  all  types  continue  to  be 

placed.  Demand  by  foreign  investors  is  enormous  but  a  torrential 

reversal  well  might  ensue  if  policies  to  weaken  the  dollar  were 

officially  adopted.  During  a  visit  to  Europe  last  week,  I gathered 

the  impression  that  the  reported  business  pickup  on  the  continent 

may  be  more  an  improvement  in  sentiment  than  in  performance.  In 

France,  of  course,  a  sharp  setback  in  business  is  anticipated.  In 

the  United  Kingdom,  Mrs.  Thatcher's  reelection  is  taken  virtually 

for granted  and  people  are quite  sure  that business  is  rebounding. 

T H I RD   D I S T R I CT   -  P H I L A D E L P H IA 

Indications  from  the  Third  District  in  M ay   are  that  business  activity  is 

generally  on  the  upswing. 

Local  manufacturers  report  substantial  improvement  in 

business  conditions  since  March.  Retailers  say  sales  at  area  stores  are  growing  steadily. 

L o an   activity  has  turned  mixed  recently;  retail  lending  has  gained  ground  but  commercial 

loans  have  slipped  slightly.  In  the  construction  industry,  overall  activity  is  healthy. 

Third  District  contacts  foresee  these  trends  continuing  for  the  next  six 

months.  Gains  in  industrial  activity  and  retail  sales  are  expected  to  continue  at  a  brisk 

pace  into  the  fall.  In  the  banking  sector,  declining  interest  rates  should  reinforce  current 

diverging  lending  trends.  Strong  demand  for  housing  will bolster  residential  construction, 

according  to  builders, but  commercial  demand  looks  weak. 

R E AL   E S T A TE   A ND   C O N S T R U C T I ON 

Representatives  of  the  Third  District  construction  industry  indicate  that 

construction  activity  is  in  good  shape  in  M a y.  

Real  estate  brokers  report  a  steady 

increase  in  sales  at  current  mortgage  rates,  with  more  sales spilling  over  from  pre-owned 

homes  into  the  market  for  n ew   units.  As   a  result,  residential  construction  is showing  the 

first  real  signs  of  strength  in  over  two-and-a-half  years. 

Builders  say  demand  is 

sufficient  to sustain,  if  not  boost,  the  current  pace  of  residential  activity,  but  expansion 

at  the  present  rate  will  press  on  already  tight  supplies  of  building  materials.  Commercial 

construction  business  has  also  improved  recently,  despite  relatively  high  vacancy  rates. 

Commercial  developers,  however,  say  demand  for  office  space  is  very  weak  and  expect 

office-building  to  wind  down   considerably. 

M A N U F A C T U R I NG 

Respondents  to  the  Business  Outlook  Survey  indicate  that  industrial  activity 

in  the  Third  District  continues  to pick  15) steam.  T he   gains  reported  in  April  and  M ay   are 

on  a  par  with  the  vigorous  growth  recorded  earlier  this  year,  providing  further  evidence 

that  a  sustained  recovery  is  underway. 

Specific  indications  of  the  pick-up  include 

booming  new   orders  and  shipments.  Producer  backlogs  have  also  increased  for  the  first 

time  since  mid-1979,  and  delivery  times  are  getting  longer. 

Inventory  liquidation 

continues,  but  some  employers  have  begun  adding  to  payrolls  and  extending  working  hours 

as  activity  levels  have  climbed. 

Survey  respondents  are  very  confident  that  industrial  rebuilding  will  continue 

and  are  projecting  more  gains  for  the  next  six  months. 

Expanding  new   orders  and 

shipments  are  forecast  by  four  out  of  five  respondents  to  the  M ay   survey,  and 

businessmen  are  planning  to  hire  additional  workers  and  to  lengthen  the  average 

workweek  by  late  fall. 

In  addition,  modest  growth  in  stock  levels  is  foreseen,  and 

increased  outlays  for  capital  equipment  are  in  the  works. 

Increased  activity  is  pushing  industrial  prices  up  slightly  in  M a y,   according  to 

survey  results.  Input  costs  have  risen  at  just  over  one-quarter  of  area  plants,  and  a  few 

reports, of  price  hikes  fear  finished  products  have  surfaced  this  month,  too.  Respondents 

foresee  further  escalation  in  raw  material  prices  by  November   and,  to  a  lesser  extent, 

are  planning  to  boost  their  own  prices  over  that  time,  as  well. 

R E T A IL 

Sales  at  Third  District  department  stores  have  climbed  steadily  through  April 

and  into  M a y.   Dollar  volume  is right  where  retail  executives  expected  it  to  be,  about  5 

percent  to  6  percent  ahead  of  a year  ago.  Merchants  say  an  improving  economic  climate 

has  buoyed  consumers'  confidence  and,  as  big  tax  refunds  keep  rolling  in,  customers  are 

parting  with  mors  dollars. 

In  addition,  this  spring's  excellent  weather  is  credited  with 

taking  the  edge  off  the  usual  post-Easter  sales  slump.  Activity  remains  good  across  the 

board  including  some  n ew   movement   in  durables,  especially  household  furnishings,  which 

are  benefiting  from  the  housing  pick-up. 

Retailers  predict  that  sales  will  continue  to  grow  over  the  next  six  months. 

Declining  unemployment  rates  and  an  expanding  economy  are  expected  to  provide  an 

increasingly  strong  stimulus  to  sales.  Larger  tax  refunds  will  still  be  a  factor,  according 

to  contacts,  and  the  mid-summer  tax  cut  also  should  give  retail  business,  particularly 

durable  goods,  a  boost.  Merchants  are  projecting  that,  by  N o v e m b e r,   sales  activity  will 

be  6  percent  to  8  percent  ahead  of  the  year  before. 

Stock  levels  are  about  even  with  those  of  a  year  ago,  and  retailers  report  a 

little  easing  in  their  tight  grip  on  inventories  as  sales  have  improved.  Inventories  remain 

very  lean,  nonetheless,  and  there  are  no  plans  at  the  present  time  for  further  rebuilding. 

F I N A N C I AL 

Loan  activity  at  Third  District  banks  has  turned  mixed  since  the  last 

Redbook.  C &I   loan  volume,  as  expected,  has  dropped  slightly  since  March,  owing  to 

weaker  commercial  loan  demand  and  cutbacks  in  below-prime  lending,  according  to 

contacts.  Reports  of  commercial  loan  volume  now  range  fom  6  percent  below  a year  ago 

to  4  percent  above  a  year  ago.  Retail  loan  activity,  on  the  other  hand,  is  building 

slowly.  Although  interest  rates  are  still  high  enough  to  keep  a  somewhat  tight  lid  on 

demand,   consumers'  attitudes  toward  credit  have  improved  this  spring,  according  to 

bankers.  In  the  wake  of  a  push  by  lenders,  consumer  loan  volume  has  risen  by  5  percent 

to  10  percent  from  a  year  ago.  A r ea   banking  contacts  say  these  trends  in borrowing  are 

likely  to  continue  into  the  fourth  quarter.  Lenders  expect  that  d e m a nd   for  commercial 

loans  will  be  soft  for  the  next  f ew   months.  T he   shift  to  the  bond  market  is  likely  to  be 

enhanced  by  further  declines  in  interest  rates,  and  a  "hesitating"  economic  recovery 

should  keep  capital  investment  plans  flat  until  fall.  L o w er   rates,  however,  are  likely  to 

bolster  retail  lending  activity,  especially  if  economic  indicators  continue  to  point  to 

strength. 

T he   prime  rate  has  held  steady  at  10.50  percent  at  major  banks  in  the  Third 

District. 

Pressures  are  building,  according  to  bankers,  that  should  push  rates  down 

between  50  and  100  basis  points  by  the  middle  of  the  third  quarter.  These  pressures 

include  good  inflation  news  and  weak  demand  for  commercial  credit.  By   fall,  however, 

much  of  the  downward  pressure  should  begin  to  disappear  as  more  consistent  economic 

growth  awakens  business  loan  demand. 

Deposit  flows  are  still  very  strong  in  M a y,   although  activity  has  settled  down 

recently.  D e m a nd   deposits  are  a  healthy  4  percent  to  6  percent  ahead  on  a  year-over-

year  basis,  down  slightly  from  March  levels.  Bankers  attribute  that  slide  to  April 

seasonal  problems  and  a  surge  of  I RA   activity  at  tax  time.  T i me   deposit  growth  has 

slowed  as  well,  indicating  that  the  shift  to  M M D As   may  be  nearing  completion.  In  fact, 

some  outflows  from  M M D As   have  been  reported.  Nevertheless,  time  deposits  remain  far 

ahead  of  year-ago  levels. 

FOURTH DISTRICT  - CLEVELAND 

Summary.  Economic  conditions  continue  to  improve.  Employment  is 

rising  and unemployment  is falling.  Retailers  report  improving  sales. 

Manufacturing  activity  appears  to be  expanding  slowly.  Prices  and  orders  for 

primary  metals  are  strengthening.  Construction  continues  to be  a bright 

spot.  Demand  for  fossil  fuels  remains weak, and  farm prospects  remain 

uncertain despite  the new program  to curtail  production.  Banks  are  reported 

to be  liquid, with  residential  mortgage  lending  the only  sector  showing 

strength. 

District  Labor Market  Conditions.  Employment  is rising  and 

unemployment  is falling  in this District.  Manufacturing  employment  in Ohio 

(nsa) rose  slightly  in January,  February,  and March,  and  average  hours  worked 

per week has  a slowly  rising  trend.  Recalls  have begun at  some  firms as 

orders  have  improved but  firms generally  are  cautious  about  expanding  their 

workforce.  Indexes  of  leading  indicators  point  to recovery  in Pittsburgh  and 

Cleveland.  Indexes  for both  areas have risen  for five consecutive  months. 

Unemployment  rates  in the District  are  falling but  remain well  above 

the national  average.  Unemployment  rates  in the District's  eleven  largest 

SMSAs averaged  14.0%  in March  (nsa), down  from  15.4%  in January,  and  the rate 

fell  in every  SMSA  except  Toledo. 

Retail  Sales.  Major  retailers  report  improving  sales.  Department 

store  sales have been very  good  in recent  weeks.  One  major  firm reports  sales 

up 4 percent  in real  terms  from the year-ago  level.  Another  reports April 

sales up  1.7 percent  (s.a.,  monthly  rate)  from March,  and  similar  gains  in 

early May.  Both  firms  report  higher  priced  "upscale"  goods doing  especially 

well,  and  both  are  optimistic  about  the  sales outlook.  The  intensity  of  price 

promotions  has  ebbed  some  in the  last  two  or  three  months.  Inventories  are 

described  as  "clean  and  lean;" neither  firm plans  major adjustments up  or  down. 

A  major  automobile  service  and  tire  retailer  reports  unit volume  of 

tire  sales up  10 percent  from last year  and dollar volume of  service  sales up 

7 percent.  The  firm describes  the  market  as  "extremely  competitive," with 

more  price  cutting  this year  than  last.  Inventory  levels are  satisfactory  and 

no adjustments  are  planned.  Customers  continue  to replace  tires only  when 

absolutely  necessary,  except  for buyers  of  "prestige"  tires. 

Manufacturing.  Manufacturing  activity  appears  to be expanding  slowly, 

but  capital  goods  production  remains weak.  A  survey  of purchasing  managers 

reveals  increases  in orders and  production,  and  stable  employment. 

Inventories  of  raw  materials,  supplies,  and  finished  goods  are  stable.  Many 

orders  are "rush," apparently  because  of  lean  inventories.  Price  increases 

outnumber price  decreases  by a growing  margin but  most  prices are  stable. 

Preliminary  results  of  this Bank's May  survey  of Fourth  District 

manufacturers  shows new orders,  shipments  and backlogs  are rising  while 

inventories  are  flat.  Prices  paid  for  supplies  are generally  stable,  as is 

employment, but  there  is some  increase  in average hours worked  per  week. 

A  major  producer  of  machine  tools  is very  pessimistic.  Except  for_ 

those  from the defense  industry, he  is obtaining  practically  no orders, not 

even  for spare parts  for which  orders usually  improve at  this stage  of a 

business  cycle.  He  sees no  sign of upturn  in his business  before  1984.  A 

major producer  of components  for capital goods reports orders were  flat  in 

April and  are  likely  to be  flat  in May. 

Primary  Metals.  Orders and  prices are strengthening  for steel and 

aluminum.  A  major  steel  producer  reports  that orders  for  flat rolled  steel 

had  surged  earlier  this year  as customers  feared  that  supply  might  tighten, 

but  that  flurry  of  orders quickly  died.  Steel users have  ceased  liquidating 

inventory.  Shipments  to steel users have  risen  to equal  steel  consumption, 

which  is rising  slowly  in  line with  the general  business  recovery.  Steel 

mills are  still reducing  their own  inventory  to raise cash  to offset  losses 

from operations  that  are  still  below  the break-even  point.  The  gap  is  slowly 

closing,  however,  as volume  and  prices  gradually  rise. 

A  major producer  of aluminum reports  that  orders have  improved 

substantially  since  last  fall, at  times  coming  in at  a rate  that  exceeded 

capacity.  The  strength  in orders has come  from customers  hedging  against 

rising  prices and  a possible  strike  in June,  from refilling  the  supply 

pipeline  after  customer  inventories  had become  too  low, and  from some 

strengthening  in underlying  demand,  especially  from housing  and autos.  Ingot 

prices  have  risen by half  since  last  summer but  remain below some  producers' 

costs  of production  as  there  is strong  competitive  pressure  for market  share. 

Construction.  Construction  continues  to be  a bright  spot.  House 

construction  continues  to rise and  respondents  are confident  the  improved 

level of house  construction  in the District  can be  maintained  at  current 

mortgage  interest  rates.  House  prices are  firming  and  larger houses  are being 

built  and  bought.  House builders  expect  shortages  of  lumber,  gypsum board, 

and  skilled  workers.  Office  construction  is  likely  to remain  strong  in the 

District  for another year  or  two as  major projects  already underway  are 

carried  to completion, but  few new  projects  are being  planned.  Construction 

of  shopping  space  is weak, but  construction  of general purpose  industrial 

buildings  is firm.  Rental  rates  for non-residential  properties  are very  soft. 

Energy.  Demand  for  fossil  fuels remains weak.  A director  reports 

spot  market  demand  for coal  is practically  non-existent.  Small  mine  operators 

are  in difficulty  and  their numbers are  shrinking.  Oil  and  gas exploration  is 

drying  up.  There  is an excess of drilling  rigs,  and  drilling  is expected  to 

be weak  for at  least  another  year. 

Agriculture.  Farm  income  is  low and  prospects  remain  uncertain 

despite  the  payment  in kind  (PIK) program.  A  director  is concerned  that  the 

PIK  program  may not  take  enough  land  out  of  production  to avoid  another  bumper 

crop.  Prices  are rising  sharply  for grass  seed  required  to prevent  erosion  of 

idled  land  that  has  more  than an 8 percent  grade.  Commodity prices  are 

recovering,  but  only  because  of  speculation  on PIK's  impact.  Some  farmers, 

expecting  higher  prices,  are  fertilizing  crops  more heavily  than usual, and 

others  are considering  reducing  the amount  of  land  they will withdraw  from 

production. 

Some  farms  still are being  sold  at  distress  prices but  others are now 

selling  at  reasonable  prices.  Another  director  reports  farm equipment  sales 

are  rising  and  dealers  are accepting  PIK commodity warrants  as  payment  for 

equipment.  Fertilizer  sales are reported  to be  slow. 

Commercial Banks.  Banks  are very  liquid, putting  downward  pressure  on 

interest  rates  as residential  mortgage  lending  is the only  sector with  strong 

demand.  Inflows  of deposits  to MMDAs are reported  slowing, especially  as 

offered  interest  rates  are  lowered  toward  market  rates.  Business  loan demand 

is soft, while  consumer  loans are up a bit.  Bankers  report  getting a 

smaller-than-usual  share  of automobile  financing business.  Residential 

mortgage  lending  activity  continues  to grow rapidly, and  the proportion  of it 

used  to refinance  older  high-interest  rate  mortgages  is  shrinking. 

FIFTH DISTRICT  -  RICHMOND 

Overview 

A broadly  based  economic  expansion  appears  to have  gotten  underway 

in the Fifth District  in recent  weeks.  In  the manufacturing  sector, 

shipments  and new orders  rose  across  a wide  front.  Order  backlogs, 

employment, and  the average work week  also  increased  among  manufacturers. 

District  retailers  also  report  gains  in activity  over  the month, with  sales 

and  relative  sales of big  ticket  items having  both  increased.  In  addition, 

the  construction  industry has begun  to gain  support  from  the housing  sector, 

at  least  in the metropolitan  and  resort  areas.  The  outlook  among District 

businesses  is generally  positive.  Prices  remain  relatively  stable. 

Inventories,  despite modest  recent  increases,  are  at  comfortable  levels. 

Manufacturing 

Gains  in shipments,  orders,  and  order backlogs  have  been widespread 

among  Fifth District  manufacturers  in recent weeks.  Most  industries  appear 

to be  sharing  in  these  gains, but  some,  like  textiles  and  furniture,  seem  to 

be  leading  the way.  Also,  these  recent  gains  are beginning  to affect  the 

production  side.  Manufacturing  employment  edged  up  over  the month, while  the 

length  of  the average work week  rose  across  a broad  front.  Stocks  of mate-

rials were up  slightly,  but  finished  goods  on hand held  steady.  Nonetheless, 

total  inventories  seem  to be very nearly  in line with  desired  levels. Cur-

rent  plant  and  equipment  capacity, however,  remains  somewhat  in excess  of 

present  needs. 

Consumption 

Most  evidence  points  to a  fairly  substantial  rebound  in  consumer 

spending  since our  last  survey.  Sales  appear  to have  advanced  broadly  in 

most  areas,  although  some rural  areas  appear  to be  lagging  in this  respect. 

Retailers  experienced  increases  in sales  and  in relative  sales  of big  ticket 

items  over  the month.  Our  directors  also note  improved  levels  of  consumer 

activity  in most  areas.  The most  widespread  gains  appear  to have been  in 

autos,  although  other  durables  and  non-durables  have  also done well.  Furni-

ture  and  appliance  lines  are  getting  support  from both  primary  and  replace-

ment markets.  Activity  in  the housing  sector has  picked  up  sharply  in some 

areas  so that builders  and new  owners  are actively  furnishing  new or  recently 

purchased  houses. 

Despite  the  increase  in sales,  retail  inventories  are  reported  to 

have  risen  slightly  in the past  few weeks.  Nonetheless,  total  stocks  are 

well  in line with  desired  levels.  The  feeling  appears  to be  that  retailers 

will  continue  to maintain very  trim  inventory  positions,  at  best  allowing 

their  growth  to keep  pace with  sales. 

Housing  and  Construction 

Fifth District  construction  and  real estate  activity  continues  to 

vary widely  from  sector  to  sector  and  from region  to region.  To  the  extent 

that  it  is possible  to generalize, housing  construction  and  sales  appear much 

improved  in the metropolitan  and  resort  areas.  In most  other  areas  of  the 

District, with  only  a few exceptions,  the residential  sector  continues 

sluggish  to severely  depressed.  There  is generally  thought  to be very  little 

inventory  of new,  finished  homes  and  prices  are characterized  as  stable  to 

firming.  By and  large, current  construction  in the commercial  sector  con-

sists  of projects  in  their  later  stages.  There  appears  to be  little work  in 

the pipeline.  Estimates  of  the  time before any pickup  run  generally  in  the 

6-12 month  range. 

Materials  prices  are  coming  under  upward  pressure  and  in some  cases, 

e.g.,  lumber, have  risen  substantially.  Wages,  on  the other hand,  are 

generally  stable,  and have been  for  some  time.  On balance,  construction 

costs would  not  appear  to be  in for any major  shocks  originating within  the 

District. 

Banking  and  Finances 

Business  loan demand  has been  flat  to  slightly  declining  recently 

while  consumer  demand  has  been  stable  to slightly  rising.  Mortgage  rates 

have  generally  declined  to  the  12-13 percent  range  and  activity  is up 

significantly.  There  is a feeling  that'current  mortgage  rates  will permit  a 

modest  but  sustainable  recovery  in housing  sales  and  construction. 

Most  depository  institutions  seem  to feel  that  total MMDAs  consist 

of about  10-50 percent  new money. 

Agriculture 

District  farm  credit  conditions  during  the  first  quarter  of  1983 

remained  much  the  same as  in  the previous  quarter  but  showed  signs  of  slight 

improvement  over  the  situation  a year  ago.  Further  declines  in  interest 

rates  and  continued  improvement  in bank  fund  availability  highlighted  con-

ditions  for  the  second  consecutive  quarter.  By  and  large,  liquidity  con-

ditions  at rural banks  eased  again, while  farm  loan demand  remained  soft. 

Both  loan repayment  rates  and  requests  for renewals  took a modest  turn  for 

the better,  compared  with  those  a year  earlier.  Farmland  values  increased 

for  the  second  quarter  in a row, rising moderately  over  the revised  previ-

ous-quarter  level but  remaining  under  a year  ago. 

S I X TH   D I S T R I CT   -  A T L A N TA 

Evidence  of  recovery  continues  to  grow,  but  certain  sectors,  particularly 

agriculture  and  the  textile  and  chemical  industries,  remain  weak.  Retail  sales,  especially 

of  consumer  durables,  are  still  on  the  upswing.  Construction  continues  the  previously 

reported  resurgence.  T he   financial  sector  shows  modest  improvement,  but  uncertainty 

prevails 

in  some  local  markets. 

T he   upsurge  in  tourism  remains  concentrated 

geographically,  but  the  increase  in  the  volume  of  air  travel  appears  to  be  spreading. 

Employment  and  Industry. 

Signs  of  recovery  in  manufacturing  output  and 

employment  are  uneven.  Orders  in  the  lumber  industry  are  strengthening. 

After  an 

extended  period  of  economic  slack,  shipments  of  phosphates  have  revived  in  Florida. 

In  contrast,  output  and  employment  in  the  textile  industry  have  not  yet  responded  to 

the  upturn  in  economic  activity.  Nonetheless,  industry  representatives  are  optimistic. 

They  expect  increasing  auto  sales  and  new  housing  construction  to  boost  orders  for  tire 

cord,  upholstery,  carpeting,  and  draperies.  Still,  they  express  concern  about  the  cost 

of  financing  new  equipment  required  to  become   competitive  with  foreign  producers. 

Spokesmen  for  the  petrochemical  industry  in  Louisiana  and  Mississippi  foresee  little 

improvement  in  demand  for  petrochemicals. 

Engineering  firms  report  that  companies 

are  not  expanding  product  lines  but  are  exploring  alternatives  with  higher  profit  potential. 

Many  establishments  are  shifting  to  more  lucrative  specialty  chemicals. 

Consumer  Spending.  District  retailers  report  continued  sales  gains  in  March 

and  April.  Retail  sales  performance  in  the  Southeast,  especially  in  Orlando  and  Atlanta, 

is  reportedly  better  than  in  other  parts  of  the  country.  Department  store  officials  say 

that  current  promotional  activity  rather  than  recovery  in  the  housing  industry  is  spurring 

sales  and  higher-than-usual  inventories.  Merchants  expect  retail  sales  to  weaken  in 

May  but  look  for  a  strong  back-to-school  season.  Both  attendance  and  orders  at  the 

fall  apparel  buyers'  market  in  Atlanta  were  up  15  percent  over  last  year. 

Retailers 

reportedly  stepped  up  their  buying  because  sales  have  been  strengthening  in  recent 

months.  District  motor  vehicle  sales  in  April  continued  the  upward  trend  of  the  past 

few  months.  Automobile  dealers  say  that  sales  of  full-size,  luxury  models  and  light 

trucks  are  responsible  for  most  of  the  improvement. 

Construction.  Officers  of  financial  institutions  expect  mortgage  rates  to 

continue  declining  through  May.  

Reports  from  building  permit  offices  indicate  April 

and  M ay   applications  are  at  least  as  strong  as  March,  during  which  they  were  up  sharply 

in  spite  of  bad  weather. 

Our  respondents  believe  the  strong  permit  data  during  the 

first  four  months  of  the  year  reflect  the  true  strength  of  residential  housing  demand. 

Those  we  polled  see  a  general  firming  of  house  prices  and  in  some  areas  outright  price 

hikes  by  means  of  the  elimination  of  builder  buy-downs  and  other  discounts. 

Respondents 

in  Tennessee,  Mississippi, 

and 

Georgia 

anticipate 

new 

construction  and  office  space  absorption  to  be  at  lower  levels  in  1 9 83   than  in  1 9 8 2. 

Sources  in  Florida,  Louisiana,  and  A l a b a ma   are  more  optimistic  yet  cautious.  Contacts 

report  a  hiatus  in  new  construction  of  large  shopping  centers  in  Georgia,  A l a b a m a, 

Mississippi,  and  Tennessee. 

Shopping  center  construction  in  Florida  and  Louisiana  is 

characterized  as  steady  with  good  prospects  for  picking  up  in  the  near  future. 

Finance. 

Legislators  in  Florida  and  Tennessee  have  effectively  defeated 

bills  to  allow  interstate  banking  in  their  respective  states.  Proponents  of  the  Florida 

legislation  maintained  that  interstate  banking  would  provide  more  capital  for  loans, 

expand  the  state's  tax  base,  and  create  some  healthy  competition. 

Although  tabled, 

the  Florida  bill  could  come  up  later  this  year.  Advocates  of  the  Tennessee  legislation 

argued  that  out-of-state  acquisition  of  some  local  banks  would  relieve  the  lack  of 

confidence  in  the  state's  financial  industry  caused  by  the  failure  of  United  American 

Bank  ( U A B ).   Bankers  claim  the  F D I C 's   failure  to  honor  loan  participations  purchased 

by  Tennessee  and  Kentucky  banks  from  the  now  defunct  U AB   could  further  weaken 

some  already  shaken  institutions. 

Tourism.  Contacts  report  an  expanded  increase  in  the  volume  of  air  traffic 

at  regional  airports. 

Smaller  carriers  are  introducing  service  to  many  local  airports 

that  major  airlines  abandoned  following  deregulation.  However,   financial  conditions  for 

southeastern  carriers  remain  troubled  despite  a  slight  abatement  in  the  intensity  of 

airfare  competition.  Our   contacts  do  not  expect  financial  conditions  for  District-based 

carriers  to  improve  until  at  least  the  third  quarter. 

In  other  sectors  of  the  travel 

market  strength  remains  concentrated  geographically:  Central  Florida  is  booming,  while 

lodgings  and  attractions  in  south  Florida,  Tennessee,  and  Louisiana  languish.  Atlanta's 

convention  trade  continues  to  be  troubled  by  shortened  stays  and  drop-offs  in  bookings 

although  volume  is  up. 

Agriculture. 

Declining  demand  for  short-term  credit  by  District  farmers 

reflects  continuing  weakness  in  agriculture.  Except  in  Georgia,  loans  outstanding  from 

the  Production  Credit  Association  fell  in  every  District  state  in  the  first  quarter  relative 

to  the  previous  quarter.  T he   poultry  industry  is  reeling  from  the  side  effects  of  the 

Payment-In-Kind  program.  Feed  grain  price  increases  of  $10-30  per  ton  have  resulted  in 

a  2-5  per  dozen  climb  in  the  cost  of  egg  production. 

Large  supplies,  a  declining 

export  market,  and  weak  domestic  demand  have  led  to  a  sharp  drop  in  egg  prices  here. 

A  substantial  improvement  in  the  weather  has  allowed  farmers  to  make   up  much  of 

their  planting,  but  corn  and  cotton  crops  remain  behind  schedule,  and  yield  reductions 

on  late-planted  corn  are  possible. 

Corn  supplies  are  likely  to  be  below  normal  in 

southern  states  in  July  and  August. 

Panel  of  Economists.  Our  panel  of  economists  is  almost  evenly  divided  in 

its  recommendations  for  monetary  policy. 

Half  believe  that  current  Fed  policy  is 

appropriate,  and  half  think  that  money  supply  growth  should  be  reduced  to  a  steady 

rate,  ranging  from  5  to  10  percent. 

Similarly,  about  half  of  those  surveyed  expect 

inflation  to  average  4  percent  in  1983;   the  remaining  members  anticipate  a  more  rapid 

acceleration  in  prices. 

Almost  all  expect  inflation  to  reach  at  least  5-6  percent  in 

1984.  By  a  narrow  majority,  they  look  for  the  foreign  exchange  rate  of  the  dollar  to 

fall  this  year.  T he   most  frequently  cited  signs  of  local  recovery  continue  to  center  on 

the  construction  industry—housing  and  commercial  building,  real  estate,  and  lumber 

manufacturing.  However,   a  few  respondents  mention  improving  labor  markets,  increases 

in  consumer  spending,  and  some  upturn  in  manufacturing. 

No   pattern  is  evident  in 

regard  to  the  next  phase  of  recovery.  Nearly  everyone  on  our  panel  regards  housing 

demand  as  strong  enough  to  sustain  the  current  pace  of  construction  activity. 

SEVENTH  DISTRICT—CHICAGO 

Summary.  The  economic  picture  is definitely  brighter  in  the  Seventh 

District, but  there  is scant hope  that  employment  and  output  will  soon  regain 

a  substantial  portion  of  the  ground  lost  in  the  steep  descent  from  the 

prosperous  levels of  1978.  Confidence  has been  at  least  partially  restored. 

Households  are  spending more  freely,  especially  on motor vehicles  and  other 

durables.  Employment  appears  to be  rising  gradually  and  factory  hours  have 

lengthened.  Output  schedules  for autos and  trucks have been  raised.  The 

uptrend  in housing  activity, both  transactions  and  new  construction,  seems  to 

have  substantial momentum,  assuming  interest  rates  do not  rise. 

Nonresidential  construction  remains weak with widespread  evidence  of 

overbuilding.  Except  for a few  items  such as double  trailers,  demand  for 

producer  goods  remains very  depressed.  Depleted  inventories  of  steel and 

other materials  and  components are being  cautiously  replenished.  In  the  farm 

sector,  adverse weather has  delayed  field work, but  income  prospects  have 

improved, mainly  because  of PIK.  The  decline  in District  farmland  value 

ended  in  the  first  quarter. 

Caterpillar  Strike.  With  the  ending  of  the  seven-month  Caterpillar 

strike  on April  25, one  of  the District's  largest manufacturers  resumed 

ordering  steel,  castings, and  other  supplies.  Demand  for  Caterpillar's 

earth-moving  equipment  remains weak, but  its inventories  of  finished  goods 

and  replacement  parts had  declined  so much  that  sales were being  lost. 

Company  Restructuring.  Business  confidence  has  improved  to the point 

that  "mere  survival"  is no  longer  the principal  concern  of  hard-pressed 

enterprises.  But many  prominent  District  companies are  emerging  from  the 

recession  smaller,  leaner,  and  less aggressive.  Breakeven points  have  been 

lowered  by  "drastic  blood-lettings", with  deep  cuts  in supervisory  and 

white-collar  staff  that will not be  restored,  and  closings  of  less  efficient 

plants  that will not  be  reopened.  Refinancing  of debt  will  continue  as 

opportunities  develop, but new  debts will be  incurred  only  reluctantly. 

Producer  Goods.  Demand  for most  capital  goods produced  in  the 

District  remains very  slow.  However,  depressed  lines  are  no  longer  getting 

worse.  Moreover,  a pronounced  pickup  has  occurred  in orders  for double  truck 

trailers  permitted  by new  federal  regulations.  Also,  sales  of  some  types  of 

mining  and  construction  equipment  have  improved.  The  longer-term  outlook  for 

capital  goods  is clouded  by  the  lack of  large  programs  in  the planning  stage 

in basic  industries  such as  steel,  chemicals,  electric  power,  and  energy 

development. 

Motor Vehicles.  Auto  dealers believe  a  solid,  if moderate,  rise in 

demand  for domestic  cars and  light  trucks  is underway.  Easier  credit  terms, 

improved  product  quality,  and  stronger  consumer  confidence  are  cited.  Auto 

demand  is  centered  in full-sized,  conventional  cars, which  are  generally  in 

short  supply.  A  large proportion  of  these  cars are built  to  order. 

Recreational vehicle  sales also  are much  improved.  Auto  output  will not 

decline  as much as usual  in the  third  quarter.  Rapid,  "rolling" model 

changeovers  are planned  for most makes.  Output  of both  cars and  trucks will 

be up  sharply  in  the  third  quarter  from  last year, but  still well below  the 

high  levels of  1978. 

Steel.  The  industry's  reduced  capacity  to produce  cold-rolled  and 

coated  sheet  is fully booked  for  the near  future, mainly  because  of  increased 

vehicle  production.  Light  structurals also have picked  up.  Demand  for 

plates  and  large  structurals  remains very  weak. 

Retail  Sales.  Some  large  retailers  are pleased  with  recent  increases 

in sales, with  appliances,  furniture,  consumer  electronics,  and  some  types of 

clothing  showing  good  gains.  Inventories  are  on  the  low  side. 

Housing.  Transactions  in existing homes are up  sharply,  particularly 

in the Chicago  area.  Many purchasers  are  first-time  home  owners,  often 

two-income  couples, who  have been waiting  for  "affordable"  mortgages. 

Residential  construction  is up by  about  two-thirds  in  the District  from  last 

year, but  is less  than half  the  level of  early  1978.  Prices  of  building 

materials  have  increased, but  no  significant  shortages  are  expected  if  starts 

do not  exceed  the expected  1.5-1.6 million  range. 

Nonresidential  Construction.  Most  types of  nonresidential 

construction  in the District  will be  lower  this year.  Office  space  is 

overbuilt,  especially  in downtown  Chicago,  and  substantial  concessions  are 

offered  to attract  tenants.  No  large new  shopping  centers  are planned, but 

work on  small "strip" retail developments  and  renovations  are  at  a good  pace. 

Utility  construction  and most  public works  also will decline.  However, 

highway  and bridge  repair work will  increase  substantially. 

Agriculture.  Cold, wet  weather  has  substantially  delayed  spring 

field work,  caused  death  losses and  slow weight  gains for  livestock,  and 

disrupted  production  of  fruits and vegetables.  However, projections  of net 

farm  income  for  this year have been  raised.  Planting  intentions  suggest  that 

corn  acreage will be  down  31 percent  in District  states, and  soybean  acreage 

down  4 percent. 

Our April  1 survey  of agricultural bankers  indicates  that  the 

downturn  in District  farmland  values  ended  in the first  quarter, aided  by  the 

PIK  program.  Each  of  the District  states noted  at  least  a  slight  upturn. 

Potential  land buyers who had been waiting  for  land  prices  to "bottom" have 

reappeared, and  landowners wanting  to sell are  less  inclined  to accept  low 

bids. 

EIGHTH DISTRICT  -  ST. LOUIS 

The  economic  recovery  in  the Eighth District  picked up momentum  in 

April and  early May.  Retail  sales continued  significantly  above  year-ago 

levels,  and construction  activity  has been  robust.  Orders  and  shipments  of 

manufactured  goods have been  increasing,  and  inventories  are  relatively 

lean.  Employment  is inching up, and  a few plans  for future capital 

expansion  have  been  revised  upward.  On  the adverse  side, many  plants  are 

operating  substantially  below capacity, unemployment  remains  high,  and 

price  increases  have  accelerated  slightly.  Expectations  are  widespread 

that  economic  activity  will continue  to expand  during  the  summer and  fall 

of  1983. 

A recent  survey of  166 executives  in  the  St. Louis  area  by a  local 

management  association  found  that  25 percent  of  the businessmen  expected 

their business  will continue  to  be good  in  the next  six months,  another 48 

percent  anticipated  their business  will  improve, 18 percent  said  it  will 

remain at about  the same depressed  level, and  3 percent  thought  it would 

deteriorate.  Six percent  did  not  predict.  A number of other  respondents 

noted  that  a climate  of optimism  had  developed,  and  that  the mid-year  tax 

cut  should  further  bolster  sales and  production.  Producers of  business 

equipment,  especially  for the petroleum  industry,  seemed  to be  the  least 

optimistic.  They  believed  that  any  significant  upturn  for  t;hem would  be 

delayed until at  least  the  fourth  quarter of  this year. 

Sales at  six department  stores  in the District  were  8  percent 

higher  in April and  early May  than  in the comparable  period  in  1982.  Most 

types of merchandise  shared  In  the improvement;  furniture  and other  home 

furnishings  sold  particularly  well.  Two  retail  shoe chains  reported  that 

sales averaged  12 percent  above  the year-ago  pace.  A restaurant  chain  and 

a  fast  food  firm  also  reported  that  business  had  improved.  Automobile 

sales  improved  in April and  early May  at  five dealers  and  declined  at  two 

dealers.  A  large  Ford  dealer  sold 40 percent  more cars,  25 percent  more 

trucks and  12 percent  more used cars  in April and  early May  than  in  the 

same period  last  year. 

Both new  and  existing  homes  have  sold well  since  March. 

Reflecting  the  demand  for homes,  as well  as a  slight  increase  in orders  for 

office  buildings, construction  activity has expanded.  The  average  size of 

new homes,  however,  has decreased,  reflecting  high costs of  construction, 

relatively  high interest  rates,  and  higher gas heating  prices. 

Most  industrial  firms  in the District  reported  an increase  in new 

orders and  shipments  since March.  The  gains were  largest  for consumer 

goods and  for products  sold  to automobile  manufacturers,  residential 

construction contractors  and  related  businesses.  Firms producing  business 

equipment  and metals  reported  little change  in sales or only  a  slight 

pick-up.  Inventories  at most  firms are either at or below desired  levels, 

a positive  sign for future production.  Trucking companies  reported  an 

increase  in tonnage hauled,  but  rail and  river barge  traffic  has changed 

only  slightly. 

Total District  employment  inched up,  reducing  the unemployment 

rate  slightly  in April and  early May,  but  the number unemployed  is  still 

relatively  high.  Whirlpool  is adding  2,000 workers  at  an  Arkansas 

appliance  plant,  and many other firms  have  hired  selectively  as  activity 

has  improved.  On  the other  hand, businessmen  are  still  striving  to  control 

costs,  and  some  further  reductions  in employment  have occurred.  These 

attritions  and  layoffs,  however,  are  becoming  less  frequent. 

While  financing of  District  business  has come  from  increased  cash 

flows and  from  borrowing  in capital markets,  the demand  for commercial and 

industrial credit  at  large District  commercial banks  also  rose  in April and 

early May.  In addition,  both  real estate  and consumer  loans  increased 

moderately  at  these  banks.  Bank  deposits  rose more  sharply  than  loans, 

with both money market  deposit  accounts  and  super NOW accounts  continuing 

to  rise  rapidly.  Savings  and  loan associations  likewise  have  experienced  a 

huge  inflow of  funds  to  these new accounts,  enabling  them  to  increase  their 

lending  and  improve  their  liquidity. 

Because  of unseasonally cool weather  and  heavy  rains,  planting of 

cotton,  rice, corn  and other crops  in the District  has been delayed.  There 

is  still  time  to plant  these crops,  however,  if  the weather  improves.  The 

PIK  (payment-in-kind) program, which  limits  the amount  of  land  in 

production,  has provided  more  flexibility  for  timely planting.  Livestock 

production has become  less  profitable  than during  1982  since  feed  prices 

have  risen  relative  to  selling  prices.  Because  the PIK program  reduces 

acreage  planted,  it has adversely  affected  both  farm  implement  and  seed 

sales at many  dealers.  Some  implement  dealers,  however,  have  had  an 

expansion of  sales,  reflecting  the  bargain  prices  available  and  the more 

favorable  income outlook  resulting  from  the PIK program. 

NINTH DISTRICT  - MINNEAPOLIS 

The  previously  reported  upswing  in  Ninth  District  consumer  spending 

and  agriculture  has  continued,  but  the  recovery  in  industrial  activity  has 

slackened.  General  merchandise  and  home  sales  were  still  improving  in  April 

and  early  May,  and  auto  sales  have  begun  to  expand  again.  In  addition,  as 

expected,  the  Payment-In-Kind  Program  appears  to  have  started  to  provide  some 

relief  for  district  farmers.  The  recovery  in manufacturing,  however,  appears 

to  have  softened  this  spring  after  a  spurt  in  early  1983*  Rail  and  truck 

shipments  showed  only  modest  increases,  confirming  this  slackening  in  indus-

trial  activity,  and  increases  in  airline  passenger  travel  were  also  weak. 

Finally,  lending  remains  sluggish  at Ninth District  banks. 

Consumer  Spending 

District  consumers  continue  to  spearhead  the  recovery.  The  improve-

ment  in Minneapolis/St.  Paul  department-discount  store  sales, which began  last 

fall,  continued  in  April  and  early  May,  according  to  two  major  Twin  Cities 

retailers.  They  say  that  clothing  and  electronics  have been  the best  selling 

items. 

Bank  directors  report  that  outside  Minneapolis/St.  Paul,  general 

merchandise  sales  have also  continued  to  improve  since  last  fall,  particularly 

at  large  shopping  centers-

District  home  sales  have  continued  to  improve  as  well  and  have 

sparked  an  increase  in  homebuilding.  A  South  Dakota  director  indicates  that 

home  sales  in  Sioux  Falls  doubled  between  January  and April,  and  other  direc-

tors  report  increased  home  sales  in  their  communities.  Rising  home  sales,  in 

turn,  have  led  to  a  pickup  in  homebuilding.  The  executive  secretary  of  the 

Minneapolis  Association  of  Homebuilders,  for  example,  reports  a  marked  in-

crease  in  homebuilding  this  spring.  District  residential  building  permits  in 

March  were  up  U8  percent  from  a  year  ago.  Many  of  the  homes  being  built, 

however,  are the  low-priced  or  starter  homes  (costing  less than  $80,000). 

District  auto  sales  rebounded  in  April,  after  pausing  in  the  first 

quarter.  A  regional  sales  manager  for  one  of  the  nation's  largest  auto  manu-

facturers  states  that  his  firm's  sales  in  April  increased  20  percent  from  a 

year  ago  after  decreasing  8  percent  in  early  1983* 

Another  sales  manager 

reports  a  noticeable  pickup  in  medium-sized  car  sales.  The  directors'  gen-

erally  positive  remarks  about  April  auto  sales  in  their  communities  confirm 

these upbeat  sales  reports. 

Agricultural  Conditions 

The  faint  signs  of  recovery  in  agriculture,  which  were  reported 

previously,  have  intensified. 

The  upswing  in  corn  and  wheat  prices,  which 

began  in  January  with  the  announcement  of  the  Payment-In-Kind  (PIK)  Program, 

continued  in  April. 

The  Minneapolis  cash  corn  price,  for  example,  rose  8 

percent,  from  $2.87  to  $3.09  per  bushel,  between  March  and  April;  it  has 

increased  33  percent  since  January.  The  Minneapolis  cash wheat  price  rose  7 

percent,  from  $1».01  to  $^.31  per  bushel,  between  March  and  April  and  has 

increased  13 percent  since January.  These  increases, according  to bank  direc-

tors,  have boosted  farmers'  confidence, which has resulted  in some  increase  in 

farm  spending. 

In  North  Dakota,  for  example,  some  implement  dealers  have 

reported  increasing  implement  sales,  while  in  western  Wisconsin,  prices  have 

risen at  farm  auctions. 

Although  district  agriculture  appears  to  have  started  to  recover, 

corn  planting  is  behind  schedule.  Due  to  excess  moisture  in Minnesota,  only 

lU  percent  of  this  year's  corn  acreage  had  been  planted  by  May  10;  normally, 

33  percent  has  been  planted  by  this  time.  Because  of  PIK,  however,  farmers 

will  plant  only  about  two-thirds  of  their  normal  corn  acreage. 

Therefore, 

they  are  less  worried  than  usual  about  catching  up  once  the  fields  dry out  or 

about  a  late  crop  that  might  reduce  yields.  In  contrast  to  corn,  district 

spring wheat  planting  is on  schedule. 

Industrial  Activity 

In  contrast  to  the  further  strengthening  in  consumer  spending  and 

agriculture,  the  advance  in  manufacturing,  which  began  last  fall,  appears  to 

have  slackened  in April  and  early May.  Paper  and building  inputs  are the  only 

areas  where  directors  report  a  continued  pickup.  One  director,  for  example, 

reports  that  paper  and  wafer  board  plants  in  Minnesota  have  recently  been 

running  at  capacity. 

Prices  for  these  commodities  have  risen  modestly  as 

well,  reflecting  some  strengthening  in  demand. 

In  addition,  in  southern 

Minnesota,  a  manufacturer  of  heavy  construction  equipment  recently  recalled 

three-fourths  of  its  previously  laid-off  workers.  But  even  in  these  areas, 

some  signs  of  softening  have  emerged.  A  Montana  director,  associated  with  a 

national  forest  products  company,  reports  some  letup  in lumber  sales  in April. 

A  large  Minneapolis  manufacturer  of  residential  temperature  controls  recently 

laid  off 100 of  its  It,000 local  employees because  recent  sales  haven't  been  up 

to  expectations.  In both  instances,  this  softening  was  attributed  to  worries 

about  excess  inventories. 

Transportation 

The  recent  softening  in district  manufacturing  is reflected  in  trans-

portation  activity.  This  industry,  which  employs  around  90*000  people  in  the 

district  and  accounts  for  5  percent  of  district  personal  income,  is  a  good 

coincidental  indicator  because  it  moves  the  goods  produced  by  the  district's 

major  industries.  An  economist  with  a  large  district  railroad  says that  this 

movement  has  recently  been  lackluster  and  that  he  believes  the  region  is 

experiencing  a  "spit  and  sputter"  recovery.  His  firm's  rail  shipments  rose 

sharply  in  January,  then  sagged  in  February,  March  and  early  April,  before 

picking  up  a bit  in  late  April.  Shipments  of  lumber products  and other  manu-

factured  goods  have  not  been  as  good  as  expected. 

He  attributes  this  to 

business  concerns  about  excess  inventories  and  believes  businesses  are  order-

ing  smaller  amounts and  relying  more on trucks  than  usual. 

Trucking  firms,  however,  have  yet  to  see  a  major  pickup  in  their 

business.  The  total  truck  tonnage  shipped  by  general  freight  carriers  from 

Minneapolis/St.  Paul businesses  has  only  increased  modestly  since  early  Janu-

ary. 

A  trucking  executive  with  a  large  general  freight  carrier,  like  the 

railroad  economist,  believes  concerns  about  inventories  are  curbing  shipments 

and  says  that  building  input  shipments  have been  increasing  faster  than  other 

shipments. 

Like  the  transportation  of  goods,  the  transportation  of  people  has 

increased  only modestly.  The number of people  arriving  and departing  from the 

Minneapolis/St.  Paul  International  Airport  in  the  first  quarter  was  up  1.1 

percent  from  a  year  ago.  But  it  was  still  down  10.7  percent  from  the  high 

reached  in 1980. 

Financial  Developments 

Lending  continues  to  be  soft  at  Ninth  District  banks.  Sixty  percent 

of  the  respondents  to  our  Agricultural  Credit  Conditions  Survey  in  early 

April,  for  example,  indicated  that  their  loan  to  deposit  ratios  were  lower 

than  desired.  Directors'  comments about  weak  loan  demand  in their  communities 

confirm  this  survey. 

TENTH DISTRICT—KANSAS  CITY 

Overview.  Tenth  District  business  firms are generally  optimistic 

about  economic  conditions  in  1983.  Their  optimism has not been  reflected 

in loan demand  at District  commercial banks, which  remains unchanged  for 

the third  consecutive  month.  While  retailers  expect  sales  growth  throughout 

the year,  inventories  are  still being  trimmed  in many  instances.  Housing 

starts activity  is strengthening,  but new house  sales are  lagging.  Wet 

conditions  are delaying  corn planting  in the District, but  the winter wheat 

crop  is generally  in good  condition. 

Retail Trade.  Retailers  report  that nominal  sales  in early  1983  range 

from  unchanged  to 5 percent  above  last  year,  due  largely  to a rebound  in 

home  appliance  sales  in the last  two months.  Sales  of apparel have  tapered 

off.  Forecasts  of nominal  sales  growth  in 1983 are  in the  3 to 10 percent 

range.  Despite  increased  optimism,  abundant  supplies  and  short  lead  times 

allow retailers  to continue  to trim  inventories.  Half  of  the  respondents 

expect  inventory  levels  to bottom  out  soon, however.  For  1983 as a whole, 

retailers  anticipate  little  change  in prices  or  markups. 

Purchasing  Agents.  A majority  of manufacturers'  purchasing  agents 

report  average  prices  of major  inputs as unchanged  to 10 percent  higher  than 

a year ago.  Larger  increases  are  reported  for  lumber, however.  Most  price 

increases have  occurred  in the past  three months.  For the rest  of  1983, 

purchasing  agents  expect  further  increases  in input  prices  to average  less 

than  4 percent.  With minor  exceptions,  respondents  are not  experiencing 

problems with  lead  times  or material  availability,  nor  do  they  expect  such 

problems  this year.  Inventories  are now at very  low levels,  and  are 

expected  to remain  low  for the rest  of  the year. 

Housing  and Housing  Finance.  Tenth District  respondents  report  sub-

stantial  increases  in housing  starts,  especially, single-family  units,  in 

early  1983  compared with  early  1982.  Most  respondents believe  that  the 

present  level of housing  starts  is sustainable  at  the current  level of 

mortgage  interest  rates.  Sales  of new houses  are not  showing  as much 

strength  as  starts.  The  current  level of housing  activity  is putting  little 

pressure  on  supplies and  prices of  inputs, with  the exception  of  lumber. 

Further  declines  in mortgage  rates  are expected  to bring  further  improvement 

in housing  activity  with no hindrance  from  supply  constraints. 

Most  Tenth District  savings  and  loan associations  report  improvement 

in deposit  inflows  in  the  first  four months  of 1983  compared  to last  year, 

due both  to an  improving  economy  and  to new deposit  instruments.  Almost  all 

associations  expect  continued  gradual  gains  in  inflows  throughout  the 

remainder  of  1983.  Demand  for mortgage  funds  is also  increasing.  Mortgage 

interest  rates  range  from 11 3/8 percent  on adjustable  rate  loans  to 13 

percent  on  30-year  fixed  rate  loans.  Rates declined  slightly  in April and 

are expected  to decline gradually  through  the rest  of  the year. 

Agriculture.  The winter wheat  crop  in the District  is generally  in 

good  condition, with  some  localized  damage due to adverse weather  conditions. 

Although  the nation's winter wheat  harvest  is expected  to be  10 percent  less 

than  last  year, Kansas  farmers  should  harvest  the state's  second  largest  crop 

ever.  Wet  conditions  continue  to delay  corn planting  in  the Tenth  District. 

Cattle  grazing  on wheat  acreage  idled  by  the PIK  program  is prevalent  in  the 

southern  part  of  the District.  Calving  has proceeded  normally with  only 

isolated  instances  of unusually  high death  losses,  despite  a wet,  cold  spring. 

While  it  is too  early  to determine  the full  impact  of PIK  on  input 

suppliers,  sales are  substantially  lower  than  last  year  for  fuel,  fertilizer, 

and agricultural  chemicals.  New machinery  sales are very  sluggish,  though 

some areas  report  brisk used machinery  and haying  equipment  purchases. 

Agricultural  credit  conditions  are  generally  improved  throughout  the  District, 

as  indicated by  increased  availability  of  funds, higher  loan repayment  rates, 

fewer  requests  for  loan  renewals  and  extensions,  and  lower  interest  rates. 

District  farmland  prices  remain  weak. 

Banking.  Loan demand  at Tenth District  banks  is unchanged  from  last 

month.  Real estate  lending  continues  to show modest  growth, while  demand  for 

commercial and  industrial  lending  is experiencing  modest  declines.  Most 

District  banks  surveyed  report  that  deposits  continue  to grow although  a few 

have  experienced  a normal  seasonal  runoff.  Demand  deposits  are up  slightly, 

while  both NOW  accounts  and  Super-NOW  accounts  are beginning  to  stabilize. 

In contrast, most  of  the banks  surveyed  report  growth  in money  market  deposit 

accounts  (MMDA's), with  funds  still being  attracted  from outside  institutions. 

Money market  certificates,  small  saver  certificates,  and  large  CD's  are 

holding  steady.  The prime  lending  rate  is either  down  slightly  or  unchanged 

from last  month.  It  ranges  from  10.5  to  13.25 with most  banks  at  the  lower 

end  of  the  interval.  Most  bankers  surveyed  expect  further  small  declines 

in the prime  rate.  Consumer  lending  rates  are reported  to have  declined 

slightly. 

ELEVENTH DISTRICT—DALLAS 

The  District  economy  continues  to  show  evidence  of  a  recovery. 

Electronics  and  construction-related  manufacturing  is  rising,  but  oilfield 

equipment  production  remains  very  low.  The District  drilling  rig  count  is 

unchanged,  but  the  U.S.  count  has  been  rising  steadily.  District  retail 

sales  slowed  in April  from  March's  surge,  but  auto  sales  are  stable.  The 

outlook  for  farm  income  has  improved.  Construction  continues  at  a  rapid 

rate,  but  material  availability  has  begun  to  vary. 

S&L  construction 

financing  and  mortgage  lending  remain  high.  Deposits  and  bank  credit  are 

both well  above  levels  posted  a year  ago. 

Construction  is  robust  in  the District.  The  first  quarter  saw a 

record  number  of  single-family  and multifamily  housing  permits.  Apartment 

construction  will  probably  decline  later  this  year,  in  the  wake  of  rising 

vacancy  rates,  but  suppliers  of  construction  materials  expect  high  levels 

of  single-family  homebuilding  through  1984. 

The  square  footage  of 

nonresidential  projects  showed  surprising  strength  in  the  first  quarter. 

This  sector  is expected  to remain healthy  all  year. 

The  availability  of  materials  for  homebuilding  is  mixed.  There 

is  plenty  of  lumber,  plywood,  and  particle  board,  but  sheetrock  and 

exterior  siding  are  in  short  supply. 

Because  of  rising  demand  from 

homebuilders  and  steady  demand  from  commercial  construction,  suppliers 

may  have  to  ration  sheetrock  until  the  third  quarter,  when  new  production 

capacity  will  come  on  line. 

The  supply  of  exterior  siding  had  been 

plentiful  in  the  District,  but  it  is  now  insufficient  owing  to  increased 

demand  from  other  regions.  Prices  of  residential  construction  materials 

have  generally  increased  since  year-end,  but  they  will  remain  at  or  below 

their  1978  levels. 

Manufacturers  in  electronics  report  rising  sales  to  businesses 

and  consumers. 

Production  of  steel  rose  as  distributors  rebuilt  low 

inventories. 

Manufacturers  of  insulation  for  commercial  construction 

expect  very  high  rates  of  capacity  utilization  during  the  rest  of  1983. 

Output  of  oilfield  equipment  remains very  low. 

The  number  of  drilling  rigs  at  work  in  the  District  states  in 

the  first  half  of  May  was  slightly  below  April's  weekly  average. 

But 

several  factors  suggest  that  drilling  may  increase.  The  number  of  crews 

seeking  potential  drilling  sites  increased  slightly  in  April. 

The 

recession  appears  to be  over,  and  the  price  of  oil  is  stabilizing. 

Retail  sales  increased  substantially  in March,  aided  by  an  early 

Easter,  but  they  rose  at  a  much  slower  pace  in  April. 

Furniture  and 

appliances  are  selling  well,  and  inventories  are  generally  at  planned 

levels.  Some  stores  are  increasing  orders  to  replenish  stocks  of  consumer 

durables  which  were  reduced  during  recent  promotions. 

Retailers  in 

District  cities  with  diversified  economies  are  optimistic  about  sales 

increases,  but  respondents  along  the  Gulf  and  Mexican  border  expect  slow 

sales  all  year. 

Although  recent  shortages  of  more  popular  models  have  held  down 

volume,  new  car  sales  have  been  stable  since  March,  and  they  are  much 

higher  than  a  year  ago. 

Inventories  are  low.  Factory  orders  for  some 

models  are  being  returned  unfilled.  Dealers  expect  stable  to  increasing 

new  car  sales  over  the  next  few  months,  if  discount  financing  continues. 

After  special  new  car  financing  programs  appeared  again  in April,  used  car 

sales  slowed, but  they  picked  up  in early  May. 

Recent  increases  in some  crop prices  and widespread  participation 

in  the  payment-in-kind  (PIK)  program  have  improved  the  prospects  for  farm 

profit  margins  this  year.  Agricultural  bankers  anticipate  a declining  rate 

of bankruptcies/liquidations  during  the rest  of  1983,  and  they  expect  to be 

able  to help marginal  farmers  stay  in business  another  year. 

Total  deposits  at  the District's  financial  institutions  continued 

to  increase  at  a  healthy  rate  in  April  and  savings  deposits  were  154 

percent  above  last  year's  level.  MMDAs now  account  for  12 percent  of  total 

deposits.  The  first  quarter's  runoff  of  small  time  deposits  and buildup  of 

large  time deposits  continues. 

In  April,  loans  and  securities  at  member  banks  were  16  percent 

higher  than  a  year  earlier.  Bank  loans  grew  slowly  as  firms'  liquidity 

improved,  and  business  loan  demand  at  large  weekly  reporting  banks  remains 

sluggish.  Real  estate  lending  in April  slowed  from  its  first  quarter  pace, 

but  it  remains  significantly  above  last  year's  level.  Loans  to  consumers 

declined  slightly  in April. 

S&Ls  continue  to  fund  residential  construction  and  home 

purchase  loans  at  a  brisk  pace. 

Most  new  residential  loans  are  being 

packaged  and  promptly  sold  in  the  secondary  market. 

Several  S&Ls  are 

losing  money  on  new  but  unfilled  apartments  they  built  in  joint  ventures 

with  developers.  Increases  in  net  deposit  inflows  have  further  improved 

S&L  liquidity  positions. 

Excess  funds  are  being  placed  in  short-term 

investments  and  federal  funds.  Recently,  the  first  and  second  largest  S&Ls 

and  the  fourth  and  fifth  largest  S&Ls merged,  resulting  in two  associations 

with  114  and  110  branches,  respectively.  The  38th  largest  S&L  in  Texas 

applied  to  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency  for  permission  to  open  a 

commercial  bank. 

TWELFTH  DISTRICT  —  SAN FRANCISCO 

Consumer  spending  and  residential  construction  continue  to  lead  the  Twelfth 

District  economy  into  recovery.  Retail  sales  at  department  stores  and  auto 

dealerships  continue  to  improve, while  the decline  in mortgage  interest  rates  has 

held  Western  homebuilding  and  sales  activity  at  levels  far above  those  of a year  ago. 

Manufacturing  activity  is picking  up  in a  few important  industries  such  as  lumber  and 

aluminum,  but most  of  the  region's  capital  goods  and mining  industries  continue  to 

experience  extremely weak demand.  Despite  ample  funds and  aggressive  promotional 

efforts  on  the  part  of  the  institutions,  commercial  and  consumer  loan  demand  at 

Twelfth  District  banks  remained  sluggish  during April, but  the banks  report  a 

significant  increase  in real estate  lending  activity. 

Consumer  Spending 

Reports  throughout  the Twelfth  District  confirm  the  growing  strength  of  retail 

sales  in March  and April.  Major  department  store  chains  in Southern  California 

reported  that  sales  increased  in both months  and  in April  ran about  8 percent  above 

the  level of a year earlier,  representing  a  solid  gain  in real  terms.  One  respondent 

described  sales  at  smaller  stores,  such as  those  selling  women's  apparel  and  shoes, 

as  "the best  in years,  even better  than Christmas".  In  the  Pacific  Northwest  and 

Intermountain  states, department  stores  also  are  experiencing  strong  year-to-year 

sales  increases.  The  pickup  is extending  beyond  apparel, which  remained  relatively 

strong  even  during  recession,  to a broader  spectrum  of product  lines.  In  particular, 

the upturn  in home  sales  is helping  to  spur  sales  of household  goods,  including 

furniture,  appliances,  and  other big  ticket  items.  Interest  rate  concessions  by 

automobile manufacturers,  and  declining  gasoline  prices, have  stimulated  sales  of 

automobiles  and  recreational vehicles.  Retail  credit  delinquencies  are  returning  to 

more  normal  levels. 

Manufacturing  and Mining 

Twelfth  District manufacturing  industries  that  serve  the housing  and  defense 

sectors  are  showing  improvement.  But  the majority  of  industries—namely,  those  that 

manufacture  durable  capital  goods—continue  to reduce  output  and  employment.  Perhaps 

the  brightest  spot  in the  district  economy  in terms  of a  turnaround  is  the  Pacific 

Northwest  lumber  industry.  The  recovery  in national  homebuilding  activity  enabled 

the  industy  to boost  production  during  the  first  quarter  46 percent  above  the  level 

of  a year  earlier  and  to raise  prices  on average  by  11 percent.  The  region's 

aluminum  industry  also has  reactivated  some  idle  capacity.  But  layoffs  continue  in a 

number  of other  important  industries  however.  The  paper  industry  continues  its  cost-

cutting  efforts  in the  face  of weak demand.  In both  California  and  Washington,  the 

aerospace  equipment  manufacturing  sector  has been  benefiting  from  increased  defense 

business,  but weakness  in civilian markets  for aircraft  and  electronic  equipment  have 

continued  to reduce  overall  industry  payrolls.  In  the  Intermountain  states—Arizona, 

Nevada,  Utah—the  nonferrous metals  industries  are  once  again  experiencing  depressed 

demand  now  that  the  likelihood  of a copper  strike  has  diminished.  Throughout  the 

District,  capital  goods  industries  that  produce  such goods  as  trucks, machinery  and 

equipment  and  ships, have yet  to experience  a  turnaround  in demand.  The  decline  in 

oil  prices  is depressing  oil  drilling  activity  and  revenues  in Alaska and  California 

and  causing  layoffs  at  Intermountain  coal and  uranium mining  sites. 

Construction  and  Real  Estate 

The West  shared  in  the moderate  decline  in housing  starts  and  building  permits 

recorded  nationally  in March,  suggesting  that  the  pace  of residential  construction  in 

the  district  in coming months may  not  be  quite  as high  as during  the  first  two 

months.  But housing  analysts  still expect  regional homebuilding  activity  to be at 

least  50 percent  better  for  the year  than  last  year's  depressed  level.  They  stress, 

however,  that homebuilding  activity  could  drop much more  sharply  during  the rest  of 

the year  if mortgage  rates  do not  fall  further.  This  is because homebuilders  built 

inventory  during  the  first  quarter  in  the expectation  that  rates would  fall  further, 

qualifying  more  buyers.  If  the decline  is not  realized,  they will  be caught  with 

excess  inventory  and  reduce  construction  sharply.  The  fact  that most  of  the  new 

homes being  constructed  are  at  the  lower  price  range  and  that many  carry  subsidized 

FHA/VA mortgages  also  suggests  that  the recovery  will  not  be  sustained  unless  rates 

fall  further  to make homes  affordable  to a greater  segment  of  the public.  Lower 

rates  also  are needed  to offset  rising home  prices.  In  the non-residential  sector, 

construction  is reported  to be  slowing  due  to  the high vacancy  rates  in most 

metropolitan  areas. 

Agriculture 

Rain  storms  continued  in California  through April  causing  further  adverse 

consequences  for  the agricultural  sector.  In addition  to an estimated  $300 million 

in crop  losses  sustained  earlier  in  the year,  farmers  face  further  financial  losses 

as  a result  of continued  delays  in plantings  of  important  row crops  such as  lettuce, 

tomatoes  and  onions.  Prices  for  these  products  have  risen  sharply  in  the past  few 

months  but volume has  been  so  reduced  as  to result  in  far  less  than normal  revenues. 

Also,  the  storms  seriously  reduced  the prospective  nut  crop by  preventing  pollination 

of blooming  orchards.  Although  prices  for  livestock,  grains  and  a wide  array  of 

other  farm products  also  rose  in April, District  farmers  and  ranchers  expect  1983  to 

be  another  difficult  year, with  net  income  showing  little,  if any,  improvement  over 

1982's  depressed  level.  Large world  crop  supplies, weak  overseas  economies  and  the 

rising  value  of  the U.S. dollar  are  combining  to  lower  exports. 

Financial  Institutions 

Although  Twelfth District  banks  have  been aggressively  promoting  commercial and 

consumer  loans  as an outlet  for  the huge  inflow of  funds generated  by  the MMDA's, 

demand  for  those  types  of  loans  remained  sluggish  during April.  Real  estate  loans 

showed  a  similar  pattern.  But  since  institutions  are reporting  strong  real  estate 

lending  activity,  this  probably  just  means  that  the  recovery  in  the housing  market 

has yet  to  translate  into  an  increase  in the aggregate  statistics  on real  estate 

loans.  Banks  are noting  an  increase  in both  loan  inquiries  and  new  loan  extensions 

which  coincides  with  the  fall  in mortgage  rates  and  consequent  surge  in housing 

starts  and  permits  during  the  first  quarter.  An  additional  favorable  indicator  that 

a homebuilding  recovery  is underway  is  that  the majority  of  the  lending  activity  in 

recent  months has  represented  new  credit  extensions,  rather  than  the  refinancing  of 

old  loans. 

REDBOOK  SPECIAL  REPORT 

CONSTRUCTION AND REAL ESTATE  ACTIVITY 

NATIONAL SUMMARY 

This  summary  is  organized  around  the  answers  to  four  key  questions 

about  current  levels of construction  activity. 

•  How  robust  is  the  current  upturn  in  housing  sales  and 

construction? 

•  How  serious  is  the  current  downturn  in  nonresidential 

construction  activity? 

•  How  sensitive  would  activity  in  the housing  sector  be  to 
interest  rate  changes  of  different  magnitudes  and 
directions? 

•  What  is  the  likelihood  of  bottlenecks  and  upward  price 

pressures  in  the construction  supplies  industries? 

Housing  Sales and  Construction 

The  recent  upswing  in housing  is  widespread  geographically, 

with  all  Districts  reporting  substantial  improvements  over  the 

extremely  depressed  levels  of  the  first  quarter  of  1982.  Moreover, 

a  moderately  high  rate  of  housing  construction  appears  to  be 

sustainable  at  least  through  1983.  Cautious  estimates  by  economists 

in  the  construction  supply  industry  indicate  an  annual  rate  of 

housing  starts  of  at  least  1.5  million  units,  and  the  consensus 

among  forecasters  centers  on  levels between  1.5 and  1.6 million. 

The  general  feeling  is  that  a  marked  pickup  in  the 

underlying  demand  for  houses  has  occurred,  and  it  was  not  just 

January  and  February's  good  weather  that  generated  the  remarkably 

high  figures  for  those 'months.  Moreover,  the  bad  weather  in  March 

was  probably  responsible  for  that  month's  small  drop  in  seasonally 

adjusted  starts,  especially  in  the  Richmond,  Atlanta,  and  San 

Francisco  Districts. 

Most  Districts  reported  that  sales  of  low  priced  homes  had 

picked  up  especially  rapidly  and  there  is  an  apparent  tendency 

toward  construction  and  sale  of  smaller  houses.  While  the  houses 

may  be  smaller  than  ever,  they  are  apparently  still  being  equipped 

with  a  full  array  of  appliances.  In  some  regions,  Cleveland  and 

Philadelphia  for  example,  sales  of  medium  or  luxury  priced  homes 

have  also  picked  up,  but  the  performance  of  the  middle  and  upper 

markets  has been  spottier. 

While  all  the  Districts  reported  current  improvement,  the 

medium  term  outlook  is  more  mixed. 

St.  Louis  and  Dallas  have 

started  off  very  strong,  but  starts  are  expected  to  slow 

considerably  by  the  end  of  the  year.  New  York  and  Boston  report 

activity  that  is  already  rivaling  previous  peaks  and  regional 

industry  observers  anticipate  continued  growth. 

In  the  other 

Districts  the  current  level  of  activity  falls  well  below  previous 

peaks,  and  analysts  are  uncertain  as  to  what  the  rest  of  the  year 

will  bring. 

Nor  is  there  a  nationwide  pattern  in  builder  confidence. 

San  Francisco  reports  speculative  building  in  anticipation  of 

healthy  sales  later  this  year.  In  Richmond  and  Dallas  contractors 

are  only  completing  already-sold  homes,  and  Philadelphia  reports  a 

substantial,  but  diminishing,  inventory  of unsold  houses. 

Construction  of  rental  housing  has  also  increased,  but  the 

strength  of  the  upswing  varies  from  District  to  District  in  line 

with  the  tightness  of  local  markets.  Rental  markets  are  tight  in 

New York and Minneapolis;  loose  in Atlanta,  Chicago  and  Dallas. 

In  general  then,  while  there  is  little  doubt  that  a  strong 

recovery  in  housing  is  underway,  it  is  not  at  all  certain  that  the 

rest  of  1983 will  continue  as  strong  as  the  first  quarter. 

Nonresidential  Construction 

The  nonresidential  construction  sector  remained  generally 

strong  over  the  course  of  the  last  recession.  Now,  however,  a 

slowdown  is  beginning  nationwide  as  large  office  projects  are 

completed  and  fewer  new  starts  are  planned.  Vacancy  rates  have 

started  to  climb  in  most  reporting  regions—exceeding  five  percent 

in most  places  and  as  high  as  8 percent  in  Chicago  and  9  percent  in 

Minneapolis.  Advertised  rents  for  office  space  have  not  declined, 

but 

several 

Districts 

report 

an 

increasing 

incidence 

of 

rent-reducing  special  deals  such  as  one  year's  free  rent,  extensive 

remodelling,  and  free  amenities.  Under  these  conditions  developers 

are  taking  a  "wait  and  see"  attitude  about  future  construction 

plans.  Vacancy  rates  will  have  to  decline  and  effective  rents  will 

have  to  increase  before  office  construction  starts  begin  to  increase 

again. 

The  Districts  differ  in  the  expected  duration  of  the 

slowdown  in  commercial  starts.  Indeed  activity  has  just  started  to 

pick  up  in  Florida  and  in  some  of  the  smaller  Texas  cities. 

Industry  analysts  in New  York  expect  1984  to  be  a  good  year,  and  new 

projects  are  being  talked  about  actively  in  Boston  and  St.  Louis. 

By  contrast,  observers  in Minneapolis  fear  that  it  will  be  three  to 

five  years  before  commercial  construction  activity  begins  to pick  up 

in that  District. 

None  of  the  Districts  reported  large  amounts  of  new  retail 

construction.  Work  on  smaller  shopping  malls  can  be  expected  to 

begin  later  this  year,  about  six  months  after  the  increase  in 

housing  construction  activity.  Only  Kansas  City  reported  current 

work  on  a  large  shopping  mall,  and  an  analyst  of  large  regional 

retail  centers  does  not  expect  any  such  projects  to  be  started  this 

year across  the  nation. 

Sensitivity  to Interest  Rates 

It  is  generally  agreed  that  the  decline  in  mortgage  rates 

is  the  single  most  important  factor  behind  the  increase  in  housing 

activity.  Indeed,  most  respondents  tended  to  feel  that  a  further 

increase  in  housing  sales  could  still  happen  even  without  any 

additional  decline  in  rates.  The  basic  question,  however,  appears 

to  be  whether  another  large  drop  in  conventional,  fixed  rate,  30 

year  mortgage  interest  rates—to  10.5  or  11  percent—would  bring  out 

a  great  many  more  potential  buyers. 

Observers  in  Boston, 

Philadelphia,  Atlanta  and  Minneapolis  believe  that  lower  rates  would 

touch  off  something  like  a  boom  in  housing  sales.  Analysts  in 

Chicago  and  Dallas  are more  dubious on  this  point. 

The  use  of  variable  rate  mortgages,  which  might  reduce  the 

sensitivity  of  housing  activity  to  interest  rate  fluctuations,  does 

not  appear  to  be  gaining  in  consumer  acceptance.  District  reports 

that  discussed  this  issue  indicated  that  the  practice  of  "creative" 

financing  had  diminished  markedly  with  the  drop  in  rates.  The 

conventional  30  year  fixed  rate  mortgage  remains,  by  far,  the  most 

popular home  finance  instrument. 

The  general  optimism  about  the  sustainability  of  a  healthy 

market  appears  to  be  based  on  a  widespread  belief  that  interest 

rates  will  not  increase.  Several  Districts  report  the  fear  that  any 

increase  in  mortgage  interest  rates,  of  say  fifty  basis  points  or 

more,  could  dampen  recent  growth  rates.  Market  analysts  in  the  New 

York  region,  however,  believe  that  activity  could  be  sustained,  even 

given  a  small  interest  rate  increase—especially  if  this, were  taken 

as  a  sign  that  mortgage  costs  had  "bottomed  out"  and  would  be 

increasing  further  in the  future. 

Input  Prices 

While  there  have  been  a  few  instances  of  temporary  input 

shortages  (notably  for  lumber  and  dry  wall)  and  some  price  rises, 

« 

observers  do  not  expect  any  sustained  pressure  on  construction  costs 

through  this year.  Construction  supply  industries  are  operating  far 

below  capacity  and  are  apparently  capable  of  increasing  production 

quickly;  so  it  is  unlikely  that  anything  more  than  temporary  and 

localized  shortages will occur  in the near  future. 

However,  if  mortgage  interest  rates  do  fall  another 

percentage  point  or more,  and  if,  as  some  predict,  this  leads  to  an 

annual  level  of  housing  starts  closer  to  1.8  than  to  1.6  million, 

input  bottlenecks  and  upward  price  pressure  could  begin  to  become 

problems. 

