SUMMARY  OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC  CONDITIONS
BY  FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICTS

September,  1983

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY  ............................................................

First  District  - Boston  ......................................... 

-1

Second  District  - New York  ....................................

II-

Third  District  - Philadelphia  ................................... II-1

Fourth  District  - Cleveland 

..................................  IV-1

Fifth  District  - Richmond  ........................................V-l

Sixth District  - Atlanta  ........................................VI-

Seventh  District  - Chicago  .................................... VII-

Eighth  District  - St.  Louis 

.. 

o..o............. 
...

........  .... VIII-1

Ninth  District  - Minneapolis  .................................... IX-1

Tenth  District  - Kansas  City  .....................................

X-l

Eleventh  District  - Dallas  ..................................... XI-1

Twelfth  District  - San Francisco  .............................. XII-1

SUMMARY*

Overview

The  economic  expansion continued  through August and  the early

part of  September  in all  12  Federal  Reserve districts.  Retail  sales

continued  to be  strong, and both  factory orders  and  production rose.

The  level  of  employment  has  increased,  and  the  rate of  unemployment has

fallen  from  its  peak  in  the early  part of  this  year.

Manufacturing output  is  increasing at  a slow pace relative to

most  other  sectors  of  the  economy.  The demand  for heavy  capital

equipment, which had been particularly  sluggish,  is  showing signs  of

improvement.  Auto  sales  continue  to  be brisk and would have  been even

stronger were  it  not  for  short  inventories  of  larger domestic  and

Japanese models.  Housing sales have declined recently throughout  the

nation, and  the  hot  dry weather  that  has  persisted  over much of  the

Midwest has  severely damaged many crops.

Retail  Sales

Consumer products  have been  selling well  for  some  time  now.

Chicago and  St.  Louis  report  that  demand has been  particularly strong  in

the areas  of  autos,  furniture,  appliances  and  floor coverings.  Boston

reported  smaller-than-expected sales  increases  in  July and August.

*Prepared  at  the Federal Reserve  Bank of  St.  Louis.

However, retailers  expect  a return to  the  levels  established earlier  in

the  year, and merchants generally  expect  the  Christmas  season to be

particularly  good.

Manufacturing

On  the whole, moderate increases  in manufacturing production

have continued.  Dallas  reports unusually  large orders  during July and

Agust.  Backlogs  of  orders have developed  at electronics  firms which

have been producing at  near capacity.  Minneapolis,  San Francisco and

Boston report  increased orders  at high  technology  and electronic

companies.

Sales  of  heavy capital  equipment,  on  the  other hand,  continue to

be  sluggish.  Many plants  in  the Chicago  District remain  closed  or are

operating at  less  than  50 percent  capacity.  However, the manufacture of

tandem trailers,  permitted under  the  new federal  law, has been

particularly  strong.

Employment

Employment  in most  districts  is  responding to  the  turnaround in

economic  activity.  Dallas  indicates  that  job  growth has  been

particularly  strong  in durable goods  manufacturing and primary metals.

New claims  for unemployment compensation are  down sharply  in the  Chicago

District,  and  St.  Louis  notes  that many  construction, manufacturing and

service  firms expanded  their work forces  during August.  Employment has

increased modestly  in  the Boston District, with  job  opportunities  in  the

professional  and  technical  areas  particularly strong.

Construction and  Real  Estate

Housing  starts, construction and  the sales  of  new and older

homes were mixed during July and  August.  San Francisco reports  that

sales  of  new homes  fell  by  14 percent  in August, and many respondents

expected  sales  to  slow  further.  Atlanta,  Philadelphia, Dallas  and

Chicago indicate  that  residential  construction slowed  in  July.  In each

case,  the reductions were attributed  to higher  interest  rates.

However,  New York, Richmond  and Kansas  City  indicate  that

construction activity  remains  at  relatively high  levels.  Construction

activity  in New York has  been so brisk that  shortages  of  supplies  and

labor have developed.

Finance

Commercial and  industrial  loan activity  at  banks  has been soft

over much of  the nation.  Any  increases  in  loan activity have been

concentrated  in  the  areas of  consumer  installment  credit  and  auto  loans.

San  Francisco  indicates  that  these  loans have  increased at  a 12  percent

rate  over  the  past  three months.

Demand  for mortgage  loans  continued  at  the  relatively high

levels  established  earlier in  the year.  However,  a number of districts,

indicating that  this  is  a result  of  previous  commitments,  report  a drop

in  applications  for new mortgage  loans.

Agriculture

The hot  and  dry weather that  has continued over much of  the

nation has  severely damaged  the  corn and  soybean crops.  Kansas  City and

Chicago  estimate  the yields  of  these  crops  to be  roughly 50  percent below

normal.  Crop prices  have risen  in anticipation of the  poor yields.  The

marketing of  livestock has  increased due  to higher  feed  cost  and  poor

pasture  conditions, and  the price  of  livestock has  fallen as  a result.

San Francisco reports  that unseasonable rains  in  Southern

California have  damaged a number of  crops.  However,  farm  income  in this

District  is  expected  to  be  relatively high  this  year due  to  the combined

effects  of  the  drought  experienced  in the  rest  of the  nation and  large

PIK transfers.

Tourism

The  tourist  trade  continued  to  be  strong  in July and  August  and

this  is  expected  to  continue  into  the early  fall.  Occupancy rates  at

hotels and motels  in  the  St.  Louis,  Atlanta and  Minneapolis districts

were  generally  higher than year-ago  levels.  Respondents attribute  the

brisk  trade  to  lower  room rates,  discounted airfares,  and  reduced

gasoline  prices.

FIRST  DISTRICT - BOSTON

Manufacturers in  the  First  District report  that  business  conditions

are  looking up.  Demand  has  improved  for  electronics,  computers,  original

equipment automotive  products,  and  components  related  to  the  general  level

of  industrial production.  Demand  remains  weak for many  capital goods,

although the  level  of  inquiries  is  high.  Basic  industries,  such as  autos

and farm equipment,  are  said  to  be  interested in making  capital

expenditures but  unwilling  to make major commitments.  Manufacturing

inventories  are  in  good  shape  for  the most  part.  In  the  retail sector,

First  District  department  stores  report  that  the  pace  of  recovery  seems  to

have  slowed.  Sales  gains  in July and  August were both  smaller  than

expected  and  smaller  than  the  gains enjoyed earlier in  the  year;  as  a

consequence,  inventories  are  slightly  higher  than desired.  The  slowdown

was attributed  to  the  unusually hot weather which caused  an exodus  from the

metropolitan areas.  Reports  of  a very  good  tourist  season  in more  rural

areas  seem to  confirm this  hypothesis.

Manufacturing

More  and  more  First  District manufacturers are  seeing an upturn in

orders,  but  perceptions  as  to  the  strength of  the recovery vary

considerably.  The  defense  business  is good.  Consumer products like

appliances have  been selling well  for  some  time now.  Demand  has  increased

for  original  equipment  automotive  products and  for components  and  supplies

related  to  the  general level  of  industrial activity.  Various high

technology companies  report  increased  orders;  the electronics industry is

doing  particularly well.  However,  demand  is  still weak for many investment

goods - especially  those purchased  by  the  auto,  off-the-road equipment,  and

energy  industries.  Many capital  goods  producers  say  inquiries  have

increased  substantially and  sales  people  are  very busy, but  so far,  these

inquiries  have  produced  few new orders.  Customers  are not  willing to make

major committments.  This  reluctance  to  commit  is  attributed  to  low

capacity  utilization and  low, although improved,  profits.  However,  one

manufacturer noted  that high real  interest  rates make  it  more difficult  to

justify capital  expenditures and  another  said  that,  in  the  area of

industrial automation, firms are  taking  time  to  study  and  analyze different

alternatives.  The  recovery  in the capital  goods industries  is  thought to

be  slower  than  in  1975-76.

Several  firms  report  that  exports  are improving,  but  one very large

exporter  which had enjoyed  fairly good  sales  during  the  recession has  seen

a sharp  dropoff  in  the  past  couple  of months.  The  competition from

European producers  is  said  to  be  fierce, as  Europe  tries  to  export  its way

out  of  the  recession.

Employment  is  increasing modestly at  most of  the manufacturing

firms  contacted,  but  one  firm which has already drastically reduced

its workforce  is  contemplating  still another major layoff.  Two high

technology companies  are  aggressively recruiting  in  the  professional and

technical areas;  they say  professional manpower  is  scarce  and expensive.

Inventories  are  in good  shape except  in  some  segments  of  the

machine  tool industry where  they  are  still  much too  high.  Prices  continue

to  be well  behaved,  but  are  no  longer declining.  One  respondent  reports

that  he  sees  more attempts  to  increase  prices, but  these  are rarely

successful.

Retail

Retailers  in  the First  District  reported  smaller  than  expected

sales  increases  in July and  August.  Compared  to  sales volumes  in  the

previous  year,  sales  gains were  smaller  than in  the  first  half  of  1983.  As

a result, inventories  are slightly  above desired levels.  However, most

merchants  expressed  confidence  that  sales  gains  would again be  strong  this

fall.

Two department  store  chains,  centered in major  cities,  cited  the

unusually  hot weather as  a possible  explanation for  the slack  sales,

hypothesizing  that  local  residents  left  town more frequently  this  summer

than last.  This view seems  to be  supported  by  reports of  a strong  tourist

season in northern and western New England.  Also consistent  with this

hypothesis were  reports  that  the weakness  occurred  across  the  board -

no

specific  product  lines were  especially  strong  or weak.  Since  they see  no

reason to  expect  the unseasonal weather to  continue long  into  the  fall,  the

merchants are  optimistic about  a return  to  the  strength shown earlier in

the  year.  However,  one  retailer with affiliated  stores in other regions

doubts  that  First District  stores  will hold  the  sales  lead they  have

enjoyed in  recent  months, not  because  of  local weakness, but  because the

other  regions'  previous year's  sales  were  so  weak.

Somewhat  excessive  inventories have  resulted  from two factors.

First,  slower-than-expected  sales  gains  left more merchandise  in  inventory

than planned.  Second,  several  retailers  said  the  strong  spring  recovery

had  encouraged them to  buy more aggressively and  bring  goods  in earlier

than usual.

II-1

SECOND  DISTRICT-NEW  YORK

An  uneven  economic  recovery  in  the  Second  District  continued  in

August. 

Consumer  spending  appeared  to  be  slowing  from  the  extraordinary  pace

of  early  summer,  though  gains  over  1982  were  still  substantial  at  some

stores.  Residential  construction  was  strong;  homebuilders  are  booked  up  for

the  next  few months.  Nonresidential construction improved  further,  with  some

industrial and  commercial  projects getting underway.  Most manufacturers  saw a

pickup  in  activity,  but  heavy  goods  producers  saw  little  improvement. 

In  the

agricultural sector, a summer  drought damaged corn and hay crops,  but harvests

of fruit are expected to  be  high.  On  the  financial  side, business  lending was

flat and automobile loans picked up.

Consumer Spending

Retail  activity  continued  to  slacken  in  recent  weeks.  Although  some

department  stores  still  achieved  healthy  double-digit  gains  over  a  year  ago,

the  volume  of  sales  in  August  was  generally  lower  than  in  May and  June. 

The

pace  appeared  to  be  slowing  further  in  early  September. 

One  middle-income

chain  experienced four  straight weeks  of declining  sales  and  reported  that  by

early September, volume was  less  than last year.  Some merchants  felt  that hot

weather  was  a key  factor  in  depressing  sales,  especially  those  of  autumn

apparel.  Retailers  are  hopeful  that  business  will  pick  up  when  the  weather

cools.

II-2

Construction and Real  Estate

Residential  construction  continued  at  a  rapid  pace.  Builders  of

custom  homes  are  fully  booked  through  the  next  few  months,  and  speculative

projects,  mostly  condominiums,  are  increasing.  This  activity  has  caused

shortages  of  supplies  and  labor  to  become  more  severe.  Despite  the  current

activity,  builders  are  anxious  about  next  spring. 

Traffic  has  fallen

recently.  While  such  a  slowdown  is  normal  around  Labor  Day, 

there  is  concern

that  higher  interest  rates  may  be  discouraging  buyers. 

If 

the  normal  pickup

in  October  fails  to  materialize,  construction  will  fall  off  during  the  first

half  of next year.

The  nonresidential real estate  market  continued to  improve  throughout

most  of  the  District.  Leasing  activity  increased  further  in  downtown  New

York,  New  Jersey,  and  on  Long  Island.  Although  new  starts  of  office

construction 

remained  rare,  our  contacts  reported  that  some  buildings  are

being  planned.  Furthermore, 

several 

industrial  and  commercial  development

projects  are  planned  or  underway 

in  New  York  City's  outer  boroughs,  with  a

good  deal  of  public  sector  participation. 

And  plans  for  major  retail  mall

projects have been reported in Manhattan, Long Island, and the Albany area.

Business Activity

Manufacturing activity  continued  to  pick  up  throughout  the  District,

but the  extent  of  the  upturn was uneven.  High technology companies,  including

producers  of  computers,  semiconductors,  defense  electronics,  and  medical

equipment,  experienced  the  sharpest  gains,  and  several  of  these  firms

announced  expansion  plans. 

In  other  industries,  such  as  plastics  and

II-3

instruments,  sales  gains  were  modest. 

In  heavy  goods  industries,  however,  no

significant pickup has been reported.  While steel production rose marginally

in  Western  New  York,  almost  half  of  the  industry's  capacity  remained  idle.

And  although  capital  goods  producers  were  finding  more  projects  on  which 

to

bid, they had still not observed any significant rise  in  solid orders.

As  for  employment,  a  state  labor  official  felt  the  job  market  was

just  beginning  to  turn  up,  with  the  strongest  relative  improvement  in  the

services  and  construction  sectors. 

By  contrast, 

some  major  insurance

companies  reported  efforts  to  cut  costs  by  reducing  employment  levels  or  by

moving  jobs  outside  Manhattan.  Unemployment  District-wide  remained  below  the

national  level,  but  in  some  areas,  re-entrants  to  the  labor  force  were

expected to keep  rates high even  as  employment  levels  rise.  In New York  City

in  particular,  the  rapid  increase  in  the  labor  force  pushed  the  unemployment

to 10.6 percent in July and August.

Agriculture

In 

the  agricultural  sector,  bad  weather  has  damaged  some  crops  but

has had little effect  on others.  The  drought  during July and August depressed

yields  per  acre  for  corn  and  hay.  In  contrast,  wheat  was  harvested  early

during  the  dry  spell,  and  yields  were  high. 

The  fruit-growing  regions  had

adequate  rain,  and  good  crops  are  expected. 

The  apple  harvest  may  be  one  of

the  largest  on  record.  High  yields  and  low  demand  for  New  York  wines  have

combined to depress  the price of  grapes, however.  In  the  dairy  industry, high

production  has  limited  price  increases,  and  profits  are  expected  to  be

squeezed as  feed costs  climb.

II-4

Financial Developments

Banks  surveyed 

in  early  September  reported 

that  business 

lending

showed little improvement.  Any increase  at  individual  institutions,  moreover,

was  attributed  to  their  marketing  efforts  rather  than  any  improvement  in

overall  loan  demand. 

Most  institutions  in  the  region  have  taken  an

unaggressive  approach  to  mortgage  lending  as  rates  have  backed  up  and  demand

for  loans  has  dropped  off. 

In  contrast, 

the  volume  of  both  direct  auto  loans

and  dealer  paper  has  picked  up  during  the  summer  as  auto  sales  have  surged.

Further,  the  competitive  position  of  banks  is  expected  to  improve  as  many

interest  rate promotions  of  auto  finance companies  end.  With the  deregulation

of  most  types  of  consumer  time  deposits 

beginning  October  1,  some

institutions  have  begun  extensive  promotional  campaigns,  in  some  cases

offering  retail 

repurchase  agreements  at  high  rates  until  October  1  when  the

funds will  be  converted into  longer term time  deposits.

III-1

THIRD  DISTRICT  - PHILADELPHIA

Reports  from 

the  Third  District  point 

to  mixed  economic  conditions  in

September.  The  strength  in  activity  remains  centered  in  the  manufacturing  and  retail

sectors,  where  surprisingly  robust  growth has continued  this  month.  Loan volume  at  area

financial  institutions,  however,  has  weakened  recently  and  is  mixed.  Activity  in  the

housing  market  continues  to  nose  downward  as mortgage  rates rise.

Third  District  contacts  foresee  general improvement  in business  activity  over

the  next six  months.  Both  retail  and  manufacturing  executives  project  healthy gains  into

1984,  although  a  slowdown  in  growth  is  anticipated.  Local  bankers  are  forecasting  a

sluggish  upturn  in  lending  activity  and  interest  rates  by  next  March.  The  outlook  for

housing  is not  bright,  however,  especially  if  mortgage  rates  continue  to  rise.

REAL  ESTATE  AND  CONSTRUCTION

Third  District  housing  activity  has  slowed  again  in  the  last  six  weeks,  but

business  is  still  well  above  last  September's  depressed  levels.  Housing  sales  and  new

starts are  reported  to  be  off  by  between  25  percent and  75  percent  from  their  spring  and

early-summer  highs,  and  traffic  of  prospective  buyers  has  also  fallen  significantly.

Builders  and  realtors  contacted  attribute  the  slide  to  a  combination  of seasonal  pressure

and  the  continued  escalation  of  mortgage  rates,  which  have  risen  about  50  basis  points

since  early  August.  Many  real  estate  brokers  indicate  that  a  drop  of  between  50  basis

points  and  200  basis points  is  needed  to restore  strength  to  the  market.

MAN UFACTURIN G

Respondents  to  the  September  Business  Outlook  Survey  indicate  that  Third

District  industrial  activity  has  picked  up  the  pace  of  its  upward  advance  this  month.

September  returns reveal  the most  widespread  improvement  in general business

III-2

conditions  this  year.  Both  new  orders  and  shipments  are  up  significantly  over  August

levels,  and  producers'  backlogs  have  increased  at  many  factories,  as  well.  Production

activity  has  increased  enough  to  prompt  many  employers  to  add  to  payrolls  and  to

lengthen  the  average  workweek.

Despite  the  vigorous  expansion  currently  underway 

in  the  manufacturing

sector,  survey  respondents'  outlooks  have  mellowed  somewhat  this  month.  Two-thirds  of

the  participating  businessmen  expect  further  improvement  in  industrial  activity over  the

next  six  months,  fewer  than  at  anytime  in  the last  year.  Climbing  levels  of  new  orders

and  shipments  are  still forecast,  although  not as  strongly  as  in recent  months,  and  further

expansion  of  the  factory  workforce  and  working  hours  are  planned.  Capital  expenditure

plans  are  still  fairly  weak,  but  solid growth  in  inventories  by  the  end  of  the  first  quarter

is  projected.  Overall,  survey  respondents  obviously  expect  the  recovery  to  continue,  but

they  seem  to  be  indicating  a slower  rate  of expansion  over the next six  months.

Prices  in  the  manufacturing  sector  continue  to  drift  upward,  but  survey

results  indicate  that, on  average,  the  pace  remains  slower  than  in the past.  Roughly  one-

third  of  the  participating  businessmen report  paying higher  input  prices  since  August,  and

another  sixth  have  raised  their  final  products'  prices  this  month.  Further  increases  in

industrial  prices  are  likely  by  March.

RETAIL

Sales  activity  at  Philadelphia  area  department  stores  has  remained 

in

excellent  shape  through  August  and  into  September. 

In  fact,  the  growth  in  the  dollar

volume  of  sales  over  year-earlier  figures  has  once  again  pushed  into  the  double  digit

range,  much  higher  than  merchants  had  anticipated.  Very  dry  weather,  rising  consumer

optimism,  and  timely  promotional  offerings  have  combined  to  step up  the pace  of retail

III-3

spending.  According  to  retailers,  "back-to-school"  and  other  seasonal  soft  goods  are

moving  especially  well,  and  most  other  lines are  not far  behind.

Area  merchants  predict  that  consumer  spending  will  be  healthy  in  early  1984

but  that  sales  growth  will  settle  down  to  more  modest  levels near  year-end.  Following  a

"reasonable"  holiday  season,  gains  of  four  percent  to  five  percent  over  a year-earlier  are

expected  for  the  first  quarter  of  1984.  The  cheery  forecast  has  encouraged  store

operators  to  be  less  cautious  about  inventories,  and  stock  levels,  which  are  currently  a

little higher  than  a year  ago,  have  notched  some  growth  since  August.  Contacts  indicate,

however,  that any  further  inventory  growth  will be  carefully  controlled.

FINANCIAL

Local  bankers  say  loan  activity  at  major banks  in  the  Third  District  is  mixed

again  this  month.  C&I  loan  activity  has  been  "unexpectedly  quiet"  since  early  August.

Current  reports  on  business  loan  volume  range  from  11  percent  below  to  14  percent

above  a  year  ago,  much  the  same  as  they  were  six  weeks  ago.  According  to  contacts,

increased  corporate  profits  have  sufficiently  improved  cash  flow  at  many  companies,

permitting  more  internal  financing  and  preventing  any  real  firming  of  commercial  loan

demand.  Loan  activity  on  the retail  side  continues  to  improve,  but  recent  gains  are  not

as  strong  as  earlier  in the year.  Although  consumer  lending  is  now  as much  as 11  percent

ahead  of  last  September,  lenders  say  rising  interest  rates  have  taken  some  of  the  edge

off the  demand  for  consumer  loans.

Area  banking  officials  foresee  gradual 

improvement 

in  overall 

lending

activity  over  the  next  six  months.  C&I  loan  demand  is  expected  to  gain  strength  slowly

through  next  March  as  commercial  investment  expands  beyond 

the  funds  available

internally.  Most  bankers  also predict  that  consumer  demand  for credit  will  expand

III-4

further  despite  the  likelihood  of  slightly  higher  interest  rates.  Many  lenders  plan  to

maintain  their aggressive  marketing  posture.

The  prime  rate  charged  by  major Third  District  banks  has  risen  to  11  percent

in September  from  10.5  percent  in early  August.  Local seers are  predicting  that, because

of  positive  reports on  inflation  and  the  money  supply,  upward  movement  in  interest  rates

over  the  next  six  months  will  remain  sluggish.  They  are  forecasting  an  increase  in  the

prime  and  most  other  rates  of  between  50  basis  points  and  75  basis  points  by  the  end  of

the  first  quarter  as both  private  and  government  borrowing  expand.

Deposit  flows  have  weakened  somewhat  in  September,  but  bankers  attribute

most  of  the  decline  to  seasonal  factors.  Demand  deposits  have  slipped  slightly,  and  are

now  only  one  percent  to  two  percent  ahead  on  a  year-over-year  basis.  Growth  in  time

and  savings  deposits  has  slowed  as  well,  but  deposit  levels  have  maintained  their  sizable

spreads over  pre-MMDA  levels.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT  - CLEVELAND

Summary.  The District economy continues  its mild improvement.

Employment  is rising and unemployment falling.  However, weekly earnings in

manufacturing declined along with the  average work week.  Consumer prices  are

rising  slowly in Cincinnati  and Pittsburgh  but rapidly in Cleveland.  Retail

sales are well  above year-ago levels  but down  from June and July.

Manufacturing activity continues to expand,  but steel  and machine tool  orders

and output remain very weak.  Productivity is rising  briskly in many  firms  as

output  rises.  Investment  in plant and equipment is weak.  Coal  inventories

remain  too high while  output is stable.  Commercial  banks remain  liquid as

savings  deposit  growth  is strong.  Real  estate  and consumer loan demand has

increased in recent weeks  but commercial  loan  demand remains flat.

District  Labor  Market  Conditions.  Employment  continues  to  rise  in

this  District  while  unemployment  falls. 

In  Ohio,  total  employment  continued

its  uptrend  in  July,  despite  a  small  decline  in  manufacturing  and  a  larger

decline  in  nonmanufacturing  wage  and  salary  employment.  The  overall

employment  gain outpaced labor force  growth causing the  unemployment rate  to

fall  from  12.8%  in June  to  10.9%  in July  (nsa).  Unemployment rates among ten

of the  District's  largest SMSAs  ranged  from 8.5%  to 14.3%  (nsa)  in July and

averaged 11.6%,  down from  13.3%  in June.  Local  indexes of leading indicators

for Pittsburgh  and Cleveland point to  continued  improvement in those

industrial  centers.

Prices,  Wages,  and Earnings.  Average weekly  earnings of Ohio

manufacturing production  workers fell  in July as both average weekly hours

worked  and  average  hourly  earnings  declined.  The  decline  in  hours  was  the

IV-2

first  since  January  and  the  decline  in  hourly  earnings  was  the  first  since

October.

The Consumer Price  Index  for all  urban consumers in Cincinnati  rose

6.5% in  the  last  twelve  months  and  at  a  1.8% annual  rate  in  the  last  two

months.  For Cleveland, the  index advanced 9.3%  and 9.0% and  for Pittsburgh

7.1% and  0.4% in  the  same  two  periods.

Retail  Sales.  Fourth District retailers  are  showing significant sales

gains  from  year-ago  levels,  although  spending  for  most  goods  has  moderated

further  from June  highs.  General  merchandise  sales by major retailers in

August were  roughly 14  to  15  percent above last year, but somewhat lower than

in  either  June  or  July.  Sales  strength  is  reported  for  most  expenditure

types, with softgoods  and home  furnishings  registering the  strongest gains.

Auto  dealers  are  reporting moderate-to-strong sales across  the District.  New

domestic  car  sales  are  generally  above  year-ago  levels,  but  decidely  slower

than  in  June  or  July.  Domestic  new-car  sellers  indicate  a  mounting  inventory

shortage,  which  should  ease  as  1984  models  arrive.  Lean  inventory  positions

more seriously  restrained new import-car  sales  in August and early September,

but import  showroom traffic  is still  heavy.

Manufacturing.  District manufacturing activity continued to expand  in

August.  A survey of purchasing  managers in the Cleveland area  reveals

production, employment, and new orders rose  in August more  rapidly than  in

July. 

Inventories  were  little  changed  from  July,  but  prices  accelerated  from

July.

A survey of purchasing  managers in the Cincinnati  area  shows

production  and  new  orders  rose  briskly  in  August,  albeit  not  as  rapidly  as  in

July.  Employment and prices  rose more  rapidly than  in July while inventories

of  finished  goods  continued  to  fall.

IV-3

This Bank's  survey of Fourth  District manufacturers shows  shipments,

new orders, backlogs,  inventories, and employment rose in August and

are  expected  to  rise,  albeit  somewhat  less  rapidly, in  September.  Prices are

rising  slowly.  Several  firms  report productivity rising  rapidly, limiting

their need to expand employment and hours as  output increases.

Producers of  defense and aerospace equipment report continued

increases  in  orders,  production,  employment, and  investment.  Suppliers  of

parts  for cars  report sales  continuing  good.  Orders  for truck  components  are

rising.

New orders  for machine  tools  have  been  rising  slowly this year but

remain  weak  as  customers'  capacity utilization  is  low.  A major producer

reports backlogs rose  slightly in  July for  the  first time in  30 months.

Production  is  down from  last year.  Employment  remains stable with  no  layoffs

and no  recalls.  Prices  remain  soft.

Orders for  steel  have  begun to  rise  slowly  from very  low levels.

Capacity utilization  remains  near 55%  and below  the break-even  point.  Several

producers  report that orders  and production  for flat rolled products have  been

at or  near  current effective  capacity.  Nevertheless, prices  remain  soft and

are  heavily discounted from list,  and currently  idle capacity  is unlikely to

be brought  back  into  production soon.  Employment is stable,  but one major

firm  is reported to  be  planning further layoffs  of management personnel.

Investment  in  plant and equipment by major firms  in  this  district

remains weak  and cautious.  Most  of current activity  involves  completion of

long-lead-time  projects,  and  replacment, which  includes  some  upgrading of

technology.  A very  few firms are  initiating projects to  expand capacity;

these  are  in  industries where product demand  is currently stong,  including

aerospace,  defense  electronics, and road construction materials.

IV-4

Coal.  A major coal  producer  reports  inventories remain  too  high.

Sales  improved in August because hot weather induced greater use of

electricity.  Production, employment and hours worked  remain stable  as  the

firm  is matching production  to  sales  but is not building inventory.

Commercial  Banking.  Savings  deposit growth continues to be strong at

district banks.  Banks  remain  liquid and are apparently using these funds  to

replace  maturing large  denomination CDs.  They  have added to  their holdings of

U.S. Treasury  securities with maturities  of less  than  five years, and

increased sales  of federal  funds  even though  loan demand has picked up in

recent weeks.  The increase in loan  demand appears to  be concentrated in the

real  estate  and consumer areas.  Commercial  loan  demand continues to be  flat.

COMMENTARY ON ECONOMIC  CONDITIONS

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Overview

The  economic  expansion continues  apace  in  the  Fifth District.

Manufacturing activity generally is  still  improving, and  the effects are

beginning to  spread  across more  industries, notably  primary metals.  Retail

sales  have also made  further  gains  in  recent weeks with big  ticket  lines  still

increasing their  share  of  the  total.  In  the  construction sector, housing

activity remains  strong  in most  areas  despite some  recent  slippage in  sales.

In addition, a resurgence  of  commercial  and industrial  activity  seems  to be

getting  underway, at  least  in  the metropolitan areas.  Unemployment  seems  to

have  stabilized somewhat  over the  past month.  Business lending by District

financial institutions has  been essentially flat.  Principal areas  of  concern

continue  to  be  the  export  and farm sectors.

Manufacturing

In  the manufacturing sector,  shipments, new orders, and order back-

logs  continue  to make broad month to month gains  which are also  continuing to

spread  across  industry groups.  Such industries as  primary metals and elec-

trical machinery and  equipment have  joined  the early leaders  of  the  expansion.

Despite  this  continuation of  rising levels  of activity, manufacturing employ-

ment gains were modest  over the past month, significantly less  than  in  the

previous  few months.  The length of  the  average work week, however,  continued

to  increase  generally.

Manufacturers' inventories  particularly  of  finished goods,  continued

to  decline  according to  our  respondents.  There  are now scattered  reports of

shortages  of finished goods on hand and total stocks are now essentially in

line with desired levels.  In  addition, there are  beginning to  be  reports of

inadequate  plant and equipment  capacity and,  in  a few cases, of  inadequate

plans  for  expansion of  that  capacity.

Price increases  are also becoming more  common among manufacturers.

Nonetheless, a majority of  respondents  continue  to report  stable prices  for

goods  bought  and sold.  A larger majority  continues  to report  stable  employee

compensation in terms  of  average hourly  earnings.  District manufacturers

remain  optimistic with a large majority expecting  further gains  in business

activity, nationally, locally, and in their respective markets over  the next

six months.

Consumer Spending

There is  almost no  evidence of a loss  of momentum in the  consumer

sector.  Retailers  continue to  report widespread gains in  sales  and further,

although modest,  increases  in relative sales  of  big ticket  items.  It  appears

that more  of  the  recent gains are  occurring in the non-durable  lines which,

until recently, had  experienced only modest gains.  In  addition, there  appears

to  have been some  further inventory accumulation at the  retail  level over  the

past  month, and  total  stocks  on hand remain  at or  above desired levels  despite

the  continued  sales gains.  Prices  at the  retail  level continued  to hold

essentially flat  over the  month, although reports  of increases  in wages  paid

were  fairly common.

District  retailers  remain basically optimistic, but  their outlook

for  the next  six months has  become  significantly less  ebullient  in recent

weeks.  Although none expects  any decline  in activity, many apparently feel

V-3

that  the potential gains  in activity have,  for  the most part,  been achieved.

Housing and  Construction

Residential construction is  apparently holding up very well in  those

parts  of  the District  that  showed  recent  strength,  i.e.,  most  areas.  Further-

more,  there  is  almost no  evidence,  to  date,  that  it will slow in the  immediate

future.  It  is  evident, however, that  sales  of residential properties  have

slowed.  Mortgage rates  appear to have  stabilized  after  the run up of

mid-summer.

Reports of  a resurgence  in commercial  and industrial, particularly

commercial,  construction plans  and activity have  become much more widespread

the  last  few weeks.  Several  of the  District's major metropolitan areas  are

reporting  major projects  in various  stages.  These reports  clearly suggest

that  the commercial  construction pipeline  is  filling up.  It  is probably too

early to  tell, however, when  the  process will become more widespread.

Banking and Finance

Mortgage activity is  down somewhat  and consumer  installment credit

is  growing  less  rapidly than earlier in  the  summer.  Business loan demand  is

also  soft  and, for  the most  part,  is  expected to  stay that way.  In some

quarters,  however,  lenders  are  expecting an  inventory buildup and  increases  in

sales  generally to  begin to  pump up  loan demand in  the near  future.

Nonetheless,  as a result  of generally  soft loan activity competition

for consumer  deposits  like MMDAs has not been particularly aggressive and

rates  on  those  deposits have  risen only about  one-quarter  to one-half as  far

as  money rates  generally.

VI-1

SIXTH  DISTRICT  - ATLANTA

The  pace  of  recovery 

in  the  Southeast 

is  showing  signs  of  slowing,  but  most

sectors  continue  to  expand.  Consumer  spending  remains  strong  although  unseasonably

hot  weather  resulted  in  lower-than-anticipated  back-to-school  clothing  sales. 

Industrial

employment  and  orders  are  generally 

rising,  but  some  reversals  appear 

imminent

especially 

in  the  forest  products  industry.  Higher  mortgage  rates  have  reduced  sales

of  new  homes  from  levels  attained  earlier  this  summer. 

In  the  financial  sector  deposit

and  loan  growth  is  weaker  than  in  June.  The  surge  in  central  Florida  tourism  shows

further  indications  of  ebbing.  Drought-induced  crop  shortages  are  likely  to  increase

food  prices  and  lower  revenues  for  crop  and  livestock  farmers.

Employment  and  Industry.  Employment  has  been  expanding,  but some  setbacks

seem  likely.  Tire  and  automotive  glass  manufacturers  report  markedly  increased  activity.

At  least  one  large  tire  plant 

is  operating  seven  days  a  week.  Major  government

contracts  for  defense  and  the  space  shuttle  will  soon  create  new  jobs  in  Alabama  and

Louisiana,  respectively. 

In  contrast,  representatives  of  the  forest  products  industry

indicate  that  the  jump  in  interest  rates  has  diminished  orders  for  and  production  of

lumber.  Building  material  inventories  are  increasing  beyond  desired  levels.  Moreover,

reduced  demand  for  coal has  prompted  layoffs  in  Alabama's  mines.  Contacts  at  industrial

development  agencies  remark  that  recent  capital  expansion  plans  are  designed  more  to

improve  productivity  and  efficiency 

than  to  meet  additional  demand. 

For  example,

many  petrochemical  firms  in  Louisiana  are  planning  cogeneration  projects  that  would

produce  electricity  from  wasted  heat,  thereby  reducing  fuel  requirements  by  10  to  13

percent.

Consumer  Spending.  Retailers  report  that  consumer  spending  in  August  and

September  continued  to  exceed  1982  levels.  Southeastern  taxable  sales  rose  7.0  percent

VI-2

in  July  over  1982  levels.  Florida's  21.0  percent  increase  offset  a  28.1  percent  decrease

in  Mississippi  and  a  smaller  decline  in  Louisiana.  New  car  sales  are  well  ahead  of  the

depressed  levels  of  August  1982.  Home  entertainment  and  personal  computer  items

continue  selling  well.  Sales  of  fall  clothing  are  strong  but  less  vigorous  than  anticipated

by  merchants.  Nearly  all  of  those  polled  had  stocked  back-to-school  inventories  earlier

and  on  a  larger  scale  than  last  year.  However,  sparked  by  the  prolonged  heat  spell,

purchases  of  summer  clearance  items  accounted 

for  an  unusually 

large  portion  of

consumer  expenditures  during  the  back-to-school  season.  Notwithstanding  less-than-

expected  sales  of  fall  apparel,  most  retailers  plan 

to  maintain  higher  inventories  in

anticipation  of  a  good  fourth  quarter.

Construction.  After  three  months  of  rising  mortgage  rates,  housing  sales

fell  during  August  and  early  September  and  have  yet  to  revive  even  though  the  FHA/VA

mortgage  rate  fell  50  basis  points  to  13  percent  as  of  August  22.  Miami  and  north

metro-Atlanta  realtors  report  little  change  from  the  strong  sales  activity  earlier  this

summer,  whereas  Birmingham,  New  Orleans,  Macon,  Knoxville,  and  Chattanooga  have

experienced  significant  drops  in  single-family  housing  sales. 

In  areas  of  Birmingham,

sales  fell  by  30  to  40  percent.  However,  lenders  generally  believe  early  September

mortgage  rates  will  hold  steady  through  autumn,  and  realtors  expect  improved  sales  in

the  fall.

Commercial  real  estate,  especially  suburban  office  space  and  shopping  center

developments,  continues  to  improve  in  spite  of  the  recent  rise  in  interest  rates.  Markets

in  most  central  business  districts,  including  Atlanta's,  are  also  tightening.  However,

gluts  in  office  space  continue  in  Orlando  and  New  Orleans.  Because  of  expected  ongoing

improvement 

in 

the  economy, 

industry  contacts 

foresee  a  spurt  of  commercial

construction  contracts  throughout  the  region  within  the  next  six  months.

VI-3

Financial  Services.  Deposits  at  thrifts  and  large  banks  continued  the  slow

growth  of  July  into  August,  according  to  preliminary,  unadjusted  data. 

S&L  money

market  deposit  accounts  have  been  declining  since  spring,  whereas  two  other  interest

sensitive 

categories-jumbo 

savings 

accounts 

and 

six-month  money  market

certificates-have 

shown  strength. 

The  savings  gains  by  southeastern  S&Ls  are

attributable  to  larger  investors  who  can  afford  the  minimum  deposits  required  to  open

these  accounts,  not  to  smaller  savers  whom  the  S&Ls  have  taken  pains  to  attract.

Loan  activity,  particularly  business  lending,  grew  more  slowly  in  August  than  in  July.

Regional  bank  executives  have  proposed  the  creation  of a  southeastern  banking

zone,  whereby  southeastern  state  banking  laws  would  allow  mergers  and  acquisitions

only  by  financial  institutions  headquartered 

in  the  region.  This  arrangement  would

allow  southeastern  financial  institutions  to  consolidate  their  competitive  positions  before

large-scale  interstate  banking  becomes  a  reality.  Several  major,  money  center  banks

recently  applied  to  Florida  banking  authorities  to  establish  industrial  savings  banks.

Tourism.  The  boom  in  central  Florida  tourism  shows  further  signs  of  slowing

since  earlier 

this  summer. 

The  number  of  visitors  registering  at  Florida  Welcome

Centers  in  August  declined  slightly  from  1982  levels,  whereas  the  margin  of  growth  in

the  previous  three  months  had  ranged  from  12  to  17  percent.  Lodging  receipts  are  up

statewide,  but  occupancy 

in  many  areas  is  even  with  or  below  last  summer's  levels.

The  addition  of  850  rooms  in  the  next  six  months  should  cause  further  softening  in  the

Miami  market,  where  established  hotels  are  sharply  discounting  room  rates  to  boost

occupancy  enough  to  cover  fixed  costs.

Tourist  trade  appears  strong  in  Alabama  and  Georgia,  where  late  summer

attraction  attendance,  lodgings  tax  receipts,  and  visitor  center  registrations  rose  above

year-ago  levels.  Georgia's  tourism  industry  representatives  attribute  much  of  this  year-

over-year 

improvement 

to  an 

increase 

in  auto  travel  relative 

to  air  travel  as  a

VI-4

consequence  of  cutbacks  in  discount  airfares.  Prospects  for  the  1984  World's  Fair  in

New  Orleans  improved  in  the  late  summer:  a  number  of  exhibitors  firmed  commitments,

and  several auto  and  bus  associations  purchased  a  total  of 500,000  Fair  tickets.  However,

Fair  construction 

is  hampering  access 

to  New  Orleans' 

tourist  district  and  thereby

exacerbating  already  depressed  conditions  in  that  sector  of the  local economy.  Mississippi

tourism  spokesmen  blame  the  rather  lackluster  level  of  business  this  summer  on  the

Fair,  which,  they  say,  is  causing  travelers  to  defer  trips  to  Mississippi  until  next  year.

Agriculture. 

The  first  widespread  rainfall  in  weeks  relieved  the  drought

across  the  eastern  portion  of  the  region  during  the  Labor  Day  weekend.  Although  rains

arrived  too  late  to  reverse  the  damage  to  most  crops,  late-planted  soybeans  and  pasture

grasses  should  achieve  additional  growth.  Louisiana  and  Georgia  experienced  less  crop

damage  than  Mississippi  and  Tennessee.  Corn  in  southern  Georgia  achieved  acceptable

yields,  whereas  north  Georgia  corn  was  extensively  damaged. 

Prospects  of  sharply

reduced  supplies  have  caused  substantial  increases  in  soybean  and  corn  prices.  By  early

September  average  prices  of  both  important  livestock  feed  commodities  had  increased

about  65  percent  from  year-ago  levels.  Facing  severe  losses,  livestock  farmers  have

hastened  animals  to  market.  Calf  prices,  having  declined  14  percent  since  June,  are

well  below  last  year's  levels.  Reductions  in  poultry  and  egg  output,  partially  a  result

of  heat  stress  and  death  losses,  have  already  produced  substantial  retail  price  increases

for  these  food  items.

Georgia  and  South  Carolina  growers,  who  lost  much  of  their  crop  to  a  late

spring  freeze,  will  now  find  it  difficult  to  sell  their  smaller,  drought-stricken  apples  in

the  retail  market  and  will  have  to  divert  such  fruit  to  lower  revenue  outlets,  such  as

processing  or  juice.

VII-1

SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.  The  economic  recovery  in  most  Seventh  District centers

continues  to  lag  the  national  pattern,  except  for areas  concentrating on

automotive  products.  Even  in that  industry,  operations  are  far  short  of  the

peak  levels of  the  late  1970s.  Major  Midwest companies  are  still  engaged  in

far-reaching  cost-reduction programs  to restore  or  improve  profitability and

to counter  the  high  value  of  the  dollar.  Employment  improvement,  overall,  is

slower than  in the  U.S.,  but  few new  layoffs  of  importance are  imminent.

Retail  sales were  at  favorable  levels  in August,  aided  by  hot weather.  Demand

for  capital  goods  produced  in the  region  has  shown  only  slight  improvement,

except for  a surge  in  orders  for  truck  trailers.  Steel  demand  remains

concentrated  in lighter products,  and  has  been disappointing  in total.

Single-family  home  sales  and  permits  slowed  in  the  summer as  a result of

higher  interest  rates,  but  leasing  of  office  space  has  accelerated  in downtown

Chicago.  State  governments  now anticipate  surpluses  rather than  deficits

because of  increased  taxes  and  tight  budgets,  but  some  local  governments

remain  under  severe  strain.  Corn and  soybean  crops  have  been  severely damaged

by  hot weather  and drought.  Higher  crop prices  will  boost  income  for many

farmers.

Autos.  Sales  of  cars would  be  even  stronger  if more  large,

rear-wheel-drive domestic models  and  more  Japanese cars  were available.

Supplies  of  popular  domestic models  have  been  limited  by  capacity, which had

been  reduced, while  the  Japanese export  quota  has  determined  the  level  of  U.S.

sales  of  their  cars.  U. S. production  schedules  have  been  raised  for  the

remainder  of  the  year  and  appear  firm.  Measures  are  being taken to  increase

large  car  production  capacity even  though  government  penalties  for  failure  to

meet  CAFE  standards  could  be  imposed  under  existing regulations.

VII-2

Cost  Cutting.  Various  Seventh  District companies  have  announced  ongoing

programs  to  reduce  costs  substantially  relative  to  the  general  price level

over  the  next two  or  three years.  The  main  reason for  urgency  is the

substantial  advantage  foreign competitors  have  because  of  the  high  value  of

the dollar.  Steps  include drastic  reductions  in overhead  staff;  pressure on

unions  to  accept  concessions  on  compensation  and work  rules;  closing  of

high-cost  facilities  (usually  in the  Midwest) and  consolidation  in more

efficient  units;  pressure on  suppliers  to  cut  prices;  and  "outsourcing"

components,  previously  made  "in house",  if cheaper  supplies  can  be  obtained

from others,  either  in the  U.S.  or  abroad.

Employment.  Substantial  increases  in employment  in the  District  since

last  December  have  been  concentrated  in the  automotive  industry  and

residential  construction.  The  bulk  of  the  expected automotive  callbacks

probably  already  have  occurred.  New claims  for  unemployment compensation are

down  sharply.  While  few important  new layoffs  are  in immediate  prospect,

announcements  of  closings  of  long-established  facilities  continue.  Where

closings  involve  major,  older  facilities,  the  announcement  is merely the  coup

de  grace  following  a long  period  of  attrition.  Other  plant  closings  follow

failures  of  labor  and  management  to  agree  on  concessions.  On  the  other  hand,

some  closed  plants  have  been  reopened  following  successful  concession

negotiations.

Consumer  Purchases.  General  merchandise retailers  reported  strong  August

sales,  with  air  conditioners  and  other warm weather merchandise leading  the

uptrend.  However,  virtually  all  classes  of  goods  have  sold  well,  including

furniture,  appliances,  and  carpeting,  which tend  to  be  associated with  house

sales.  The  pickup  in furniture was  too  late to  save  a number  of well  known

stores,  which went  out  of  business--casualties  of  high  interest  rates

VII-3

according  to managers.  Recreational  vehicles  have  had  a very  good  year.

Airline  travel  continues  to  show  large  gains  in volume with  promotional  fares

still  a factor.

Capital  Goods.  As  reported  in the  last Commentary,  the  important  capital

goods  producers  of  the  District  have not  participated  proportionately  in the

uptrend  in the  national  aggregates.  Many plants  remain  closed  and  others  are

operating  at  less  than  50  percent  of  capacity.  Imports  and  loss  of  foreign

markets  have  reinforced  sluggish  domestic  demand.  Some  say  that  the  high

value  of  the dollar  also makes  investments  in production  facilities  abroad

more  attractive.  In most  cases  where  increases  in orders  have  been

reported--for  example, machine tools  and  heavy  trucks--the  rise has  been

modest and  from a very  low base.  One  sector  that  is going  strong  is tandem

trailers,  permitted  under  the new federal  law.

Housing Slows.  Higher  interest  rates  slowed  housing activity  in July and

August.  In the  District,  July  home  permits  were  down  sharply  from June.

Conventional  mortgage  rates  in the  Chicago  area  had  moved  up  to  the  14 percent

range  in the  summer,  but  have  been  reduced  since  late  August  by nearly  half  of

the  lenders  surveyed  by  one-eight  to  one-half  percentage  points.  The  state  of

Illinois  recently  provided  $70 million  obtained  by  sales  of  tax-exempt  bonds

for  mortgage  loans  at  10.55  percent--3 to  3-1/2  percent below the  market.  The

money was  all  spoken  for  at  participating  lending  institutions  in an  hour  or

two,  with  some  rancor  evidenced  by  disappointed  applicants.

Commercial  Building.  Factory  construction and  new utility projects  are  at

a very  low  level.  However, a number  of  large  new office buildings  have  been

announced  for  downtown  Chicago,  and  more announcements  are  expected.

(Downtown  Chicago  has  been the  only  strong area  in the  District  for  office

VII-4

buildings.)  Earlier  this  year,  some  experts  predicted  that  the glut  of  office

space  in the  Loop would  last for  years.  Recently, however,  leasing  activity

accelerated markedly,  rents firmed,  and  concessions  to  lessees were  cut back.

State  and  Local  Governments.  In the  last  legislative  sessions,  all  five

states  of  the  District enacted  tax  increases  to eliminate current  or  potential

deficits.  Higher  taxes,  tighter  expenditure control,  and  the  pickup  in the

general  economy now are expected  to  produce  budget  surpluses  in all  five

states  in the  new fiscal  year.  Increased  rates  were  levied  on  corporate  and

personal  incomes,  retail  sales,  and  gasoline.  Rarely  have  the  states moved  in

unison with  such  vigor to  increase  revenues,  but the need  was  urgent because

state deficits  are  illegal.  Meanwhile major cities  are wrestling with  revenue

shortfalls  and  demands  for  higher  salaries for  public  employees,  including

teachers,  police  and  fire  personnel  who  have  called  strikes  in some  cases.

Some  layoffs  and  short weeks have  been  ordered.

Agriculture.  Continuing  searing drought  through August  caused  the USDA to

reduce  its  estimate  for  the  corn  crop  of  the  District  states  by  a further  20

percent.  With  large acreage  cuts,  the corn  crop  is now expected to  be  53

percent  below  last year.  The  soybean  crop,  also badly  damaged,  is now

expected to  be  down  28  percent.  The  extent  of  the  drought  damage  varies

widely and  is most  severe  in Illinois  and  Indiana.  Because  of  higher  prices,

earnings  of  farmers  who were  least affected by  the drought, and  those

receiving PIK  grain, will  improve  significantly.

VIII  -

1

EIGHTH DISTRICT  - ST.  LOUIS

The  broadly based  economic  expansion continued  during  August and

early  September  in  the Eighth District,  and most  respondents  expected

further  gains  during  the  fall  and winter.  Retail  sales  continued  strong,

factory  orders  and  production  rose, and employment  increased.  Orders  for

business  equipment, however,  remained  depressed, housing  and  auto  sales

slipped,  and  the  hot  dry weather destroyed many  crops.

Outlook

A research  organization recently  projected  that  real  economic

growth  in  Arkansas  and Missouri would be  slightly  greater  in  the  last

half of  1983  than  in  the  first half.  It  anticipates  that  real  growth  in

1984 will be  over  5 percent  in Arkansas  and 4 percent  in  Missouri.

Hotels  and Motels

Since May  there  has  been a pronounced  increase  in  District  hotel

and motel  occupancy rates.  A manager  for  a chain of motels operating

throughout the  district noted  a marked  rise  in  occupancy rates.  Summer

conventions,  increased  tourism and more business  travel  have kept

downtown  St.  Louis hotels  nearly full  for  the  first  time  in  years.  With

large  fall  and winter bookings, hotel  and motel managers  are  optimistic

about  the  future.  In  the  St.  Louis  area,  two  new major hotels  are  now

under  construction, one hotel  has  just completed  a substantial

renovation,  and  at  least  three  others  are  planning  sizable  redecorations

or  enlargements  this  fall.

Sales

Department  stores,  discount houses  and  small  shops  throughout

the  District  report  relatively  favorable  sales  in August  and  early

VIII  -

2

September.  Back-to-school  promotions were  successful  and  furniture,

floor  coverings,  appliances,  jewelry  and  toys  moved  briskly.  One  large

store  is  stocking  shelves  for  an  expected  "spectacular"  Christmas  season.

Automobile  sales  continued  to  be  lively,  but were  down  from

peaks  reached in  June and July.  Inventories  are  low  at  a number  of

dealers,  and  several  said  they  could have  sold more  if  the  cars  had been

available.  Demand  for  used  cars  remains  good,  and  prices  of  late models

have  risen.

Home sales  remained below the  pace  reached  in  the  spring,  but

were  still  up  substantially  from a comparable  period  a year ago.  Higher

interest  rates  and  the  hot weather  contributed  to  the  slowdown.  Housing

construction, however,  continued  to  rise.

Manufacturing

Orders  and  production at  most  industrial  firms  in  the  District

rose  in August  and  early  September.  Orders  for  appliances  and other

consumer  durables  were  particularly large,  but equipment  sales  to

businesses  are still  depressed.  Inventories  are  at  desired levels  at

most  firms,  but  reports  have  been received  of  an  abundance  of  gasoline

stocks  which has  softened  prices  somewhat.  Several  firms  are  increasing

their  outlays  on  research  and  development.

Transportation

A major  railroad  reported  that  traffic was recently  running 9

percent  above year  ago  levels.  Grain  shipments were  sufficiently strong

to  eliminate the  surplus  of  covered hoppers.  Several  trucking  companies

also  reported  an  increase  in  tonnage hauled.

VIII  - 3

Employment

Employment  in the  District rose  in August,  as  many  service,

construction, transportation and manufacturing firms  slowly  increased

their work  forces  as  the  need became  clear.  The  unemployment  rate,

however,  changed  only slightly because  the  labor  force  grew and  because

of  some offsetting  reductions  in employment,  primarily through

attrition.  Three  large  District  employers have  scheduled  rehirings,

totaling  5,000,  over  the  next  two months.  It  was announced,  however,

that  a plant  employing 500 would be  phased  out  this  fall.

Agriculture

Crop  damage  in  the  District  from  the  hot dry weather was  the

largest  in years.  Many  crops  were completely wiped  out;  farmers  in most

counties  sustained  some damage,  and  in a number  of  counties  output will

be  less  than  half of  last  year.  Corn, soybeans,  tobacco, alfalfa,

cotton,  fruits  and  vegetables  were  all hurt,  and many  chickens  and  some

hogs  died.  Financial  losses  to many  individual  farmers  and  rural

communities have  been severe.  Meat  and other  food  prices are  likely  to

rise  over  the  next year because  of  the  reduced  supplies.  The lower

yields,  reinforcing  the  PIK program acreage cuts,  are  reducing  the  large

overhang of  inventories.  Commodity  prices  have  risen, bolstering total

farm  income.  A few  farm equipment  dealers  report  improved  sales,  and

farmland  prices, which have declined  for  about  two  years, reportedly  have

stabilized and  even risen in  recent months.

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

With  the  exception  of  a  dip  in  real  estate  and  related  activities,

the  economic  recovery  continues  despite  higher  interest  rates. 

Consumer

spending  for  general  merchandise  and  autos  has  not  declined  much  from  the

torrid pace  reported  in  our  last  report.  Tourism has  finished  the  summer  on  a

good  note. 

Some  bright  spots  continue  to  turn  up  in  manufacturing. 

The

outlook  for  district  crops  has  improved,  due  to  favorable  changes  in  local

weather, the  federal  Payment-In-Kind  (PIK) program, and  higher  prices.  How-

ever,  higher  corn  prices  have  hurt  livestock  profits. 

Financial  activity

appears  normal.  The  weakest  spot  in  our  economy continues  to be  raw material

extraction  and  processing.  Due  to  the  rise  in  interest  rates,  though,  real

estate  and related activities have begun to  weaken  somewhat  as well.

Consumer  Spending: 

Retail  sales  of  general  merchandise  apparently

have  continued  at  a healthy  rate.  One  large  Twin  Cities  retailer reports  an

"excellent"  August,  posting  a  sales  increase  of  more  than  20  percent.  Sales

of  home  and  office  furnishings  were  strong  for  that  retailer.  The  back-to-

school  promotion went  well  for  another large  local  retailer.  The  fall outlook

is  good  for  a  diversified  retailer, with  big-ticket  items  buoying  sales that

were  somewhat  slowed  by  the  hot  August  weather.  Higher  interest  rates  not-

withstanding,  retail  credit  sales  are  showing  substantial  strength  over  com-

parable  periods  a  year  ago.  Southern  Minnesota  and  North  Dakota  retailers

have  reported  good  sales  to  our  Bank's  directors,  although  some  retailers  in

South  Dakota  and  parts  of Wisconsin  have  reported  flat  or  lagging  sales,  due

to  local  conditions.

IX-2

Van  and  recreational  sales  led  the  way 

in  producing  healthy  automo-

tive  sales  figures.  District  managers  for  domestic  auto producers  report  good

increases 

in  both  truck  and  passenger  car  sales  over  last  July  and  August.

Vehicle  inventories  are  lean.  This  good  news  was  corroborated by our  Bank's

directors,  who  reported  good  auto  sales  in  southern  Minnesota,  in  parts  of

Wisconsin  and  the  Dakotas,  and  even 

in  economically  troubled  northern  Minne-

sota.

Tourism:  Tourism continued  to  show  the  strength  evident  in  our  last

report.  One  senior  tourism  official  in  Minnesota  says  that  August  was  excel-

lent. 

He  feels  that  the  outlook  for  fall  is  good  also. 

The  economically

depressed  Upper  Peninsula  of  Michigan  had  a  good  summer,  with  Mackinac  Bridge

traffic  higher  than  last  summer.  Inquiries  about  the  "fall color  season"  are

also  up.  Similar  sentiments  are  reported  in  the  26-county Indianhead  region

of  Wisconsin,  which  expects  to  finish  the  season  with  tourism  up  10  to  12

percent  over  last  year.

Manufacturing:  Manufacturing  activity  is  generally  good  throughout

the  district.  A  recently  released  survey  of  our  largest  manufacturers  shows

that  twelve  of  them  posted  a  second-quarter 

increase  in  earnings,  while  only

five  suffered a decline.  Two  district  paper companies  are  very busy.  One  of

them  just  hired  50  more  workers,  and  the  other  is  contemplating  an  expan-

sion.  Two  large  computer  industry  manufacturers  recently announced  lucrative

new  contracts. 

An  aluminum  pot 

line  was  added  to  a  plant 

in  Montana, 

the

first  such expansion  at  that  plant  in  several years.

Agriculture:  Recent  increases  in  corn  and  soybean  prices  are  combin-

ing  with  the  federal  PIK  program  and  better  weather  to  spur  farm 

income 

in

this  district.  The  Minnesota  farm  price  index  rose  8 percent,  reaching  its

IX-3

highest  level  in 

two  years. 

Corn  and  soybean  production  is 

looking  pretty

good  in  Minnesota,  where  favorable  weather  is  expected  to  produce  yields  well

above  the  national  average. 

However, 

these  crops  are  not  doing  as  well  in

southeastern  and  east  central South Dakota, where bad weather and woolly worms

are  taking their toll.  Wheat production is generally good in  South Dakota and

Montana,  and  wheat  prices  are  running  from  10  to  20  cents  higher  than  last

year.  Livestock  profitability  is  being  gutted  by  high  corn  prices,  though,

and  some  wheat  is being  substituted  for corn  in  cattle  feed.  Also,  a recently

implemented  federal  dairy production  assessment  is  hurting dairy  farmers.

Financial: 

District  bank  lending  and  deposits  both  increased  last

month.  Deposits  and  loans  in  Twin  Cities  banks  grew  by  3.5  percent  and  5.2

percent, 

respectively. 

Comparable  country  bank  growth  figures  are  smaller.

One bank  director thinks that there may be  some  slack in  country bank lending,

due  to  recent  interest  rate  increases.

Raw  Material  Extraction  and  Processing: 

These  industries  are  still

lagging  behind  the  economic  recovery,  primarily  because  of  structural  prob-

lems.  One  director  reports  that  delivered  iron  ore  pellets  from  Brazil,  for

example,  are  cheaper  than  pellets  from  district  plants. 

Two  more  large  taco-

nite  plants  in  northern  Minnesota  announced  closings  this  month.  At  around  15

percent, 

the  unemployment  rate 

in 

the  Duluth-Superior  area  of  northeastern

Minnesota 

is 

the  highest  among  all  metropolitan  areas  in 

the  five  state  Upper

Midwest.  Oil  drilling  is 

still 

down 

in  North  Dakota  and  Montana. 

In  fact,

the  Williston  Basin  now  has  only  about  40  active  rigs;  it  had  about  60  last

spring.  Demand  for  lumber  was  also  down  somewhat.  Recent  price  declines  for

wood  products 

illustrate  this  weakness. 

One  sawmill  operator  thinks  that

demand would be  stronger  if  interest  rates  fell, and  stimulated more construc-

tion  activity.

IX-4

Real  Estate:  Recent  interest  rate  increases  have  begun  to  slow  real

estate  activity. 

Single-family  home  sales  have  fallen  off  in 

the  Twin

Cities.  The  condominium  market  also  slipped.  Builders,  realtors  and  mortgage

lenders  all  attributed  this  to  recent 

increases 

in 

interest  rates. 

Some

scattered  bright  spots 

in 

residential  construction  are  noted, 

though,  with

Billings,  Montana,  Sioux  Falls,  South  Dakota  and  Rochester,  Minnesota  not

being  much  affected  by  higher  interest  rates  yet.  While  commercial  construc-

tion  has  also  been  slack,  one  Twin  Cities  contractor  notes  that  overcapacity

may  still be  contributing to  this.

TENTH DISTRICT--KANSAS  CITY

Overview. 

Business  activity  in  the Tenth District  continues  to  grow,

with  sales  and  inventories  both expanding.  Prices at  retail  and  for

industrial  inputs  are  increasing only moderately.  Housing  activity is

beginning  to  slow, although  savings  inflows  are  expected to  improve  through

yearend.  Crop prices  are up and  livestock  prices down, both  in reaction to

drought  conditions.  Bank  loan demand  has  increased  slightly,  as have

deposits.

Retail  Trade.  Total  dollar  sales  volume has  increased by  as  much as  12

percent  in  the first  eight months of  1983  compared with the  same  period last

year.  Retail  price  increases have been moderate  this year and  are  expected  to

remain so  through the  end  of  the  year.  In general,  respondents are  satisfied

with  inventory  levels  and  are expanding  stocks  only  to  meet  the pickup  in

sales.  The  outlook for  sales  for  the rest  of  the year  is  promising  due  to  an

improved  economy,  increased  advertising, and  changes  in marketing  strategy.

Purchasing Agents.  The majority  of  purchasing agents  contacted  in  the

Tenth District  report  input  price  increases  of  2 to  5 percent  since  September

of  last  year,  with most  of  the  increase  occurring  during the  past  three

months.  Prices  are  generally expected  to  remain  stable or  increase  slightly

through the  end  of  the  year.  All  purchasing agents  report  inventories  at very

low  levels.  Most  report  recent  inventory  expansion  in  response  to  increased

sales,  although a few note  continued  trimming  of  stocks.  Purchasing agents

are nearly  unanimous  in  having no  significant  problems  in  obtaining  inputs.

Housing Activity and  Finance.  Housing  starts remain  at  about double

last  year's  rate, despite recent moderation  in housing  activity.  Most of  this

year's  improvement  in  housing has been  concentrated  in  single-family  starts.

Inventories  are  low although  there  are  some  indications  that  they  are

-2-

beginning  to rise again.  Demand  for housing has weakened significantly

because of  the  recent  increase  in  interest  rates  and  uncertainty about  future

rates.  Most  savings  and  loan associations report  an improvement  in  savings

inflows  and  continued  improvement  is  expected  through yearend.  Mortgage  rates

range  from 11  3/4  percent  for variable rate mortgages to 14  percent on  fixed

rate mortgages.  Mortgage  rates  are  expected  to  remain steady  until near  the

end  of  1983  and  then decline  slightly.

Agriculture.  Crop  conditions  are mixed throughout  the  Tenth District.

Irrigated  crops are  likely  to  produce record yields, while nonirrigated  crops

have been  severely affected  by  the drought.  Crop yields  for  corn  and  soybeans

of  50  to  75  percent below normal are  likely  in Kansas, Missouri,  and Oklahoma,

according  to District  bankers.  Little  of  the  corn  crop will be  salvageable

for  silage,  while soybeans  are more  likely  to  be harvested but  at  reduced

yields.  Colorado,  New Mexico, and  parts  of  Nebraska are  experiencing high

yields  on  their  irrigated  corn,  soybean, dry edible beans, hay, and  sugar beet

crops.  While crop  prices  have risen  in  anticipation of  poor  yields,  livestock

prices  have  fallen as  marketings have  increased due  to  rising  feed  costs  and

poor  pasture  conditions.  District bankers  anticipate an  even  larger  increase

in marketing of  livestock  later  in  the year.  Farm equipment  and  supply  sales

activity  is  very  slow.  Sales  of  big-ticket  items,  such as  tractors  and

combines,  are  being postponed until  next  year.  Some  increase  in  loan

repayments  is  reported  by  bankers,  as  some  farmers have been  selling corn

recently  released  from  the  Farmer Owned  Reserve program.  Tenth District

farmers  are  showing  little  if any  interest  in the  1984  PIK  (Payment-In-Kind)

program for wheat.

Banking.  Loan demand  at  Tenth District  banks  has  increased  slightly

over  the past month, mostly due  to  increases  in  commercial and  industrial

-3-

loans.  Consumer  loan and  commercial real  estate  loan activity was quite

variable with a very  slight  increase  on  average, while agricultural  loans

decreased  slightly.  Total  deposits have risen at  the respondent banks.  The

growth  in  demand  deposits was  quite variable, with a slight  decrease overall.

Some  bankers experiencing a decrease  in demand deposits  feel  that  interest-

sensitive consumers  are  switching to  interest-bearing  deposits.  Growth  in

money market  deposit accounts  and  in money market and  small  saver  certificates

was also  variable, but with  little  change on  average.  Conventional NOW

accounts and  Super-NOW accounts were up, as  were  IRA and  Keogh accounts  and

large  CD's.  Some  respondents  indicate  that  they are  deemphasizing  large CD's.

The  prime  rate  ranged  between 11  percent  and  14.6 percent  with  three-quarters

of  the  banks  charging 12  percent  or  less.  Over half  the  respondents report  a

half-percent  increase  in  their  prime  rate over  the  last month, while  a large

fraction  report  no  change.  Consumer  lending rates  have  not  changed on  average

during the  past month and most respondents do  not expect  any  change  in  the

near  term.

ECONOMIC COMMENTARY

ELEVENTH  DISTRICT-DALLAS

The  Eleventh District  economy continues  its recovery.  Production

of  oilfield  equipment  remains  depressed, but  other manufacturing industries

showed  further  signs  of  strength. 

Growth  in  retail,  government,  and

industrial  construction, coupled with announcements of  several  large office

projects,  generated an unexpected upturn  in  commercial  construction.  There

is  some  evidence  that  residential  construction  has  started  to  slow.

Retailers  and  auto  dealers  throughout  the District are  optimistic  about

sales  in  the  third and  fourth quarters.  Loan  demand  at  District  member

banks  is  still  sluggish, but  large banks  expect business  loan  demand  to  be

moderately  stronger  through year-end.

Moderate  increases 

in  manufacturing 

production 

continued.

Unusually  high  orders  in  July  and  August  boosted  order  backlogs  at

electronics  firms, which have been producing at  or near capacity.  Despite

price declines  and  cutbacks  in distributors'  orders,  the  rate  of  production

of  lumber  and wood products  remains  high. 

Apparel  production  turned  up

sharply  during  the  last  six weeks  as  gains  in national retail  sales worked

through  to  the manufacturing level.  The large volume of  new orders  at  the

wholesale apparel market  in August  indicates  that  the near-term outlook for

apparel production  remains  strong.  Steady  increases  in  the  demand  for

chemical  products  have  been  matched  with  output  gains.  Production of

oilfield  goods  is  roughly stable  at  low levels  although small  increases  in

XI-2

drill  bit  manufacturing were reported.  Further gains  in  demand from auto

producers  and construction contractors  pushed up steel  production  slightly

in  August. 

Prices  and  profit margins  for  steel  producers  are  still  below

year-earlier levels.

Employment  in  the District  is  responding  to  the  turnaround  in

economic  activity.  The  seasonally-adjusted unemployment rate  for Texas  was

7.3 percent in August,  down from a 9.0-percent  peak last March.  Job growth

in 

the  durable  goods  sector  reversed  the  decline  in  manufacturing

employment.  Employment  gains  in the electronics  and  construction materials

industries  more  than  offset  slowing declines  in oil-related  industries.

Continued  strength  in  auto  sales and  housing construction  led  to  further

employment  increases  in  the primary metals  sector.

Drilling activity  in  Texas  has  shown  some  additional signs  of

recovery.  Despite  stable  crude prices,  the  seasonally-adjusted  rotary  rig

count  in  Texas  has  increased for  two  consecutive months.  Lower  labor  and

capital  leasing  costs are  cited  as  factors  contributing to  the  turnaround.

Inventories  of  unused rigs  remain high.  Poor market  conditions have made

contractors  unusually reluctant to  sell  the  components  of unused  rigs. 

As

a  result,  the  number  of  idled  rigs  may not  fall by  as much as had been

expected.

Growth  in  residential  construction  slowed  in  July  as 

sales

expectations  were  revised  downward  in  response  to  higher  interest  rates.

The  volume of  single-family permits  in  July  was  off  sharply  from  the

near-record  June  level,  but  it  was still  sufficiently  high to  maintain a

moderate rate  of  growth during  the next few months.  Multi-family  permits

XI-3

also  fell. 

Given  the volatility of  this  series,  it  is  not  clear whether

the  drop marks  a reversal of  the  strong upward growth in  this  sector.

Texas  farm income remains mixed.  Livestock producers  face  losses,

while  crop  farmers  generally anticipate higher  income.  The price of  cattle

coming out  of  feedlots  is  roughly  $5 less per hundredweight than  the  cost

of  production. 

Corn  and  sorghum  grain  growers  in  the  District  are

anticipating higher  incomes.  The drought  in the  Midwest  Cornbelt  pushed

down  yield  estimates  there and  raised  prices  nationally.  The West Texas

drought has  caused nearly  $13  million in  losses  to  cattle  ranchers,  but

this  is  small  relative  to  the  $4 billion statewide  cattle  industry.  In

addition,  cotton  farmers  in West Texas  face losses  above  $100  million.  The

income  of  Texas  cotton  farmers  as  a group,  however, will be  above last

year's  depressed  level because of  higher prices.

Loan  demand  at  District 

member banks 

is 

still 

sluggish.

Year-over-year  gains  remain  in  the  15-percent  range.  At  large banks,

business loan growth  picked up modestly in August  and  further  gains  are

expected. 

Real  estate  lending  remains  strong. 

Growth  in deposits at

member banks has  slowed  somewhat  faster  than  credit  growth due  to  greater

reliance on borrowed  funds.

XII-1

TWELFTH DISTRICT -- SAN FRANCISCO

The Twelfth District  economic  recovery is  continuing, but  at  a slower  pace,  due

largely  to  the decline  in  residential construction and  its  ripple  effects  on  such  key

industries  as  lumber.  Apart  from  a shortage-induced  decline  in  automobile  sales,

consumer  spending remains  strong, with department  stores  experiencing  a widening

year-to-year  gain  in  sales  in  August.  Western homebuilding activity  has  been  falling

off moderately  since  June,  however,  and  an  even  sharper  decline  in  home  sales

suggests  a further  slowdown  in starts  in  coming months.  In  the  manufacturing sector,

overall  employment  growth has  clearly  slowed.  Some  capital  goods  industries  --

especially electronic  equipment  -- are  experiencing an  increased  order  inflow,

however.  Consumer  lending  at  Twelfth District  banks  has been  especially strong,  due

mainly  to  increased  consumer  spending but  also  due  to banks'  promotional efforts.

Applications  for  mortgage  loans have  dropped  dramatically.

Consumer  Spending

Respondent's  throughout  the  Twelfth District  report  that  retail  sales  continue

to  rise  at  department  stores  and other  outlets  and  that  these  stores  experienced  a

widening  year-to-year margin of gain  in  sales  in August.  Major department  store

chains  in  Southern California,  for  example, report  that  sales  in August  ran nearly  16

percent  above  the  year-earlier  level.  Double-digit  increases  also  were  recorded  at

major  stores  elsewhere.  Retail outlets  not  only experienced  strong  sales  of  apparel

and  other  back-to-school necessities but  more  costly  personal  luxury  items  and  home

furnishings.  Respondents  attribute  these  buoyant  spending patterns mainly to  pent-up

demand,  rising  consumer  incomes,  and  increased  job  security.  Retailers  have been

increasing  their  inventory, but  due  to  high  real  interest  rates  have held the  buildup

below  the  normal  relationship  to  sales.  Automobile  sales  declined  in  August, but

XII-2

respondents  attributed  the  slowdown  to a shortgage of  1983-models  rather  than to  a

decline  in  demand.

Manufacturing and Mining

Growth  in  both  total  employment  and manufacturing employment has  slowed

recently.  In  some  states  -- notably, California and  Oregon -- unemployment rates

actually have  risen.  Part  of  the  slowdown  has been  due  to  renewed weakness  in

residential  construction activity and  its  adverse  effects on  the important  lumber

industry.  Since  June,  prices  for  some  key homebuilding  lumber  products  have  fallen

as  much as  25  percent,  and  lumber mills have  been cutting production.  Fortunately,

the  pulp and  paper  segment  of  the  forest  products  industry has  continued  to

experience  further  improvement  in  orders  and employment.  In  the metal mining and

manufacturing sectors,  the  Pacific  Northwest  aluminum  industry has  been  raising its

capacity utilization rate,  but  the copper  industry  in  the  Intermountain states  has

remained  depressed  as  prices have  continued  to  fall despite  a labor  strike  against

the  nation's  second  largest producer.  The West's major  capital goods  producing

industries -- including  those  that  manufacture machinery, electronic  equipment,

trucks  and  aircraft  -- are  experiencing a pickup  in orders.  Not  only has consumer

and  defense  demand  for  these  goods  increased,  but  business  demand  has  risen,

especially for  electronic  equipment.  In  the case  of  commercial  transport planes,

increased  orders  have  not  translated  into  increased  employment,  however, due  to  an

even greater  increase  in  shipments  and  consequent decline  in  unfilled orders.

Employment has  stabilized but  not  yet  increased  in  such  energy  industries  as  coal

mining and  oil production.

Construction  and  Real Estate

Although housing  starts  in  the  West  have  held up relatively well  compared with

the  national pattern  in  recent months,  the  rise  in mortgage  interest  rates  has had a

XII-3

dampening effect  on starts  since  June.  Moreover,  sales  of new and older homes have

dropped much more  dramatically,  suggesting  that  the  pace  of homebuilding will  fall

further  in the months  ahead.  In  fact,  in  July,  the  West  experienced  a 14  percent

decline  in  sales  of  new homes, and respondents  report  that  sales  slowed  further  in

August.  One  large  real  estate  firm  in  Southern California reports  that  it  is  doing

40  percent  less  business  than  it  was doing  two months  ago.  Another  reports  that

sales  of  new and  existing homes have  fallen 25  percent  in the  last  60 days.  As  a

result,  the  inventory of  unsold homes has  risen  sharply.  The  climb  in mortgage  rates

has  disqualified  large numbers  of buyers  in the  high-priced California market.

Builders  in  Southern California  report  that  cancellations of  new tract-home  sales  are

running at  a 40-50  percent  rate  in August,  twice  the  cancellation rate earlier  in  the

year  when  FHA rates  were  in  the  12  percent  range.  Some builders who  had previously

committed  to  a "buy-down" arrangement  to  keep effective  interest  rates  affordable  are

now facing  a large  number  of  discount  points,  thus  shutting off  this  avenue  of

financing  in  the  future.  Most  respondents  feel  that  housing has  clearly passed  its

cyclical peak  for  this  year and  that  the recent  drop  in FHA and VA rates  from  13.5  to

13  percent will  only slow the  rate  of decline.  In  the  nonresidential construction

sector,  activity  continues  to  lag behind  the  year-earlier pace.  Vacancy rates  are

declining  for  office  and  other  commercial buildings,  but no significant  increase  in

construction  is  expected  until  1984.

Agriculture

Unseasonable  rains  in  Southern  California  caused damage  to  certain farm products

in  August,  including alfalfa hay, cotton, tomatoes,  grapes  and  almonds.  Never-

theless,  net  farm  income  is  expected  to  be  up  in most  District  states  this  year,

partly because  the  farm  sector  is  expected  to  benefit greatly  from  the combined

effects  of  the  Federal payment-in-kind  (PIK)  program and  the Midwestern drought  in

XII-4

boosting  prices  for  cotton and  grains.  The  positive  effects  of  the  PIK program for

California  and Arizona  cotton  growers will be  reduced  by  their  need  to  put part  of

their  1983  crop on  loan  with  the  Commodity  Credit  Corporation, reducing  the  amount

available  for  sale  at higher prices.  Nevertheless,  these  farmers  still will benefit

significantly  from  the program, while  farmers  in  Washington,  Oregon and  Idaho will

benefit  in  general  from higher  grain prices.  Livestock producers,  on  the  other  hand,

will  suffer  rising  feed  costs  and  a further  drop  in already weak cattle  prices.

Financial  Institutions

The  volume  of consumer  loans  outstanding at  large  Twelfth  District  banks  has

grown  at  an annual  rate  of  12  percent  over  the  past  three  months.  Increased consumer

spending  resulting  from rising real  incomes,  employment  and  confidence has been

largely responsible  for  the  increased borrowing.  Households' purchasing power  also

has been  enhanced by  the  effects  of  the  stock market  rally  in  increasing wealth.  In

addition, banks  are  actively promoting  consumer  lending, although this  is  taking

place  through new  loan  products  and  publicity  about  availability rather  than by

lowering  rates  significantly to  meet  competition from captive  finance  companies.

Mortgage  lending continued  to  increase  through August  on  the  basis  of  previous

commitments,  but  it  is  likely  to  deteriorate  in coming months  as  a result  of  higher

rates.  Bankers  report  a sharp  drop  in  applications  for  new mortgage  loans.

Commercial  lending activity  remains very weak, partly  because corporations  are  using

increased  profits  to  pay  down  short-term  debt.

