FEDERAL  RESERVE  press  release 

For Use  at  4:30  p.m. 

August  26,  1983 

The Federal  Reserve  Board  and  the  Federal Open  Market 

Committee  today released  the attached  record of  policy actions 

taken  by  the  Federal  Open Market  Committee at  its  meeting  on 

July  12-13,  1983.  

Such records  for  each meeting  of  the  Committee are made 

available  a few days  after  the  next regularly  scheduled meeting 

and  are  published  in  the  Federal Reserve Bulletin  and  the  Board's 

Annual  Report.  The  summary descriptions  of  economic  and  financial 

conditions  they  contain are  based  solely on  the  information  that 

was  available  to  the  Committee  at  the  time  of  the  meeting.

Attachment

RECORD  OF POLICY ACTIONS  OF THE 
FEDERAL  OPEN MARKET  COMMITTEE 

Meeting Held  on  July 12-13,  1983 

Domestic policy directive 

The  information reviewed  at  this  meeting suggested  that  the  economic 

recovery was  proceeding  at  a  strengthened  pace.  The  latest  data  suggested  that 

growth in real GNP  may have been even more  rapid  in  the  second  quarter  than 

the 6-1/2  percent  preliminary  estimate  of  the Commerce  Department, and  it 

appeared  that  relatively strong  growth would be  sustained  into  the  current 

quarter.  Expenditures  for  consumer goods  were  especially  large, and  a  swing in 

business  inventories  from liquidation to  accumulation seemed  to  be  developing 

more  rapidly  than anticipated earlier.  

The  dollar value  of  retail  sales  advanced  appreciably in May,  marking 

the  third  consecutive  monthly  increase.  Outlays  at  general  merchandise outlets 

and at  furniture and  appliance  stores were  brisk, but  sizable  expenditures  on 

autos  and  automotive  products  continued  to  be an  important  factor  in  the  strength 

of  retail  sales.  Sales  of  new domestic  automobiles rose  to  a  rate of  7.2  million 

units  in  June,  the  strongest monthly  selling  pace  in nearly  two  years.  Survey 

reports  of marked  improvement  in  consumer  confidence  accompanied  the  vigorous 

recent gains  in  consumer spending.  

Total  private  housing  starts  increased  considerably  in May  to  an 

annual  rate  of  nearly 1.8 million  units,  following  small  declines  during  the 

two  preceding months.  Starts  in May were  about  40  percent above  their  average 

level  in  the  fourth  quarter of  1982.  Other  indicators  of  housing  activity 

also exhibited  strength:  newly issued  permits  for  residential  buildings

7/12-13/83

-2-

rose  further  in May  as  did  combined  sales  of  new and  existing homes.  Both 

measures  were more  than  30  percent  above  the  average  levels  in  the  fourth 

quarter of  last  year.  

With inventories  depleted and  sales  strong,  businesses  have  been 

meeting demands  out  of  current  production  and  appear  to  have  started  rebuilding 

stocks  in  some lines.  The  index of  industrial production rose  1.1  percent 

in  May to  a level  7 percent  above  its trough  six months earlier,  and available 

data,  including  the  statistics  on  employment  and hours  worked  in manufactur

ing,  suggested  another sizable  gain  in  output  in June.  As  in  other  recent 

months, gains  in  output  and  employment occurred  across  a broad  range  of 

industries.  Nonfarm payroll  employment rose  nearly 350,000 in  June,  after 

an  increase of  about  300,000  in May.  The  civilian unemployment  rate  declined 

to  10.0 percent  in  June,  down 0.8  percentage  point  from its  peak in  December.  

Data on  new orders  and  shipments  continued  to  indicate  improvement 

in  the demand  for  business  equipment.  Production of  business  equipment, 

which  had  contracted  sharply in  1982  and  had  continued  to  decline during  the 

first  quarter  of  this  year,  rose  substantially in  May for  the  second  month 

in a row.  

The  producer  price  index for  finished goods  (PPI)  and  the  consumer 

price  index  (CPI)  increased 0.3  percent  and  0.5 percent  respectively in May, 

largely reflecting  a sharp rise  in  energy  prices  at  both  the  producer  and  the 

consumer  levels.  Exclusion of  the  volatile energy components would  have 

resulted  in  no  change  in  the  PPI  and  nearly  a halving of  the  increase  in the 

CPI.  During  the  first  five  months of  1983,  the PPI declined  at  an  annual  rate

7/12-13/83

of  about  2-1/4  percent  and  the  CPI  increased  at  an  annual  rate of  3 percent.  

Over  the  same  period,  the  index  of  average hourly earnings  for  private nonfarm 

production workers rose  at  an  annual  rate  of  4-1/2 percent,  compared with  an 

increase  of  6 percent  for  the year  1982.  

In  foreign exchange markets the  trade-weighted value  of  the  dollar 

against major  foreign currencies  rose  more  than  2-1/2  percent in  late  May 

and  early June to  a record  level;  subsequently  it  had  fluctuated in  a narrow 

range.  Reflecting the  strength of  the  economy and  the  persistently high  level 

of  the  dollar, the  U.S.  foreign trade  deficit  increased sharply in  the April-May 

period  from  its  reduced  first-quarter  rate;  exports  declined and  both oil  and 

non-oil  imports  rose.  

At  its  meeting  on May 24,  1983,  the Committee  had decided  that  open 

market  operations  in  the  period  until  this  meeting should  be  directed at 

increasing only  slightly  the  degree of  restraint  on  reserve positions.  That 

action had  been  taken against  the  background of growth  in  M2 and M3  remaining 

within their  long-term ranges  and  slightly below the  annual  rates  of  9 and  8 

percent,  respectively, established  earlier  for  the  quarter, M1  growing  sub

stantially  above anticipated  levels  for  some  time,  and  evidence of  an  accelera

tion in  the  rate  of  business  recovery.  The  Committee  had agreed  that  lesser 

restraint  on reserve  positions  would be appropriate  in  the  context  of more 

pronounced  slowing  of  growth in  the  broader monetary aggregates relative  to  the 

paths  implied by  the  long-term ranges  and  deceleration  of M1,  or  of  indications 

of  a weakening  in  the  pace  of  economic  recovery.  The  intermeeting  range for 

the federal  funds  rate  was  retained  at  6 to  10  percent.  

Growth  in M2  and  M3  accelerated  in  May  and  continued  relatively  strong 

in  June, with both aggregates  expanding at  an  estimated  annual  rate  of  about  10

7/12-13/83

percent.  For  the  March-to-June  period  both M2  and  M3 grew at  an  annual  rate  of 

about  8-1/2  percent,  a  bit  below the  quarterly objective established  for  M2  and 

a  bit  above  that  for  M3.  Relative  to  the  longer-run ranges,  M2  by June  was 

somewhat  above the  midpoint  of  its  range  and M3  was  around  the  upper limit  of 

its  range  for  the  year.  

M1,  which  had  surged  to  an  annual  rate  of  growth of  about  26  percent 

in  May,  expanded  at  a  rate of  around  10-1/2  percent  in  June.  From  the  fourth 

quarter  of  1982  to June,  M1  grew at  an  annual  rate  of  about  13-3/4  percent,  con

siderably above  the  Committee's  tentative range  of  4  to  8  percent  for  the  year.  

Though  the pace of  expansion  in  debt  of  domestic  nonfinancial  sectors 

over  the  first  half  of  the  year was  estimated  to  have  remained  within  the 

Committee's  annual  range of  8-1/2  to  11-1/2  percent,  growth in debt  appeared  to 

have been more  rapid  in  the  second  than  in  the  first  quarter.  This  development 

reflected  an acceleration in  borrowing by  the U.S.  Treasury  as  well as  a  pick-up 

in  private  credit  demand.  Total  credit  outstanding at  U.S.  commercial  banks 

expanded  at  an annual  rate  of nearly 10  percent  in  June  and  in  the  second  quarter 

as  a whole.  Sizable  acquisitions  of  Treasury securities  continued  to  make  the 

major  contribution  to  the  expansion in  bank  credit  in  June,  but  real  estate 

lending  strengthened  further and  business  loans  registered  their  first  signif

icant  increase since  January.  

Strong  demands  for  money were  associated with  relatively  rapid  ex

pansion  in  total  reserves  in  June,  but  growth in  nonborrowed  reserves  (plus 

extended  credit  at  the  discount window) was  considerably slower  than  the 

increase  in  total  reserves.  With  open market  operations holding  back  on  the 

supply  of  reserves,  depository institutions  increased  their  short-term

7/12-13/83

borrowing at  the  discount  window and  sought  reserves  more actively  in  the 

federal funds  market.  Adjustment  borrowing  from  the Federal Reserve  discount 

window (including  seasonal  borrowing) rose  to  about  $680  million in  June  and 

rose  further in  the first  part  of July;  borrowing temporarily  bulged  to  over 

$1 billion in  the  reserve statement  week that  encompassed  the  midyear bank 

statement  date and  the July  4 holiday period.  The  federal funds  rate  traded 

in  a range of  8-3/4  to  9 percent  for most  of  the  period,  but  most  recently  the 

rate  had moved up  into  the  9 to  9-1/8  percent  range;  somewhat  higher  rates 

were  temporarily  associated with  the management  of  reserve positions  over  the 

midyear  statement date and  the  holiday period.  

Other  short-term market  rates  rose  about  3/4 to  1 percentage  point  during 

the intermeeting period,  reflecting  in  part  responses  to  the modest  tightening 

of  reserve  market  conditions  that  was  under  way and  apparently  also  some  antici

patory  reaction  to  the  strength  of  incoming data  on the  monetary aggregates 

and  economic activity.  Most  long-term interest  rates  on  taxable securities 

increased  about  3/4  percentage point  over  the  period,  while yields  on  tax-exempt 

issues  were  little  changed  on balance.  Average  rates  on  new commitments  for 

fixed-rate conventional home  mortgage  loans  at  savings and  loan associations 

also  rose  about  3/4  percentage point.  

Given the  momentum in  economic  activity  that appeared  to  be  in  train, 

the  staff  projections  presented  at  this  meeting  indicated that  growth in  real 

GNP  in the  second  half  of  the year  would  be  somewhat  higher  than had  been 

anticipated  earlier.  Final  purchases in  private  domestic  sectors,  buoyed  by 

expenditures  for  consumer  goods,  were expected  to  be maintained  at  a relatively 

strong  pace  in  the latter  half  of  the  year and businesses  were expected  to

7/12-13/83

be  adding  appreciably  to  inventories.  A  gradual  decline  in  the  unemployment 

rate  was  anticipated  over  the  balance  of  the  year,  and  a  further decline  was 

expected  in  1984  in  association with  continued,  though more  moderate,  economic 

recovery.  Upward price  pressures  were expected  to  be  relatively modest  over  the 

projection horizon,  assuming that  inflationary expectations  remained damped, with 

related  restraint  on wage and  price  policies  of  labor  and  business.  

In  their  review of  the  economic  situation and  outlook,  the  members 

focused  on  evidence of  the  economy's  strong forward  momentum and  the  prospects 

for  continuing  sizable  gains  in  real GNP during  the  months  immediately ahead.  

Consumer  spending,  which along with  housing has  played  a major  role in  fostering 

the  recovery, was  likely  to  be  sustained by  the  further  reduction  in personal 

income  taxes  at midyear.  Most  of  the  members agreed,  however,  that economic 

activity would  probably expand  at  a more  moderate pace  later  in  the  year  and  in 

1984.  Spending  for  business  inventories  was  expected  to  become  a less  expansive 

factor as  the  recovery proceeded,  and  the  outlook  for  exports  remained  relatively 

weak.  The members  also  referred  to  a number  of  potential  threats  to  the  recovery, 

including  financial strains  related  to  the  debt  problems  of  numerous  developing 

countries and  the  adverse  impact  of continuing  large  federal  deficits  in  the 

absence  of  measures  to  reduce  them.  

While the  expansive  fiscal policy added  to  purchasing power and 

supported  consumption, members  were  concerned  that  the  need  to  finance  large 

Treasury  borrowing  in  a  period  when private  credit  demands  were  accelerating 

would  put  increasing  upward pressure  on  interest  rates and  curtail  the  availability 

of  financing to  private  borrowers.  Sectors  heavily dependent  on  credit,  such as 

housing  and  business  investment,  would be  particularly  affected, as  would  small

7/12-13/83

businesses.  The view was expressed  that  the  restraining  impact  on private 

credit  demands  and economic  activity of  even current  relatively high  interest 

rates  -- which seemed  especially high  in  real  terms  -- could  well  be  under

estimated,  and  a view was  expressed that  a decline  in  interest  rates  from 

present  levels  would  probably  be  needed  to  prolong the  recovery  during  1984.  

Members generally  continued  to  regard  the  near-term outlook  for 

prices  as  favorable, and  it  was  observed  that  wage increases  remained  quite 

moderate.  However,  several members  saw acceleration in  the  rate  of  increase 

in  prices  as  a likely prospect  for  1984.  Reference was  made  to  a number of 

developments  that  were potentially unfavorable,  including  possible  increases 

in  prices  of key farm products  as  a consequence  of  governmental  policies  to 

reduce  farm supplies,  and  pressures stemming  from  rising prices  of  imports  if 

the  foreign exchange  value  of  the dollar  were  to  weaken, as  many observers 

anticipated.  It  was also pointed  out  that  actual  price increases  would  be 

sensitive  to  expectations  as  conditioned  by  fiscal  and  monetary  policy 

developments.  

The  individual members  of  the  Committee  had  prepared  specific  projections 

of  economic  activity and prices  for  this  meeting.  With regard  to  growth in  real 

GNP,  the  projections  had  as  their  central  tendency  a range  of  5 to  5-3/4  percent 

for  1983  and  4 to  4-1/2  percent for  1984, measured  from fourth quarter  to  fourth 

quarter.  Most of  the members projected  a rise  in  the  implicit  GNP deflator  in 

a range  of  4-1/4  to  4-3/4  percent  during  1983  and  4-1/4  to  5 percent  during  1984.  

The  rate  of unemployment  was  expected  to  decline  gradually over  the  projection 

period,  with most members  anticipating an  average  rate  of  about  9-1/2  percent 

in the  fourth quarter  of 1983  and  8-1/4  to  8-3/4  percent  in  the  fourth  quarter 

of  1984.

7/12-13/83

At  its  meeting on May 24,  the Committee  had  reviewed  the  growth ranges 

for  the  monetary and  credit  aggregates  that  it  had  established  in  February  for 

the year  1983  and had  decided not  to  change  those  ranges  but  to  review them 

further at  this  meeting.  For  the  broader monetary  aggregates,  on  which the 

Committee had agreed  to place  principal weight,  the  ranges  included  annual 

growth  rates  of  7 to  10  percent  for M2,  measured  from February-March 1983  to 

the  fourth quarter  of  1983,  and  6-1/2  to  9-1/2  percent  for  M3, measured  from 

the  fourth quarter  of  1982  to  the  fourth quarter  of  1983.  The  range  for 

monitoring M1 was  set  at  4 to  8 percent  and  an  associated  range  for  total 

domestic nonfinancial  debt  was  estimated  at  8-1/2  to  11-1/2 percent,  both 

for  the period  from the  fourth quarter of  1982  to  the  fourth quarter  of 

1983.  

At  this meeting  the  Committee  reviewed  its  target  ranges  for  1983  and 

established  tentative  ranges  for  1984  in  light  of  the  basic  objectives  of  en

couraging sustained  economic  recovery while  fostering continued  progress  toward 

price  stability and  promoting a sustainable  pattern  of  international  transactions.  

In  setting  these  ranges,  the  Committee  recognized  that  the  relationships among 

the  money and  credit  aggregates  and nominal  GNP  in  the  period ahead  were  subject 

to  considerable uncertainty.  It was  therefore understood  that  the significance 

to  be  attached  to  movements  in  the various  aggregates  in  the implementation of 

policy would  depend  on continuing appraisal  of  evidence about  the  strength of 

the  economic  recovery, the  performance  of  prices,  and  emerging  conditions  in 

domestic and  international  financial  markets.  

In  the Committee's  discussion, all  of  the  members  supported  a pro

posal  to  retain the  1983  ranges  for  growth in M2  and M3  established  in  February.  

Recent  experience  suggested  that  actual  growth of  M2  and  especially of  M3  might

7/12-13/83

be in  the  upper half  of  their  respective ranges  for  the  year  rather  than near 

the midpoints  as  anticipated  earlier.  The members noted  that  the  massive 

shifts  of  funds  into  M2  stemming  from  the  introduction of  money market  deposit 

accounts  and  the much more  limited  shifts  relating  to  the new  Super  NOW accounts 

had abated  about  as  anticipated;  and  they  assumed  that  these  accounts,  along with 

the  further deregulation of  interest  rates  on time  deposits  scheduled  for  October 1, 

would have  relatively little  impact on growth of  the  broader aggregates  over 

the  balance  of 1983  and  in  1984.  

The members  differed only marginally with regard to  the  appropriate 

ranges  that should  be  established  for  growth in M2  and  M3  in  1984.  Most  favored 

a reduction of  1/2  percentage point from the  1983 ranges,  but  in  the  course of 

the discussion  two members  expressed  a preference for  retaining  the  1983 

ranges.  One member believed  that  the prospective  relationship between M2  and 

nominal GNP was  subject  to  a very high degree  of  uncertainty and  that  therefore 

no  specific  target  should be  set  for that  aggregate  at  this  time.  

In  the  view of most members,  the  establishment of  lower  ranges  for 

1984 would be  consistent with  the Committee's  objective  of  providing adequate 

monetary growth to  support  continued economic recovery while  encouraging progress 

toward  reasonable price  stability.  It was  recognized,  however,  that  attainment 

of  these broad  economic  objectives would be  greatly facilitated  by  complementary 

governmental  policies,  notably further  actions  to  reduce  future federal  deficits.  

Members  who preferred  to  retain  the current  M2  and M3  ranges for  1984 were 

concerned  that lower  ranges might  prove  to  be more restrictive  than was  desirable 

and,  given the uncertainties  that  were  involved,  they preferred  not  to  reduce 

the  ranges  unless  there  were  substantial  evidence that  inflationary  pressures

7/12-13/83

-10-

were  reviving.  In  the  view of  most  members, however, modest  and  timely action 

to  curb monetary growth would enhance,  rather  than  reduce, prospects  for  sustain

ing  the  economic  recovery  and  for  lower  interest  rates  over  time  in  the  context 

of  diminishing inflationary  pressures.  

A majority of  the  members also  supported a proposal  to  retain  for 

1983  the  associated  range  for  total  domestic nonfinancial  debt  that  had  been 

set  earlier but  to  reduce  that range  by 1/2  percentage point  for  1984.  Some 

sentiment was  expressed  in favor  of  a reduction of  1 percentage  point  for  1984 

on the ground  that  the  range  contemplated  by  the majority was  a little high  in 

relation  to  the  central  tendency  of  the  members' projections  of nominal GNP; 

in the  past,  growth in  this  aggregate had  tended  to  approximate growth in 

nominal GNP.  However, a majority  of  the members  concluded  that allowance 

should be  made for  expansion in  total  debt  in  1984  in  excess of  nominal  GNP 

growth.  Such a development  would  be  consistent with  this  year's  experience 

and might  be  connected  with the  relatively rapid  expansion in  federal  debt.  

The  members  discussed at  considerable  length what  longer-run  ranges 

to  establish for  M1 and  what weight  the Committee  should attach  to  that  aggre

gate  in  the  implementation of  monetary policy.  The income  velocity of  M1-

the  ratio  of  nominal  GNP to  M1--had deviated substantially from  normal  cyclical 

patterns  since  the  beginning of  1982.  It had declined more  sharply  and  longer 

than usual  during  the  recent  recession  and had  failed  to  rebound  as  quickly as 

in  the  past with  the  onset  of  recovery.  A number  of  factors  apparently  contributed 

to  this  unusual behavior,  including for  a time  precautionary demands  for  highly 

liquid  balances  by the  public in  the  face of various  economic and  financial 

uncertainties.  Over  the last  several  months,  the  behavior of M1 velocity  seemed

7/12-13/83

-11-

to  reflect  the  greater sensitivity  of  this  aggregate to  declines  in market 

interest  rates  probably  resulting  from the  much increased  share of  interest

bearing NOW accounts  in  the  total.  NOW accounts, which may  serve  as  a  savings 

vehicle as  well as  fulfilling  transactions  needs,  have  been  the most  rapidly 

growing  component  of  M1  since  they were  introduced  on  a  nationwide  basis  at 

the  beginning  of  1981.  Regular  NOW accounts  bear  a  ceiling  rate  of  5-1/4 

percent.  The  sharp  drop  in market  rates  during the  second  half  of  1982  made 

the  opportunity  cost of  holding NOW accounts  relatively  small and,  with  a lag, 

increased  the  demand  for  them.  It  was  noted,  though,  that  the  recent  expansion 

in M1,  with currency  and  demand  deposits  showing  strength as  well,  probably also 

reflected  growing  transaction needs  relating  to  the  recovery  in economic  activity.  

Against  this  background, a key uncertainty  confronting  the  Committee 

was  whether  M1  velocity  in  the  future would  exhibit  characteristics more  in line 

with earlier  postwar experience.  Recent  evidence  seemed  to  suggest  that  the 

decline  in  M1 velocity was  ending,  as  might  be  expected  as  the  lagged  upward 

effect  on  demand  from  earlier declines  in  interest  rates  wore  off  and  as  business 

and  consumer  attitudes  became more  optimistic.  

While  acknowledging  the major uncertainties  that  existed,  a majority 

of  the members  nonetheless  believed  that  a monitoring  range  should  be  retained 

for M1.  In  this view M1 would continue  to  be  given  reduced weight  in  the 

formulation  of monetary policy  and  primary  emphasis  would  continue  to  be  placed 

on  the  broader aggregates.  A  few members,  however, preferred  to  suspend  the 

targeting  of  Ml  at  this  time  because  they  viewed  its  prospective  behavior  as 

too  uncertain to  permit  the  establishment  of  a meaningful  range.  A  subsidiary

7/12-13/83

-12-

reason  cited  in  support of  this  view  was  the  difficulty of  communicating  a 

proper  assessment  of  the  reduced role  of  M1  to  outside observers  so  long  as 

the  Committee continued  to  set  a specific  range.  One  result  was a tendency 

for  participants  in financial markets  to  attach undue  importance  to  weekly 

fluctuations in  Ml  data, with the  consequence  that  on  occasion  published 

figures had a needlessly unsettling  impact  on  financial markets.  

In reviewing  the M1  range  for  1983,  members discussed whether  that 

range  should  continue  to  be based  on  the  fourth quarter  of  1982  or  rebased  on 

the second  quarter of  1983  in view of  the  probability  of a prospective  change 

in  the  behavior  of velocity.  If  the  fourth quarter  of  1982  were  continued  as 

a base, M1  growth would need  to  be  sharply curtailed  to  the point  of  little or 

no  growth for  the  rest  of  the  year;  alternatively, the M1  range  for  the year 

would  need  to  be  raised  substantially  from the  current 4 to 8 percent,  given  the 

rapid  expansion during the  first  half of  the year,  to  allow for  any significant 

further  growth in  the  second  half.  If  instead  M1  were  rebased  on  the  second 

quarter, or  perhaps on  June,  some members were concerned  that  this  could  be mis

construed as  an  indication  that  the  Committee  was  now weighing Ml  more heavily 

in  the  formulation of monetary policy.  However, most members  favored  rebasing 

the Ml  range  for  1983 on  the  second  quarter  to  help make  it  clear  that  the 

rapid  growth in  Ml  over the  past  several  quarters  was  related  to  special  cir

cumstances  and  that  the  Committee  expected and  wished  to  see  slower  growth in 

the  future.  Such an  approach, it  was  stressed,  did not  in  itself  imply placing 

more  weight  on Ml  relative  to  the  other  aggregates  in  policy implementation.  

The members who preferred  to  continue  setting  a longer-run  range  for 

M1  generally  also  agreed  that  it  should  encompass  growth  rates  close  to,  or  below,

7/12-13/83

-13-

the  Committee members'  outlook for expansion in  nominal GNP.  At  one extreme  the 

M1  range  could  allow for very  little  change, or  perhaps only  a minor  increase, in 

M1  velocity to  accommodate  the  possibility  that  the  demand  for M1  would remain 

stronger than it had  been  in the  earlier  postwar  period, given  income and  interest 

rates.  At  the other  extreme  such a range  could  allow for  a fairly sizable  in

crease  in M1 velocity;  however, given  the ongoing  changes  in  the composition 

of  M1,  it was  recognized  that  the  increase  could  be  somewhat  less  than experienced 

in  previous  cyclical  expansions.  

Discussion of  specific ranges  for M1  centered  on 5 to  9 percent or  4 

to  8 percent  for  the  second  half  of  1983  and  the year  1984,  although one  member 

preferred  a lower  range for  1984.  Most  of  the members  indicated  that  they  could 

accept  a proposal  to  establish a range  for  growth in M1  of  5 to  9 percent  for 

the period  from the  second  quarter of  1983  to  the  fourth quarter of  1983  and a 

tentative  range of  4 to 8 percent  for  the  period  from the fourth  quarter of 

1983  to  the  fourth quarter  of  1984.  It was  understood  that  growth within the 

lower  portions  of  those  ranges would  be  appropriate  if  the  velocity of  M1 

tended toward a relatively normal  cyclical  increase  as  the  recovery proceeded; 

growth in  the  upper portions  of  the  ranges  would  be  acceptable  if the  upturn 

in M1  velocity remained  relatively weak.  If there  should occur  an  unexpectedly 

rapid  increase or  a decline in  M1  velocity, the  Committee would reassess  the 

ranges;  it would in  any event  review the  tentative  range  for  1984 early  in  the 

year  in the  light  of  economic and  financial  conditions prevailing  then.  

In  implementing  policy,  the Committee  agreed  that  primary emphasis 

would continue  to  be  placed  on  the  broader  aggregates.  The  behavior  of  M1

7/12-13/83

-14-

would be  monitored, with  any  increase  in  the  weight  placed  on  that  aggregate 

dependent  on  evidence  that  its  velocity  behavior was  assuming  a more  pre

dictable  pattern.  Expansion  in  total  nonfinancial domestic  debt would  also 

be monitored  in assessing  the  behavior  of  the  monetary aggregates  and  the 

general  stance of  monetary policy.  

At  the  conclusion  of  its  discussion the  Committee voted for  the 

following longer-run  policy: 

The  Committee  reaffirmed  the  longer-run  ranges established 

earlier for  growth in M2  and  M3  for  1983.  The Committee  also 
agreed  on  tentative growth ranges  for  the  period from  the 
fourth quarter  of  1983  to  the  fourth  quarter of  1984  of  6-1/2 
to  9-1/2  percent  for M2  and  6 to  9 percent  for  M3.  The  Committee 
considered  that  growth  in M1  in  a range  of  5 to 9 percent  from 
the  second  quarter  of  1983  to  the  fourth quarter of  1983,  and  in 
a range  of  4 to  8 percent  from  the  fourth quarter  of  1983  to  the 
fourth quarter  of  1984  would be  consistent with the ranges  for 
the  broader aggregates.  The  associated  range  for  total  domes
tic  nonfinancial  debt was reaffirmed  at  8-1/2  to  11-1/2  percent 
for  1983  and  tentatively set  at  8 to  11  percent for  1984.  1/ 

Votes  for  this  action:  Messrs. Volcker, 

Solomon,  Gramley, Guffey,  Keehn, Martin, Partee, 
Rice,  Roberts, Mrs.  Teeters,  and Mr.  Wallich.  
Vote  against  this  action:  Mr.  Morris.  

Mr.  Morris dissented  from  this  action because he did  not  believe  that 

target  ranges  should  be  set  for  M1  and M2.  Because  of  financial  innovations, 

these  aggregates in his  view are  no  longer  predictably related  to  nominal  GNP -

an  essential  characteristic of  an  intermediate  target  for monetary policy.  

Thus,  the  Committee  should  turn to  broader  financial  aggregates,  specifically 

M3,  total  liquid assets,  and  total  domestic nonfinancial  debt  as  targets  for 

monetary  policy.  

1/  The Board's Midyear Monetary  Policy  Report  pursuant  to  the  Full  Employment 
and  Balanced  Growth Act  of  1978  (the  Humphrey-Hawkins  Act)  was  transmitted 
to  the  Congress  on July  20,  1983.

7/12-13/83

-15-

In the  Committee's  discussion of  a policy course for  the  short  run, 

most  of  the  members  indicated  that  they  could support a slight further  increase 

in  the  degree of  reserve  restraint.  In  the context  of  an  economy  that  was much 

stronger  than expected,  these members  believed  that  such a policy would provide 

some  insurance against  the  possible  need  for a considerably greater degree  of 

restraint  later  to  maintain control  on inflation and  growth in money and  credit.  

For the  third  quarter,  the  members  expected  this  policy to  be  associated with 

considerable moderation in  the  growth  of  the  monetary aggregates,  especially M1, 

although they recognized  the  substantial uncertainties  that  governed  the  short

run  performance of  the monetary aggregates,  again especially  that  of  M1.  

One member  expressed a preference  for  somewhat  more  tightening of 

reserve  conditions  over  the  weeks ahead,  while another  favored  no change  from 

the  existing degree  of  restraint.  In  the view of  several members, a slight 

further  tightening by  the  Committee  need not  itself  be  reflected  in  sizable 

further  changes  in  interest  rates  generally, given the  increases  that  had 

already occurred. 

It was  recognized, however,  that  actual movements  in market 

rates  would depend  importantly  on economic and  financial  developments  in  the 

weeks  ahead,  including  the  performance  of  the monetary aggregates,  the outlook 

for  the  budget,  and  emerging  private  credit demands  against  the  background of  a 

rapidly expanding economy.  It was also  suggested  that  such an approach to 

short-run  policy would  improve  prospects  for  the development  of  conditions 

that would permit  some easing  in  the  degree  of  reserve  restraint  later.  

At  the  conclusion of  the Committee's  discussion, a majority of  the 

members  indicated  that  they favored  a slight increase  in the  degree of  reserve

7/12-13/83

-16-

restraint  for  the near  term.  It  was  anticipated that  such a policy  course 

would be  associated  with growth of  M2  and  M3  at annual  rates  of  about  8-1/2 

and  8 percent  respectively for  the  period  from June  to  September.  Primary 

weight would  be  placed  on  the  performance  of  these  broader monetary  aggregates 

in  evaluating  the  conduct of  open market  operations.  The members  agreed  that 

lesser  restraint on  reserve  conditions would be  acceptable  in  the event  of  a 

significant  shortfall  in  the  growth of  the  aggregates  over  the  period ahead, 

while  somewhat greater  restraint would be  acceptable  in the  context of  more 

rapid growth  in  the  aggregates.  It was  understood  that  the  need  for greater 

or lesser reserve  restraint  would also  be  evaluated  on the  basis  of  available 

evidence about  trends  in economic activity and prices  and  conditions in 

domestic and  international  financial markets, including  foreign exchange markets.  

The  Committee  anticipated that  its  third-quarter objectives  for  the  broader 

aggregates would  be  consistent with a deceleration in M1  growth to  an annual 

rate of  around  7 percent  from June  to  September,  and  that  expansion  in  total 

domestic nonfinancial debt  would remain  within the  range of  8-1/2  to  11-1/2 

percent established  for  the  year.  It was  agreed  that  the  intermeeting range 

for  the  federal  funds  rate,  which provides  a mechanism for  initiating  consulta

tion of  the  Committee,  would remain at  6 to  10 percent.  

At  the  conclusion of  its discussion,  the Committee  issued  the 

following domestic  policy directive  to  the Federal  Reserve  Bank of  New York: 

The rapid growth  in  real GNP in  the  second  quarter 

and other  information reviewed at  this meeting  suggest 
that  the economic  recovery is  proceeding  at  a strengthened 
pace.  Expenditures  on  consumption  and  housing expanded 
substantially in  the  second  quarter  and  businesses 
apparently  began to  add  to  inventories  after  a period 
of  sharp liquidation.  Nonfarm payroll  employment  rose 
considerably in May and June and  the  civilian unemploy
ment  rate  declined to  10.0  percent  in June.  Industrial

7/12-13/83

-17-

production  continued  to  rise markedly in May  and  partial 
data  suggest  a sizable gain in  June.  Data on new orders 
and  shipments  continued  to indicate  improvement  in  the 
demand  for  business  equipment.  In  May housing starts 
increased  substantially  following small  declines  earlier 
and  retail  sales  rose  appreciably  further.  Average 
prices  and  the  index of  average hourly  earnings have 
risen at  a reduced  pace  in  the  first  five months of  1983.  

The weighted average value of  the  dollar against 

major foreign currencies  rose  substantially  in late 
May and  the  first  half  of  June and  subsequently 
has  fluctuated in  a narrow range.  Reflecting  the 
strength of  the  U.S.  economy and  the persistent  high 
level of  the  dollar,  the U.S.  foreign trade  deficit 
increased  sharply in April-May  from  its  reduced 
first-quarter  rate;  exports  declined  and  both oil 
and  nonoil  imports  rose.  

Strong  growth  in  the broader  aggregates  in May 
and June  raised M2  to  a level  somewhat  above  the  mid
point of  the Committee's  range  for  1983  and M3  to 
around  the upper limit  of  its  range.  M1  grew very 
rapidly  over both months  and was  well above  its 
range for  the  year.  Growth  in debt  of  domestic 
nonfinancial  sectors  appears  to  have  picked  up in 
the second  quarter.  Interest  rates  have  risen 
appreciably  since  early May.  

The  Federal Open Market  Committee  seeks  to  foster 

monetary and  financial  conditions  that will  help  to 
reduce  inflation further,  promote growth in  output  on a 
sustainable  basis,  and  contribute to  a sustainable 
pattern of  international  transactions.  At  its  meeting 
in  February  the  Committee established growth ranges  for 
monetary and  credit  aggregates  for  1983  in  furtherance of 
these objectives.  The  Committee  recognized  that  the 
relationships  between such ranges  and ultimate economic 
goals  have  been less  predictable over  the  past  year;  that 
the  impact  of new deposit  accounts  on growth ranges  of 
monetary aggregates  cannot be  determined with a high 
degree  of  confidence;  and  that  the  availability of 
interest  on  large  portions  of  transaction  accounts, 
declining  inflation,  and  lower market  rates  of  interest 
may be  reflected  in  some  changes  in  the  historical  trends 
in velocity.

7/12-13/83

-18-

In establishing growth  ranges last February for  the 

aggregates  for 1983  against this background,  the Committee 
felt  that growth in M2 might be more  appropriately measured 
after the  period of  highly aggressive marketing of money 
market deposit  accounts had  subsided.  The Committee also 
felt  that a somewhat wider  range was  appropriate for 
monitoring M1.  With these understandings,  the Committee 
established  the following growth ranges:  for  the period 
from February-March of 1983  to the  fourth quarter of 1983, 
7 to  10  percent at  an annual rate  for M2,  taking into 
account the  probability of  some residual  shifting into 
that  aggregate  from non-M2  sources:  and for the period  from 
the  fourth quarter of 1982  to the fourth quarter of 1983, 
6-1/2 to  9-1/2  percent for M3, which appeared to be less 
distorted by  the new accounts.  For  the  same period a 
tentative range of 4 to 8 percent was  established for M1 
assuming that  Super NOW accounts would draw only modest 
amounts of  funds from sources outside M1  and assuming 
that  the authority to pay  interest on  transaction balances 
was not extended beyond presently eligible accounts.  An 
associated range of growth for total  domestic nonfinancial 
debt was estimated at  8-1/2  to  11-1/2  percent. 
ranges were reviewed at  the  May meeting and  left unchanged, 
pending further review in July.  

These 

At this meeting,  the Committee reaffirmed  the  longer-run 
ranges established earlier for growth in M2  and M3 for  1983.  
The Committee  also agreed on tentative growth ranges  for  the 
period from the  fourth quarter of  1983 to  the  fourth quarter 
of  1984 of  6-1/2  to  9-1/2  percent for M2 and 6 to  9 percent 
for M3.  The Committee considered that growth  in M1  in a 
range cf  5 to  9 percent from the  second quarter of  1983  to 
the fourth quarter of  1983,  and in a range  of 4 to 8 percent 
from the  fourth quarter of  1983 to  the  fourth quarter of 
1984  would be  consistent  with  the  ranges  for  the  broader 
aggregates.  The  associated range  for  total  domestic non
financial debt was  reaffirmed at 8-1/2  to  11-1/2 percent 
for  1983 and tentatively set at 8 to  11  percent  for  1984.  

In  implementing monetary policy,  the  Committee agreed 
that substantial weight would  continue  to be  placed on the 
behavior of  the broader monetary aggregates.  The behavior 
of M1  and  total domestic nonfinancial debt  will  be monitored, 
with the degree of weight placed on M1  over time dependent 
on evidence that  velocity characteristics are  resuming 
more predictable patterns.  The Committee  understood  that 
policy  implementation would  involve  continuing appraisal  of 
the  relationships between the  various measures of  money and 
credit  and nominal  GNP, including  evaluation of  conditions 
in domestic credit  and  foreign exchange markets.

7/12-13/83

-19-

The  Committee  seeks  in  the  short  run  to  increase 
slightly further  the  existing  degree  of  reserve  restraint.  
The  action  is expected  to  be  associated with growth of 
M2  and M3  at  annual  rates  of  about  8-1/2  and  8 percent 
respectively from June  to  September, consistent with the 
targets  established  for  these aggregates  for  the  year.  
Depending  on evidence  about  the  strength of  economic 
recovery and other  factors  bearing on  the  business  and 
inflation  outlook, lesser  restraint  would  be  acceptable 
in the  context of  a significant  shortfall  in growth  of 
the  aggregates from  current  expectations, while somewhat 
greater restraint  would be  acceptable  should  the  aggregates 
expand more rapidly.  The Committee  anticipates  that  a 
deceleration in M1  growth to  an annual  rate of  around  7 
percent from June  to  September will  be  consistent with 
its  third-quarter  objectives  for  the  broader  aggregates, 
and  that  expansion  in  total  domestic nonfinancial  debt 
would remain within  the range  established for  the  year.  
The  Chairman  may call  for Committee  consultation  if  it 
appears  to  the Manager for  Domestic Operations  that 
pursuit  of  the  monetary objectives and  related  reserve 
paths during  the period  before  the next meeting  is likely 
to  be  associated with a federal  funds  rate  persistently 
outside a range of  6 to  10  percent.  

Votes for  this  action:  Messrs. Volcker, 
Solomon,  Gramley, Guffey, Keehn, Martin, Morris, 
Partee,  Rice,  and  Roberts.  Votes  against  this 
action:  Mrs.  Teeters and  Mr.  Wallich.  

Mrs.  Teeters  dissented  from  this  action because  she  preferred  to 

direct open  market  operations  toward maintaining  the  existing  degree  of  reserve 

restraint.  In her  view  the  additional upward  pressure on  interest  rates  from 

further  restraint  on  reserve  positions  was  unnecessary and would  retard activity 

in  interest-sensitive  sectors  of  the  economy and  threaten  the  sustainability 

of  the  recovery.  

Mr. Wallich dissented  from  this  action  because he favored  a directive 

calling  for  somewhat greater  reserve  restraint.  In  his  judgment,  such a policy 

course would contribute  to  better  control of  the monetary aggregates  and,  given

7/12-13/83 

-20

the  strong  momentum of  the  economy,  would  be  more likely  to  prove  consistent 

with the Committee's  longer-run objectives  of  fostering  sustained economic 

recovery while  curbing inflation.

