SUMMARY OF  COMMENTARY  ON  CURRENT ECONOMIC  CONDITIONS
BY  FEDERAL  RESERVE DISTRICTS

August,  1983

TABLE OF  CONTENTS

SUMMARY  ...............................................

First  District - Boston  ............................  .

Second  District - New  York  ........................... 

I-1

II-1

Third  District  - Philadelphia  ........................ 

III-1

Fourth  District  - Cleveland  .......................... 

Fifth  District - Richmond  ............................ 

Sixth  District - Atlanta  ............................. 

Seventh  District  - Chicago  ........................... 

Eighth  District - St.  Louis  .......................... 

Ninth  District - Minneapolis  ......................... 

Tenth  District  - Kansas  City  ......................... 

Eleventh  District - Dallas  ........................... 

Twelfth  District - San  Francisco  ..................... 

IV-1

V-1

VI-1

VII-1

VIII-1

IX-1

X-l

XI-1

XII-1

SUMMARY*

Introduction.  All  districts  reported  that  economic  conditions

continued  favorable in  July.  Atlanta,  Kansas  City,  New  York,  and  San

Francisco noted a further  "quickening" or  "acceleration" in  the expansion.

Job markets continue  to  improve,  but  at  a disappointing pace  in  much  of  the

Midwest.  All  districts  emphasized  strength  in  retail  sales,  especially  big

ticket  items.  Price  inflation  continues moderate.  Capital  expenditures  by

business  continue  to  lag  the  consumer  sector.  Inventories  remain  lean  and

businesses  are  cautious  about restocking.  Virtually all  goods  are  in  ample

supply.  Manufacturing  output  is  rising  gradually,  except  for  most heavy

capital  goods.  Higher  mortgage  rates  threaten  the  upswing  in  housing,  but

momentum in new construction  is  still  strong  in  most  regions.  Nonresidential

construction  is  relatively weak  because  of  overbuilding  of  office  space,  but

several  districts  note  signs  of  improvement.  Hot,  dry weather  has  seriously

damaged  corn,  soybean and  other  crops.  Business  loan  demand  continues  very

slow, while  consumer  credit  is  relatively  strong.  Boston,  Chicago,  and

Richmond  expressed  concern  over  increased  foreign competition related  to  the

high  value  of  the dollar.

Industrial  Output.  Further  increases  in  factory  output,  shipments,

orders,  and  backlogs  were widespread.  Atlanta,  Dallas,  New York,

Philadelphia, and  Richmond  emphasize  the  breadth  of  the  recovery  including

building  materials, textiles,  apparel,  chemicals,  electronics  and  other

sectors.  Boston,  New York,  and  St.  Louis  report  further  gains  in  defense

procurement.  Cleveland  points  to  a contrast,  strength  in  aluminum accompanied

* Prepared  at Federal  Reserve Bank  of  Chicago

by  continued  sluggishness  in steel.  Minneapolis  mentions  depressed  iron ore

mining and Dallas  the much  reduced  rate of  oil  and  gas  development.

Employment.  Although job markets  have  strengthened  in  most  regions

unemployment  remains generally  high.  Rehiring of  laid-off workers  is

cautious.  Despite  relatively  low jobless  rates,  Boston  says  employment

figures  show "no  recovery".  Chicago reports  substantial  worker  recalls  in

motor vehicles,  but  not  in  capital  goods.  New  York  reports  shortages  of

skilled workers  in  residential  construction.  Cleveland  notes  rising

employment but  no improvement  in  unemployment.

Consumer Purchases.  Retail  sales  and  other  consumer  outlays  have

been  excellent.  New York,  Philadelphia,  and  San  Francisco  report merchants  to

be highly  enthusiastic.  Large autos,  compact  trucks,  recreational  vehicles,

furniture,  and  appliances  are  selling especially  well.  Air  conditioners  and

summer  apparel  benefitted  from the  heat wave.  Consumers  are  using  credit more

freely  and  delinquency  rates  are  low.  Dallas  notes  weakness  in sales  near  the

Mexican  border associated  with  the weak  peso.  Several  districts  commented  on

strong  tourist business.

Housing.  Residential  construction  continued  high  relative to  a year

earlier.  But  higher  mortgage  rates  since  May  have  reduced  home purchases.

Realtors  have  lowered  their  expectations  for  the  year.  The backlog  of

contracts  already  signed will  keep many  builders  busy  throughout  year-end.

Demand  for  adjustable  rate mortgages  has  held  up  better  than  for  fixed  rate

financing.

Nonresidential  Construction.  Some  improvement  in office  building or

leasing  activity was  reported  by  New York  and  Atlanta.  San  Francisco expects

increased  commercial  construction activity  in coming  months despite  high

vacancy rates.  Cleveland  and  Dallas  reported  substantial  excess  office  and

suburban  shopping  center  space, with  sizable  incentives  offered  to  secure

tenants.  Significantly  increased  highway building  is expected  in the  second

half  of  this  year.

Capital  Expenditures.  In general,  business  capital  expenditures  are

not  as  vigorous  as  consumer buying.  Electronic  type  equipment  is doing much

better  than mechanical  equipment.  Chicago reports  little  improvement  in

producer equipment  from the  "abysmal"  levels  of  the  recession.  Richmond  sees

emphasis  on modernization and  replacement.  Dallas  reports  a slight

improvement  in oil  and  gas  well  drilling, which  had  dropped sharply  last

year.  San  Francisco  notes  a recent  rise  in  orders  for  commercial  aircraft.

Minneapolis  reports  computer  sales  "unexpectedly  strong."

Business  Inventories.  Retailers  and  manufacturers  report  inventories

to  be  lean  but  adequate.  Inventory  investment  policies  are  described as

"conservative" or  "cautious"  in most districts,  but  New York  reports  some

rebuilding  by  retailers.  Additional  merchandise  is generally  available when

needed,  prices  are expected  to  remain  relatively  stable,  and  carrying costs

continue high.  All  these factors  encourage  business  to  keep inventories  low

relative  to  activity.

Agriculture.  Several  districts  noted  the adverse  impact  of  hot,  dry

weather  on growing  crops.  Corn,  soybean,  cotton,  alfalfa, tobacco,  and

vegetable  yields  have been  seriously affected and  further  damage  is possible

if moisture conditions  do not  improve.  The  reduction  in supply  caused  by  the

drought reinforces  the  large  acreage cuts  associated with  PIK  and  other

government programs.  On  the bright  side,  Kansas  City  reports  a record

iv

winter wheat crop harvested  before  the drought  struck.  Also,  San  Francisco

reports  improved  supplies  of  fresh  fruits  and  vegetables  following  the  losses

caused  by wet weather  earlier  in the  year.

Financial.  Business  loan  demand  at  banks  generally  has  remained

sluggish.  Balance sheets  have  strengthened  as  cash  flow has  increased,  inven-

tories have  been  reduced,  and  short-term debt  has  been  refinanced.  Consumer

and  mortgage borrowing  have been  growing,  but  higher  mortgage  rates  are

expected  to  dampen  demand  for  real  estate  loans.

FIRST DISTRICT  - BOSTON

Business  conditions are  improving  in  the  First District  but  the

improvement  has  yet  to  be  reflected  in  employment gains.  For  manufacturers

the  pace  of  recovery  remains  modest.  Capital goods  manufacturers in

particular  see  only hints  of  an  upturn.  The  retail  sector,  on  the  other  hand,

is  enjoying  very  good  sales.  Both manufacturers  and  retailers  are  satisfied

with current  inventory-to-sales  ratios.  Prices  remain well  behaved.

Labor Market  Conditions

Employment  and  unemployment  statistics  for June  paint  inconsistent

pictures  of  the  strength of  the  recovery  in  the  First  District.  Unemployment

rates  in  both Massachusetts  and  Connecticut  in  June were  below 7 percent.

Rhode  Island  was  not  quite  so  fortunate,  but  at  just  over 8 percent  the

state's unemployment  rate  was  still  well  below the  national average.  In

contrast  to  the  relatively  favorable  unemployment  situation,  employment

figures  show no  recovery.  Nonfarm wage  and  salary employment  (seasonally

adjusted) changed  very little  in  the  first  six months  of  the  recovery and  the

June  figures  continue  this  trend,  with employment  actually  declining  slightly

in  the  larger  states.  Durables  and  nondurables manufacturing as well as

nonmanufacturing  have  all  been  slower  to  recover  in  New England  than  in  the

nation, but  the  biggest  difference  has  been  in  durable goods manufacturing.

The  relatively weak performance  of  the  durables  sector may reflect  the

region's  orientation to  the  production of  investment  goods, which  tend  to  lag

the  business  cycle.

Manufacturing

Most  manufacturing respondents  report  increasing  business,  but  the  pace  of

recovery  is  still  quite  modest.  Several noted  that  summer  is  a difficult

period  in which  to  assess  performance  because  of  vacation shutdowns.  Demand

appears to  have  increased most  strongly for  automotive  and  housing-related

products.  The  defense  business  is  good.  Sales of  packaging  and various

component-type  products,  which are  tied  to  the  general  level  of  industrial

production,  are  also  coming  back.  Demand  remains very weak  for  heavy  capital

equipment,  aerospace  products  and machine  tool  accessories.  Overseas  markets

are  improving slightly  but  the  high value of  the  U.S.  dollar  is  a major

impediment  to  exports.  Japanese  and  European firms  are  said  to  be making

inroads  into  what  have  traditionally  been markets  for  U.S.  products.

Manufacturers  fear that  some  of  these markets will  be  lost  for  the  forseeable

future.

Firms,  even  those  enjoying  good  sales  gains,  are  taking  a very  cautious

approach  to  recalling  laid  off  workers.  Almost  all of  the  workers who have

been brought  back so  far  have  been  direct  production workers.  Overhead  and

support  staff  levels are  said  to  have  been permanently reduced.

In general, manufacturers feel  comfortable  with present  inventory  levels.

Inventories  will  increase as  sales  pick up  but most  of  those  contacted  do not

plan large  changes.  The  major exception was a firm which had  previously  cut

inventories  to  bare minimums;  now as  demand  strengthens, inventories  must  be

increased  substantially.  Others  in  this  same  industry,  packaging,  are  said  to

be  in  a similiar  position.  One manufacturer of  machine  tool  accessories  is

also  adding  to  inventories  but  for  different  reasons:  demand  is  still  very

weak,  so  the  firm is  producing  for  inventory  in  order  to,  first,  maintain

I-3

employment  and  hold  on  to  its  skilled  workforce  and  secondly,  be  able  to

respond  rapidly  when orders  finally materialize.

Prices  of  materials and components  remain stable.  However,  one manu-

facturer noted  that  he  has  recently  seen more  attempts  to  increase  prices;

several  others  spoke of  how they had  successfully  "resisted" price  increases

from their  suppliers.  Resistance  to  price  increases  cuts  two  ways  and  some  of

these  same  firms have  found  their  own attempts  to  raise  prices  successfully

resisted.  Lumber  prices  are  said  to  have  eased  a bit;  demand  has  stabilized

and more mills  have  opened.  None of  those  contacted  is  experiencing any

shortages  of  supplies.

Retailing

Retailers  in  the  First  District  are  enjoying  a very  good  summer.  The

strength  is  across  the  board - shopping centers  and  downtowns,  northern and

southern New England,  hard  and  soft  goods.  Sales  of  seasonal  products,  such

as  air  conditioning,  barbeques, and  lawn  furniture,  have  been  especially

strong.  Big  ticket  items  like major appliances  and  TVs  are  also moving very

well.  Not only  are  people  buying, but  one  large  appliance  store  finds  that

they  are also  paying  their  bills faster  than  ever.

Retail inventory-to-sales  ratios  are  satisfactory.  According to  one

retailer,  "I tell  my buyers  'Buy, buy,  buy',  but  sales  have  been  so  good  that

inventories  never  increase".  For  another,  the  ratio  of  inventories  to  sales

is  at  the  low end  of  the normal  range.  One  chain reports  that,  despite  very

good  sales,  inventories  are a little  higher  than expected;  however,  since  the

store  plans  a major promotional effort with heavy  emphasis  on  having  products

in  stock,  the  higher  inventory  levels  are  not  a problem.

II-1

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK

In recent weeks  the economic  recovery  grew  stronger  in much  of  the

Second District.  Retail activity was very brisk in June, and  though  the July

pace was a little slower,  sales  remained well above year-ago levels  at most

stores.  Additional signs  of  strength were evident  in  the housing and non-

residential  real estate markets.  Business  activity  continued  to pick up  in

the manufacturing sector where producers  of  many different  goods reported

rising  orders.  However, manufacturers  remain generally cautious  about  pro-

duction increases  and new hirings,  and demand for new business  loans  is  still

slack.  Agricultural conditions  are mixed.  Fruit and  field  crops  look  good,

but  the dry weather  in  July has hurt  the  vegetable crop.

Consumer  Spending

Retailers  described  their  June sales  as  "outstanding" and "extra-

ordinary."  Most of  our  respondents,  representing a broad range of  income

markets,  also posted  double-digit gains  over  year-ago levels  in July.  One

suburban discount  chain reported  that July  sales were  "gangbusters,"  up

25  to  30 percent.  Others  felt  the July pace was not quite  as  good  as  the

prior month but attributed  the  sight  falloff  to  special factors  such  as  hot

weather  or  store  remodeling.  They  saw nothing  to  indicate a slowdown  in  the

recovery.  The only report of  sluggish  demand came from an upstate New York

chain of  department stores;  lingering weakness  in  some local economies

held gains  there to  only two  percent above last  year.  Respondents  indicated

they  were increasing  their inventories  in anticipation of  greater activity.

Two were letting  their stocks  rise  faster  than sales.  The  competitive

environment, which had been quite  fierce earlier  this year, appeared  to be

easing, but  the level of  promotional activity  generally remained high.

II-2

Construction and Real  Estate

Residential  construction  activity  remained  at  a  high  level  during

recent  weeks.  Many  homebuilders  have  enough  contracts  to  carry  them  through

the  rest  of  the  year.  In  fact,  the  industry  has  been  so  busy  in  some  areas

that  a  significant  shortage  of  skilled  labor  has  materialized.  While  the

current levels  of  sales  and  construction  activity are  quite  high,  builders  are

wary  about  the  recent  upturn  in  interest  rates;  they  fear  higher  mortgage

rates  could  cut  the  demand  for  homes  next  year.  However,  future  construction

activity is  likely  to  be  stimulated  by  recent  New York  State  legislation which

will  provide  millions  of  dollars  in  low  interest  loans  for  the  private

construction of  multifamily, rental housing.

The  nonresidential  real  estate  sector  appeared  to  be  strengthening

further,  especially  in  suburban  areas.  The  rate  at  which  available  space  is

being  leased  has  picked  up  significantly, and  ground  was  broken  for  a number

of  office  buildings  in  New  Jersey  and  Connecticut.  Work  on  ongoing  projects

continued  strong.  Although  announcements  of  new  construction  projects  in  New

York  City  are  expected  to  remain  scarce  for  awhile,  several  promising

properties  were  purchased  by  developers 

in 

the 

downtown  Manhattan

area--indicating  a definite  firming in market conditions.

Manufacturing

Business  activity  continued  to  pick  up  in  the  manufacturing  sector.

Manufacturers  of  diverse  producer  and  consumer  goods,  such  as  chemicals,

electrical  equipment,  home  weather  stripping,  and  toys,  reported  that  orders

were  rising. 

Auto  parts  suppliers  noted  that  their  upswing  has  been

maintained,  and  several  defense  companies  were  awarded  sizable  contracts.

Businessmen  generally  are  now  convinced  that  the  economy  will  continue  to

expand  but  they  remain  cautious,  nonetheless.  Production  increases  still  are

II-3

being  scheduled  primarily  to  meet  incoming  orders  rather  than  to  rebuild

inventories.  Moreover, while  recalls  have  significantly reduced  the number  of

employees  on  layoff,  few  firms  are  expected  to  add  new  workers  soon.  One

respondent  thought  it  would  take  several  more  months  of  improvement  before

firms  would make  long-range  commitments  to  capital projects  or  substantial new

hiring.

Agriculture

Conditions  in  the  agricultural  sector  vary  by  product.  The  New York

fruit  crop  looks  favorable,  and  growers  are  anticipating  attractive  prices  as

well.  Field  crops  have  recovered  from  earlier  bad  weather,  although  first

cuttings  are  occurring  a  few  weeks  later  than  usual.  In  contrast,  vegetable

yields  have  been  threatened  by  an  unusually  dry  July.  Dairy  farmers  are

concerned about  rising  production  costs;  grain  prices  have  begun moving upward

in  response  to  PIK-related  crop  reductions,  and  a general  buildup in  herd size

is  expected  to  exert  further pressure  on feed costs.

Financial  Developments

The  strong economic  recovery  nationwide  has  not  been  reflected  in  the

demand  for  business  loans  at  Second  District  regional  banks.  In  July,  these

banks  reported  only  a  slight  increase  in  business  loans  outstanding,  mostly

stemming  from  take-downs  under  existing  lines  of  credit,  and  almost  no

increase  in new applications  for  business  loans.  In  contrast,  in  the  consumer

sector,  strong  increases  in  the  demand  for  credit--for  auto  purchases,

personal  loans,  and  charge  card  purchases--seem  to  reflect  rising  consumer

confidence  and ample  loanable  funds  at  banks.  The  demand  for  mortgage  credit

appears  to  have  backed  off  a  bit  because  of  recent  increases  in  long-term

rates.

III-1

THIRD  DISTRICT  - PHILADELPHIA

Indications  from  the  Third  District  in  August  are  that  business  activity,

though  still  spotty,  continues  to  improve.  Local  manufacturing  has  posted  major  gains

again,  and  retail  sales  have  been  excellent.  Loan  activity  at  area  banks,  however,  has

turned  mixed,  and  mortgage  rates  have  risen  since  June,  causing  a  slowdown 

in  real

estate  sales  activity.  Resort  businessmen  report  booming  activity  at  most area  vacation

spots,  but agriculture  officials  say  regional  crop yields  are  down.

Most Third District  businessmen  are  looking for  further  improvement  over the

next  six  months. 

Industrial  expansion  is  expected  to  remain  at healthy  levels  into  1984,

department  store  operators  say  sales  should  maintain  their  robust  upswing,  and  banking

contacts  project  increases  in  both  commercial  and  retail  lending  by  February.

AGRICULTURE

Third  District agriculture  officials  indicate  that  poor  weather  conditions  have

reduced  many  area  crop  yields,  some  to  unprofitable  levels.  This  has  been  a  disastrous

year  for  grain  in  New  Jersey  and  Pennsylvania  because  the  cold,  wet  spring  delayed

planting  and  hot  and  dry  weather  now  is  hampering  growth.  Grain  production  levels  are

estimated  at  only  71  percent  to  83  percent  of  1982  yields,  and  prices  are  not  expected  to

rise  enough  to  offset  these  losses  in  volume.  Pennsylvania  alfalfa  hay  growers  plan  four

or  five  cuttings  this  year,  but  the  yield  on  the  third  cutting,  underway  now,  is  well  below

a  normal  year's,  due  to  low  rainfall in  recent  months.

Area  vegetable  farmers  say  the  hot  temperatures  have  also  been  harsh  on

their  crops.  The  tomato  crop  will  be  about  91  percent  of  last  year's  production,  and

potatoes,  soybeans,  and  peppers  are  all  running  below  1982  levels.  Vegetable  prices  are

strong,  though,  and  growers  are  projecting  a  pretty  good  year  profit-wise.  Many  of  the

summer's  fruit  crops,  especially  apples  and  blueberries,  have  also been  sub-par.

III-2

Some  crops  are  doing  well  this  year  despite  the  weather.  Peach  growers  are

expecting  a  bumper  crop,  with  yields  as  high  as  38  percent  over  last  year's  levels.  The

Delaware  corn  crop,  although  a  little bit  late,  also looks  good.  Delaware  poultry  farmers

are  also  turning  a  sound  profit  for  the  first  time  in  quite  awhile.

REAL  ESTATE  AND  CONSTRUCTION

Activity  in  the  Third  District housing  market  has  dropped  off  somewhat  since

June,  but  sales  are  still  30  percent  to  100  percent  higher  than  a  year  ago.  Mortgage

rates  have  risen  as  much  as  100  basis  points  in  the  last  six  weeks  and  that,  contacts  say,

has  been  enough  to  dampen  demand  slightly.  With  the  recent  rise  in  the  FHA  mortgage

rate  expected  to  push  conventional  rates  even  higher,  realtors'  outlooks  for  housing

demand  are  not  as  good  as  in recent  months.  Also,  new  construction  has  been heavy,  and

the  inventory  of  unsold  new  units,  which  is  about  as  high  as  that  of  a  year  ago,  now

presents  a serious  problem  to  builders  if  demand  deteriorates  much  more.

MANUFACTURING

Third  District  manufacturing  has  continued  its  rapid  expansion  through  July,

according  to  the  most  recent  Business  Outlook  Survey.  Survey  results  indicate  that,

after  adjusting  for  seasonal  pressures,  the  overall  growth  from  June  to  July  is  the  most

substantial  observed  so  far  this  year.  New  orders  and  shipments  are  up  over June  levels,

and,  for  the  first  time  in  two  years,  inventory  liquidation  has  slowed  to  marginal  levels.

Manufacturers,  however,  report  only  slight  expansion  of  either  employee  ranks  or  the

average  workweek.

Looking  ahead,  the  recovery  in  the  industrial  sector  is  expected  to  forge

ahead  over  the  next  six  months.  Three-quarters  of  the  manufacturers  participating  in

the  survey  foresee  better  overall  conditions  by  early  next  year;  none  predict  any

deterioration  in  activity  over  that  time.  New  orders  are  projected  to  continue  to outrun

III-3

shipments,  resulting  in  higher levels  of unfilled  orders,  and  manufacturing  inventories  are

expected  to  grow.  Survey  respondents  also  say  they  will  increase  their  capital  spending

by  early  1984  and  are  likely  to  hire  more  employees  and  lengthen  working  hours  as  well.

Industrial  prices  have  risen  again.  Reports  of  price  hikes  are  slightly  more

prevalent  than  in  June,  as  30  percent  of  the  respondents  indicate  that  input  costs  are

higher  this  month,  and  just  under  20  percent  say  they  have  raised  their  own  prices.

Projections  of further  price  inflation by  next  year  are  widespread.

RETAIL

Sales  at  Third  District  department  stores  are  progressing  smartly  in  August,

according 

to  local  store  operators.  Dollar  volume  is  as  good  as,  if  not  better  than,

merchants  had  anticipated,  notching  solid  gains of  between  8  percent  and  12  percent  on  a

year-over-year  basis.  Retailers  believe  that  consumer  balance  sheets  have  been  in  good

order  lately  and  that shoppers  are  spending  the  money  received  as  a result  of  the July  tax

cut.  Wealth  gains  from  the  stock  market  have  also  had  an  influence  on  sales  activity.

Virtually  all  lines,  including  durables,  have  been  moving  quickly  this  month,  with  men's

and  children's  clothing  doing  especially  well.

With  the  best  part  of  the  sales  year  yet  to  come,  area  retailers  are  highly

optimistic  about the  future.  Merchants  are  projecting  a banner  holiday  season  and  a  solid

start  in  1984,  but they say  that  gains  on a year-over-year  basis  are  likely  to  slip from  this

month's  highs  because  sales  in  early  1983  were  fairly  strong.  Store  operators  are

planning  conservatively, 

though,  and  they  have  brought  inventories  back  in  line  with

year-ago  levels.  Stocks  will  be  kept  lean,  but  not  so  tight  that  merchants  risk  losing

sales  if  activity  exceeds  their  projections.

III-4

FINANCIAL

Loan  activity  at  major  banks  in  the  Third  District  is  mixed  in  August.  Local

bankers  report  that  commercial  lending  has  been  declining  slightly  over  the  last  six

weeks,  somewhat  out  of  tune  with  lenders'  projections.  C&I  loans,  which  contacts  say

currently  range  from  15  percent  below  to  14  percent  above  last  August's  figures,  are

exhibiting  the  "summer  doldrums"  at  many  banks  and  that  seasonal  softness  has  caused

further  deterioration  of  already  weak  business  loan  demand.  Consumer  loan  activity,  on

the  other  hand,  has  risen  again  this  month,  and  volume  remains  ahead  of  a  year  ago.

Expanding  credit  demands  and  aggressive  marketing  by  lenders  have  given  retail  lending

a strong  boost  despite  some  recent  softening  in  mortgage  and  automobile  lending.

For  the  next  six  months,  area  bankers  are  forecasting  modest  gains  in  lending

activity.  Commercial  loan  demand  is  expected  to  firm  up  slowly  as  businesses  begin  to

rebuild  inventories  and  to  expand  capital expenditures.  Consumer  lending  is also  likely  to

show  further  improvement,  but  bankers  expect  that  further  weakening  in  the  housing

sector  will continue  to  limit  retail loan  growth.

Most  local  bankers  agree  that  we  have  now  seen  the  trough  of  an  interest  rate

cycle.  Financial  contacts  foresee  rates  trending  upward  as  commercial  loan  demand

picks  up  and  financing  of  the  federal  deficit  expands.  The  rise,  however,  is  likely  to  be

slow  and  irregular  with  the  prime,  currently  holding  steady  at  10.5  percent,  creeping  up

about  100  basis  points  by the  middle  of  the first  quarter  of  1984.

Deposit  flows  in  the  Third  District  continue  to  weaken  this  month.  Demand

deposits  have  declined  again,  and  are  now  only  about  3  percent  ahead  of a year  ago.  That

change  is  partly  seasonal,  however.  Time  deposits,  on  the  strength  of  the  MMDA,  are

still  far ahead  on  a year-over-year  basis.  Several  contacts  have  noticed  a  drop-off  in

III-5

other  time  deposits,  chiefly  in  26-week  and  30-month  certificates,  apparently  reflecting

depositors'  anticipation  of  higher  interest  rates.

TOURIST  SERVICES

Officials  at  vacation  spots  in  the  Third  District  report  a  substantial

resurgence  of  tourist  activity  this  summer.  Tourist  traffic  and  spending  is  ahead  of last

year's  volume  at  most  major  resorts  in  the  tri-state  area.  Business  at seashore  resorts  in

Delaware  and  southern  New  Jersey  has  been  booming  so  far  this  season.  Contacts  there

attribute  the  strength  to  perfect  beach  weather,  an  improved  consumer  outlook  on  the

economy,  and  excellent  fishing.  Attendance  at  area  amusement  parks  has also  been  very

heavy  because  of  the  weather.  Pennsylvania's  mountain  vacation  spots are  the  exception

to  the  good  news,  though.  Rain  and  bad  weather  washed  out  several  important  early

season  weekends,  and  tourist  traffic  is  just  beginning  to  gain  on  year-earlier  levels.

Pocono  spokesmen  say  the  current  pace  of  activity  is  good,  but  heavy  competition  from

Atlantic  City  and  lingering  unemployment  in  the  nearby  steel  regions  of  Pennsylvania

have  kept  tourist  business  below  expectations  thus  far.

The  outlook  for  the  balance  of  the  season,  however,  is  equally  bright  across

the  district.  Advance  reservations  have  nearly  filled  available  lodgings  at  the  seashore

for  the  rest  of  the  summer,  and  incoming  inquiries  are  20  percent  to  30  percent  ahead  of

last  season's  pace  in  the  Poconos.  If  the  weather  holds  out,  tourist  business  is  expected

to  approach  record  levels  by  season's-end.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT  - CLEVELAND

Summary.  Economic  conditions  in  the Fourth District continue  to

improve.  Employment  is  rising  although  unemployment  rates  show little

change.  Real  incomes are  rising,  and  retailers  are  experiencing broad-based

sales  gains.  Manufacturing  activity  continues  to  grow  but perhaps at  a slower

pace  than  in June.  Demand  is  strong for  aluminum but  remains  sluggish  for

steel.  Retailers  and manufacturers  report  lean  inventories  and  caution about

inventory  growth.  Builders  expect  construction activity  to  slow when current

contracts  are  completed.  Mortgage  lenders  report  declines  in mortgage

applications  in  response  to  higher  interest  rates.  Banks  remain highly  liquid.

District  Labor Market  Conditions.  Employment  continues  to  rise  in

this  District  but  unemployment  rates  show  little  change.  In Ohio,

manufacturing employment  rose  in June for  the  sixth consecutive month and  is

3.3%  above  last  December's  low.  Nonagricultural nonmanufacturing wage and

salary  employment  rose  in June  for  the  fourth  consecutive month and  is  3.1%

above  its  February  low.  In May  and  June,  total  employment  increased  by  160

thousand  workers but  the  labor  force  expanded  by  179  thousand,  leaving Ohio's

unemployment  rate unchanged  at  12.8%  (nsa).  Unemployment  rates  in  the

District's  eleven  largest  SMSA's  ranged  from 9.3%  to  17.3%.  Local  indexes  of

leading  indicators  for Pittsburgh  and Cleveland  have  risen  for  seven

consecutive months  and  point  to continued  improvement  in  those  industrial

centers.

Prices,  Wages  and Earnings.  Incomes  of  production workers have  been

rising  faster  than  prices.  Hourly earnings  for production workers  in

manufacturing  in  Ohio have  been  rising  at  a 6.4%  annual  rate  since  last

IV-2

October.  Average weekly hours  worked  have  also  been  increasing  so  that  in  the

same  period  average weekly earnings  have  been  advancing  at  a 13%  annual  rate.

The  Consumer Price  Index  for  all urban  consumers  in  Cleveland  rose

9.3%  in  the  last  twelve months  and  1.5%  in  the  last  two months.  For

Pittsburgh,  the  index advanced  7.1%  and  0.1%  and  for  Cincinnati  7.8%  and  1.2%

in  the  same  two periods.

Retail Sales.  Fourth District retailers  are  experiencing  broad-based

sales  gains.  Most major general  merchandisers  report  between 9% and  11%

nominal  sales  improvement  between  the  first  and  second  quarters  (a.r.).  They

anticipate  continuing, albeit  more modest  advances  in the  third  quarter.  The

-July sales  pace  has moderated  from June.  Consistent  with national trends,

sales  of  cars,  particularly  large  domestic models,  are  leading the  sales

strength  in the  District.  Retail food  sales  are  lagging,  registering  between

2% and  3% nominal  growth from  last  year.  Retail sales  growth  is  occurring

throughout  the  District,  although Northern Ohio  retailers  appear to  be  lagging

the  region.

Manufacturing.  Growth of  District manufacturing  activity may  have

slowed  in July.  A  survey  of  purchasing managers  in the Cleveland  area reveals

new orders  and production rose  in July,  but  at  a much slower pace  than  in

June.  Similarly,  the  pace  of  price  increases  slowed  from June.  Raw materials

and  finished  goods  inventories were  stable  in  July.

A  survey  of purchasing  managers  in  the  Cincinnati  area  shows  new

orders,  production, and  backlogs continuing  to  rise  through June.  Increased

proportions of  firms  surveyed  report  prices  paid  for commodities,  services,

and equipment  are  rising while vendor deliveries  are  reported  to  be  slower.

Raw material  inventories  are  stable  while  finished goods  inventories  continue

to  fall.

IV-3

Primary  Metals.  Demand  for  aluminum is  strong while demand  for  steel

remains  sluggish.  Aluminum orders  and  shipments have  increased  substantially

since  December, boosting  the  price  of  primary  aluminum ingots  by  about  50%.  A

major producer  reports  its  U.S.  smelters  are  operating at  the

highest  level  since  1980.  Aluminum  inventories  are  very  low relative  to

current  shipping  rates.

Steel  producers  report  new orders  are  slow, shipments  are  flat  and

order  backlogs  are  falling.  Product  prices  remain weak.  At current  prices

steel  producers  would have  to  operate  at  over  70%  of  production capability  to

break even  but  they  are  operating  at  only  about  50%  to  60%  of  capability.

Inventories.  Retailers and  manufacturers  report  lean  inventories.

Retailers  expect  some  inventory  accumulation by yearend  1983  but  less  than

typical  for  a  recovery  because  of  high  carrying  costs  and  skepticism about  the

durability  of  the  recovery.  Industrial  firms  generally  report  their

inventories  are  at  desired  levels  and  are  lean  relative  to  sales.  Plans  to

expand  inventories  as  sales  increase  are  cautious,  as  many firms  plan

permanently  lean  inventories.

Construction.  Builders  expect  construction activity  to  slow when

current  contracts  are  completed.  Home builders  report  a  substantial  drop  in

new contracts  following recent  increases  in mortgage  rates.  However,

construction of  new  homes  is  likely  to  remain  strong  through the  Fall  as

builders  work down their  backlog  of  orders.  Office  construction remains

strong  as  work continues  on  projects  underway.  Realtors, however, report  an

excess of  office  space,  and  prospective  tenants  are  being offered  substantial

incentives,  such as  several months  free rent.  Suburban office  space and

shopping  centers  have been over-built  in  recent  years  and  developers expect

very  little  new construction.  Prices  of  building materials  and  supplies  have

IV-4

begun  to  stabilize  following  several months  of  sharp  price  increases,  and

expected  shortages  have not materialized.

Mortgage  Lending.  Mortgage  lenders  report  declines  in mortgage

inquiries  and  applications  last month.  Lenders offering  conventional  30-year

fixed  rate mortgages  report  a substantial  drop  in mortgage activity,  and

without exception attribute  it  to  an  increase  in  mortgage  interest  rates.

Rate  increases  ranged  from  50  to  100  basis  points bringing  conventional

mortgage  rates  into  the  13%  to  14%  range.  Lenders  offering variable  rate

mortgages  have  not  experienced  a substantial  drop  in mortgage activity,  and  in

several  cases,  lenders  have  had  an  increase  in  the  number of  loan

applications.  The majority  of  loan  inquiries  and  applications have been  from

existing home  owners  seeking to  trade up  to more  expensive  homes.  Lenders

report  a significant  decrease  in  their  refinancing activity.

Commercial  Banks.  Banks  in  the  District  remain highly  liquid.

Continuing  strong  core deposit  growth  and  relatively  sluggish  commercial  loan

demand  are  allowing banks  to  reduce  their  reliance  on  large  denomination CD's

as  a source  of  funds.  Banks  are  using deposit  growth  to  increase  investments

in  federal  funds,  repurchase  agreements  and U.S.  government  and  agency

securities.  Some  funds  are  also  being used  to  satisfy  the  somewhat  higher

demand  for  consumer  loans.

FIFTH  DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Overview

The  Fifth District  economy is  continuing  to  experience  a broad based

expansion.  Manufacturers are  continuing  to  report  gains  in  shipments,  orders,

and  order backlogs.  Also,  manufacturing  employment  is  reflecting  this

increased  activity.  Retail  sales  remain  relatively robust,  particularly in

big-ticket  lines.  Housing construction and sales  are  generally holding  at  or

near  the  vastly improved  levels  of  recent months,  and there  are  scattered

reports  of  some  resurgence  in  commercial  construction activity.  Principal

areas  of  concern are  the  export markets,  particularly for  textile  products,

and  the  farm sector  in  light  of  recent  adverse weather  patterns.

Manufacturing

Activity  in  the manufacturing  sector  continues  to  expand  broadly.

Shipments, new orders,  and  order backlogs  are  generally up  over  the  past month

and  inventories  have apparently continued  to  run off.  Manufacturing  employ-

ment  has also  risen, as  has  the  length of  the average workweek.  Textile and

furniture manufacturing appear  to  be  experiencing particularly rapid  recov-

eries,  although  export  markets for  their products  remain very  soft.

Manufacturing  inventories and plant  and  equipment  capacity  appear

generally satisfactory.  There  remains,  however, little  expectation of much

capacity  expansion this  year.  Capital  spending,  it  is  thought, will  go  to

modernization and relocation,  each with cost and/or  labor  saving  objectives.

Current  distress  points  in  District  manufacturing are  almost  entirely older  or

less  efficient  plants  that  are  being phased  out  of  operation.

V-2

Consumer  Spending

By  and  large,  District  consumers  remain moderately active,  although

much of  the  recent  sales  gains  appears  to have  been concentrated in  big  ticket

items,  particularly automobiles and  durable goods  associated with purchases  of

houses.  Furniture  and  appliances,  in  particular,  seem  to  be  doing well.

Otherwise,  retail  sales  have been moderate.  There  is  some evidence  that

retailers,  at  least  in  some  cases,  are  continuing  to  allow inventory  run off

despite the  generally  held expectation that  sales  will pick  up  as  the  recovery

progresses  and reports  that  delivery times  are  beginning  to  stretch out  for

some  types  of  products.

The widely,  though  not  universally, held expectation of  continued

growth in  consumer  spending  is  based largely on  growing consumer  confidence,

improved  consumer  liquidity,  and  the  belief  that  the  recovery  is  still gaining

momentum.  The  possibilities of  a short-lived or  very moderate recovery  have

not  been ruled  out,  however, and  could  lead  to  little  or  no  growth  in  sales,

particularly of  autos  and other  big-ticket  items.

Housing and Construction

While  remaining  somewhat  spotty,  the housing  sector  is  still a

bright  spot  in most  parts  of  the  District.  Construction and  sales  have

continued  strong  although  there  are  some  signs  of  slowing activity  in  recent

weeks.  Mortgage  interest  rates  have increased  slightly  in most  areas  in  the

past  few weeks.  Fixed  rate  mortgages are  still popular and  reports are  that

the  variable  rate  instruments  are  not being received well by  consumers.  As  a

result,  there  has  been a tendency  for mortgages  to have  shorter maturities  and

higher  down payments  in  return for  lower  rates.  The  markets remain basically

optimistic.

There are  also  reports  of  a resurgence  of  commercial  construction

activity in  some  areas,  although  these remain exceptions.  Highway work is

apparently providing  a significant boost  to  the non-residential  sector  in  some

areas  as  well.

Banking and  Finance

Loan growth appears  to  have  been moderate  recently.  The  greatest

strength has been  in demand  for residential mortgage and  consumer  installment

credit.  In most  quarters,  this  pattern of  growth is  expected  to  continue  for

the rest  of  the year.  Recent  business  loan demand  is  generally described  as

more  sluggish.

Agriculture

There  is  widespread concern over  the  prospects  for  the  District  farm

sector.  Reduced acreages  resulting  from PIK program participation combined

with unusually hot,  dry weather experienced  of  late  are  giving  rise  to  concern

over the  level  of  output  of  some  crops and  over  the potential availability  of

feed  grains.

VI-1

SIXTH  DISTRICT  - ATLANTA

Recovery  continues  to  gain  momentum  in  most  of  the  Southeast.  Deposits

and  loans  at  large  financial  institutions  increased  in  the  early  summer,  and  the  improved

climate  is  stimulating  innovations  and  expansion  of  services.  Manufacturers  in  housing-

related  industries  are  operating  at  substantially 

increased  levels  of  capacity. 

The

resurgence  in  construction 

is  helping  to  buoy  consumer  spending  as  well.  However,

spokesmen  for  the  construction  industry,  as  well  as  some  realtors  and  manufacturers,

are  apprehensive  that  recent  increases  in  mortgage  rates  may  curtail  the  current,  brisk

pace  of  growth.  Strength  in  the  tourist  industry  remains  concentrated  in  Florida  and

Georgia.  Adverse  weather  presages  declining  crop  revenues  in  the  troubled  agricultural

sector.

Employment  and  Industry.  Comments  from  industry  representatives  reinforce

the  strength  shown  by  the  latest  labor  market  statistics.  The  southeastern  unemployment

rate  in June  dropped  to single-digit  levels  for  the  first  time  in  eight  months.  Respondents

indicate  that  the  upturn  in  housing  and  auto  sales  has  boosted  production  in  the  textile

industry.  Georgia  mills  are  now  running  at  about  80  percent  of  capacity,  the  highest

utilization  rate  in  30  months.  For  the  first  time  in  three  years  some  Georgia  carpet

manufacturers  are  concerned  about  production  keeping  pace  with  demand: 

a  recent

uptick  in  the  price  of  carpet  yarn  suggests  acceleration  of  demand  growth.  North

Georgia  carpet  mills  produce  about  60  percent  of  American-made  carpets.

Southeastern  corporations  producing  timber-related  products  are  registering

marked  increases  in  activity; 

they  are  approaching  full  productive  capacity  and  95

percent  employment  levels.  However,  industry  contacts  are  concerned  about  the  possible

negative  effects  of  the  recent  rise  in  mortgage  rates.  Louisiana's  petrochemical  industry

VI-2

is  beginning  to  experience  a  general  increase  in  orders,  but  firms  are  not  yet  recalling

workers.

Consumer  Spending. 

Consumer 

spending 

is  maintaining 

the  strong

performance  reported  earlier  this  summer.  June  taxable  sales  in  the  District  rose  12.8

percent  from  1982  levels.  Increases  of  over  20  percent  in  Florida  and Georgia  outweighed

decreases  in  Louisiana  and  Tennessee.  Some  retailers  report  increases  in  June  of  up  to

40  percent  over  their  1982  levels.  Most  merchants  polled  expect  sales  figures  for  July

to  be  lower  than  in  June,  but  they  confidently  anticipate  back-to-school  sales  in  August

will  prove  strong.  June  was  the  best  month  yet  in  1983  for  new  motor  vehicle  sales  in

the  Southeast.  Georgia  led  the  District  in  sales.  Not  only  durables  and  home  furnishings

but  also  apparel  and  personal  luxury  items  are  moving  well  in  most  localities.  Merchants

expect  these  increases  to  continue  as  the  improved  housing  market  and  heightened

consumer  optimism  stimulate  new  purchases.  Retailers  report  little  effect  from  the

July  1  tax  cut  except  that  it  augmented  consumer  confidence.  A  number  of  retailers

point  to  the  increased  use  of  credit  as  an  indicator  of  growing  consumer  confidence  in

the  economic  recovery.

Construction.  A  month-long  increase 

in  mortgage  rates  during  July  has

raised  fears  that  the  pace  of  recovery  in  the  housing  industry  may  decelerate.  As  of

August  1,  FHA/VA  interest  rates  for  30-year,  fixed-rate  mortgages  increased  by  a  full

percentage  point  to  13.5  percent.  Because  FHA/VA  mortgage  rates  are  determined  at

closing,  some  home  buyers  will  not  be  able  to  close  loans  for  which  they  applied  up  to

nine  to  twelve  weeks  ago  when  rates  were  11.5  to  12.5  percent.  The  industry's  near-

term  outlook  for  mortgage  rates  is  mixed. 

Some  lenders  feel  that  rates  are  now

plateauing  and  will  decline  later  in  the  year,  but  others  believe  that  federal  deficits

will  continue  to  compete  for  funds  and  will  keep  mortgage  rates  high.  Although  the

rise 

in  mortgage  rates  should  reduce  required  discount  points,  the  higher  rates  will

VI-3

raise  minimum  income  levels  required  to  qualify  for  loans  and  thereby  eliminate  some

buyers.  Realtors  expect  the  rise  in  FHA/VA  rates  to  reduce  sales  by  5  to  8  percent.

According  to  real  estate  agents  polled,  residential  sales  remained  vigorous

through  July  although  sales  were  not  quite  as  strong  as  in  May  and  June.  Building

permit  activity  continued  an  upward  trend  through  June.  Single-family  permits  in  the

District  rose  by  2.2  percent.  Contacts  indicate  that  building  permits  were  holding  up

well  through  July. 

In  some  areas  single-family  permits  issued  were  running  50  percent

ahead  of  year-to-date  figures  for  last  year.  The  commercial  real  estate  sector  is

finally  gathering  some  momentum.  Leasing  companies  report  that  office  vacancy  rates

are  dropping  throughout  the  Southeast.  They  attribute  this  increased  activity  to  a

"recovery  psychology."  Reportedly,  many  managers  believe  the  recession  is  over  and

are  leasing  new  offices  before  increased  demand  begins  to  put  upward  pressure  on

leasing  prices.

Financial  Services.  Both  thrifts  and  commercial  banks  added  to  their  deposit

bases  in  June.  With  the  exception  of  business  loans,  which  backed  off  slightly  from

their  May  levels,  loan  demand  at  large  District  banks  continued  strong 

in  June.

Southeastern  bank  earnings,  at  several  Florida  institutions 

in  particular, 

improved 

in

the  first  half  of  1983  because  of  the  declining  cost  of  funds  and  growing  loan  activity.

The  improved  business  climate  seems  to  be  encouraging  regional  banks  to  introduce

innovations  and  expansion  of  services,  such  as  discount  securities  brokerages  and

statewide  automated  teller  networks.

Tourism.  The  travel  industry  is  faring best  in  Florida  and  Georgia.  Conditions

have  changed  little  since  June  except  for  an  apparent  slowing  of  the  "boom"  in  central

Florida.  Although  the  most  popular  attraction  is  doing  well,  its  margin  of  growth

relative  to  last  year  is  less  now  than  in  the  winter  and  spring,  and  occupancy  rates  at

central  Florida  hotels  have  dipped  somewhat  from  near  capacity  levels  earlier  this  year.

VI-4

Other  attractions,  particularly  in  south  Florida,  report  that  attendance  is  flat  or  off

from  1982  levels.  Miami's  cruise  ship  industry  is  suffering  from  overbuilding  and  price

cutting;  some  lines  are  offering  50  percent  discounts  on  fares.  However,  expansion

and  refurbishing  continue  in  anticipation  of  continuing  growth  in  certain  younger  markets.

Pass-through  traffic  into  Florida  is  contributing  to  the  strong  performance

of  Georgia's  tourism  industry.  The  Georgia  Hotel/Motel  Association  reports  that  hotel

occupancy  along  interstate  routes  is  quite  healthy.  Convention  business  in  Atlanta's

central  business  districts  has  been  off  10  percent  during  the  first  six  months;  however,

this  drop-off  may  be  more  a  lagged  effect  of  earlier  crime  problems  than  of  recent

economic  trends.  Overall  attendance  at  Georgia  attractions  is  more  than  18  percent

over  last  June. 

In  other  southeastern  states,  summer  tourist  business  has  been  off.

June  lodgings  tax  receipts  in  Mississippi,  Louisiana,  and  Tennessee  were  below  year-

ago  levels.  Attendance  at  a  number  of  Tennessee  attractions  also  is  below  last  year's

levels,  and  at  some  it  is  below  even  1981  levels.  Travelers  to  Tennessee's  largely

middle-income  tourist  market  are  reportedly  quite  cost-conscious.

Agriculture.  Recent  hot  and  dry  weather  throughout  most  of  the  Sixth

District 

is  having  a  severe  impact  on  crops,  especially  corn,  soybeans  and  cotton.

Soybeans  face  the  greatest  potential  loss  because  plantings  occurred  later  than  usual,

and  crops  lacked  sufficient  maturity  to  withstand  prolonged  dry  conditions.  Weather

seems 

to  have  had  the  least  effect  on  corn 

in  southernmost  parts  of  the  District

because  crops  there  are  near  maturity.  Reliable  estimates  of  yield  losses  are  not  yet

available,  but  preliminary  figures  suggest  a  decline  of  up  to  10  percent  on  average  and

a  concomitant  15-25  percent  drop  in  net  farm  revenue.  Reduced  acreage,  unfavorable

weather  conditions,  and  plant  diseases  augur  a  near  40  percent  reduction  in  revenue

for  the  District's  1983  tobacco  crop.

VII-1

SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.  The  outlook  for  total  business  activity  in the  Seventh

District  is still  favorable,  but  there  are  disturbing  signs.  Most  important,

the  modest  recovery  in housing  is seriously threatened  by  recent  increases  in

mortgage  interest  rates.  Secondly,  the  District's  important  producer goods

industries  have  shown  only  scattered  gains  from abysmal  levels.  Inventories

remain  lean,  overall,  and  are  not  expected to  increase  significantly  because

of  ready  availability of  new supplies.

Increases  in total  income and  employment  in the  District  since  last

December have  lagged  the  nation.  District employment  had  declined much  more

sharply  from the  prosperous  levels  of  the  late  1970's  than  the  national  total

and  this  gap has  widened  further.  The  strongest  sectors  have  been  home

construction,  full-sized  autos,  light  trucks,  furniture,  appliances,

recreational  vehicles,  and  defense equipment.  But  most  of  these  are  far  below

past  peaks.  Paperboard  shipments  have  increased  in line with  the  general

economy.  Steel  shipments will  be  up  in 1983,  but  probably  less  than  had  been

anticipated  earlier.  Retail  sales  are well  above  last  year,  with  both  hard

and  soft  goods  aided  by  hot weather.  Among  construction  materials,  demand  for

gypsum board  is strong  for  both  residential  and  nonresidential  uses.  Prices

are  rising  again,  on  average,  but  no  resurgence  of  general  inflation  is

foreseen  in the  months  immediately  ahead.

Corn  and  soybean  crops  in the  Corn  Belt  have  been  damaged

significantly  by  several  weeks of  hot,  dry weather.  Yields will  be  down  at

least  8-10  percent, possibly much more  if conditions  do not  improve  soon.

While  the  effect  of  lower  crop  yields  on  farm income  is probably positive,

farmers  have  sharply  reduced  purchases  of  operating  supplies  in  line with

reduced  needs.

VII-2

Heat Wave.  Most of  the  District  has  been afflicted  by  unusually warm

weather  since  mid-June.  Effects  on  economic  activity  have  been  multiplying.

Retail  sales  of  summer merchandise  have  been  stimulated.  Electric  power

consumption, mainly  because  of  air  conditioning,  has  set  new  records, with

electric  bills  further  inflated  by  high  summer  rates.  Traffic  through  housing

developments was  reduced,  in the  opinion  of  builders.  Finally,  crop  damage

from  hot, dry weather  is the  largest  in years.

Mortgage  Credit.  The  rise  in the  FHA/VA  rate  from 12.5  to  13.5

percent,  effective  August  1, merely  recognized the  increase  that  had  already

occurred  in market  rates.  The  going  rate on  30-year  conventionals  is now

14-14.5  percent,  up  almost  a full  percentage  point  in the  past month,  and  up

two  points  since  early  May.  The  rise  in mortgage  rates  has  taken  many

potential  buyers  out  of  the market.  Unless  rates  decline, the  peak  in housing

probably  is at  hand  if not already  passed.  Some  S&Ls  report a drop  of  40  to

50  percent  or  more  in loan applications  since  May.  Total  transactions  are  not

off  this  much  because mortgage  bankers  (and  some  S&Ls)  are  achieving

increasing  success  with programs  to  sell  home  buyers  on  various  types  of

adjustable  rate mortgages.

Construction--Residential.  Building permits  for  housing, which

remained  at  improved  levels  through  June,  may  have  slipped  in July.  In the

first  half,  single-family  permits  in the  Chicago area  were  more than  triple

last  year's  level,  but  apartment  permits  were  up  less  than  20  percent.

Despite the  large  increases  from  last year,  single-family  permits were  only

half  as  large  as  in the  comparable  period  of  1977  (the  record  level),  while

apartment  permits were  only  one-fifth  as  large.

Producer  Equipment.  Experience  of  producers  located  in the  Seventh

District generally  does  not  reflect  the  improvement  indicated  by  national

aggregate  data  on  orders,  production,  and  purchases  of  equipment.  The

VII-3

difference is traceable  to the  relatively  small  involvement  here  in electronic

equipment--data  processing,  communications,  and  robotics--which  is doing

well.  There  has  been  a small  rise  in demand  for  heavy  trucks  and  trailers,

but  demand  for most  types  of  equipment  for  construction,  agriculture,

electricity generation,  railroads,  mining, oil  and  gas  well  drilling,

materials  handling, and  metalworking has  remained  very  slow.  In some  cases

operations  are  at  the  lowest  level  since the  1930s.  Some  plants  are  closed

for  good  and  others  have  been  idle for  6 months  or  more  at  a time.  Domestic

producers  of  equipment  often  have  large  margins  of  excess  capacity,  and  much

good  used  equipment  is available.  In addition,  there have  been  sharp declines

in  exports  to  OPEC  nations.  Imports  have  increased,  particularly  from Japan.

In many  cases,  imports  (including a widening  range  of  equipment  and

components)  are  of  excellent quality.  Imports  are  readily  available at  low

prices and  on  favorable  credit  terms.

Employment.  In the  first  half  of  1983  the  rate  of  increase  in

payroll  employment  in Michigan  exceeded  the  national  increase  as  auto  firms

recalled  workers.  Data  for  Illinois,  Indiana,  and Wisconsin  showed  smaller

percentage  increases  than  the  nation,  while  Iowa  showed  no  rise at  all.  For

the  five  states  combined,  payroll  employment  in the  second  quarter  was  10

percent below  the  level  of  1979,  while manufacturers'  employment  was  off  25

percent.  Hiring  intentions  are  somewhat  stronger  than  last  year,  but  there  is

no  near-term prospect  of  significantly  reducing  the  shortfall  relative  to

1979.  Many  companies  that  reduced employment  by  one  third  to  over  one  half

have  no  intention  of  rehiring  significant  numbers.  Recruitment of  new

graduates  at  colleges  is down  10  percent  from last  year,  and  down  40  percent

from two  years  ago.  Help-wanted  advertising  in Chicago-area papers was  10

percent  above  last  year  in the  past two  months,  but  it was  less  than half  of

1981  volume.

VII-4

Consumer  Purchases.  Consumer  buying  has  increased  in the  District in

the  first  half  of  1983,  but  not  as  much  as  in the  nation--according to

national  chains.  Hot  weather  permitted  large  sales  of  summer merchandise with

less  price  discounting  than  last  year.  All  types  of  appliances  have  been

selling  well.  Room air  conditioners  have  been  the  star,  with  shortages  of

some  models.  RVs  are  up  50  percent,  and  furniture  up  30  percent  from  1982.

Sales  of  full-sized domestic  cars  and  many  popular  imports  would have  been

even  stronger  if larger  numbers  had  been  available.  Despite  favorable  sales

trends  in most consumer durables,  physical  volume  is still  well  below the  peak

years  of  the  1970s.  Retail  inventories,  overall,  are  somewhat  low  relative  to

sales  based  on  historical  comparisons.  However, additional  supplies  of  most

general  merchandise are  available  within  one  or  two  days.  Blanket  orders  for

general  merchandise  already negotiated  indicate  that  significant  price

increases  will  not  occur  this year.

Agriculture.  Extremely  hot,  dry weather  during  the  second  half  of

July  apparently  resulted  in extensive  damage  to  spring  plantings  in the  Corn

Belt.  Local  analysts  believe that  damage  through  the  end  of  July  lowered

probable corn  yields  by  a tenth  from last year  and  soybean  yields  by  8

percent.  Prospective  yield  declines,  coupled  with  sharp  cuts  in acreage  under

federal  programs,  may  reduce corn  and  soybean  harvests  by  36  and  20  percent,

respectively.

Weather damage  varies  throughout  the  District,  but  it is most

extensive  in central  and  southern  Illinois  and  Indiana  and  southern  Iowa.

Further damage  is possible if the  hot,  dry  conditions  extend  into mid-August

as  some  weather  forecasters  predict.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT  - ST.  LOUIS

Economic expansion continued during  June and July in  the  Eighth

District,  and most respondents anticipate  that their activity will  rise

further during  the  fall  and winter.  Although July is typically a slow

month for  production, with  some  plants  closed for taking  inventories, model

changeovers  and vacations,  the  interruption  this year was  less  than  usual.

The greatest strength,  both  in  retailing  and manufacturing, was  in  consumer

durable  goods, while  the weakest area continued to be  in  business capital

goods.  Total  employment has  risen  slowly.  Hot and dry weather has

prevailed over most of  the  District, and it is  critical  for crops  that a

soaking  rain  come soon.

Outlook

The  average forecast made  in  late July  by  11  members  of the St.

Louis Chapter of the  National  Association of Business Economists was  that

real  GNP  would  rise  at  a  5.9  percent  annual  rate  in  the  last  half  of  1983

and  that  the  price  deflator  would  increase  at  a  4.7  percent  pace. 

The

chief  longer-run  concern  was  the  threat  of  accelerating  inflation  resulting

from  continued  growth  of  government  spending  and  rapid  monetary  expansion.

Sales

Sales at seven  District retail  stores were 9 percent higher  in

June and July than  in  the corresponding months  last year.  Promotional

activities  played  a  role  in  generating  sales,  while  the  July  tax  cut

provided  additional  buying  power.  Most  lines  sold  well,  especially

appliances and other consumer durables.

VIII-2

District  automobile  sales  continued  to  be  strong  in  June  and

July.  One  large  St.  Louis  dealer  reported  sales  40  percent  above  year  ago

levels;  he attributed the rise to incentives offered  the consumer,

particularly the  low  subsidized interest rates.  Used car and truck  sales

were also  sizable.  One major dealer sold more used cars  in June and July

than  any two months  on record.

Home  sales  in the Memphis  and St.  Louis areas, which  began

weakening in May,  remained rather sluggish  in June and July.  The hot

weather and  increased mortgage  rates and home prices contributed to  the

slowdown.  Housing starts  in the District,  however, remained large.  In

greater Louisville,  a number of new  homes are being  built in older

subdivisions that had been  dormant, and in the St. Louis area housing

starts were  triple the  level  of June and July 1982.

Manufacturing

Most industrial  firms in the District reported further increases

in orders  and shipments since  May.  Two of the companies making  business

equipment, which had reported no improvement earlier,  noted a small  gain  in

orders.  On  the  other  hand,  a  major  glass  container  firm  announced  it  would

permanently  close  a  plant  in  early  October,  resulting  in  the  loss  of  over

300  jobs;  at  the  peak,  this  plant  employed  2,400  people.

Inventories  at  most  District  firms  are  near  desired  levels,  but  a

recent survey  found that  about a third of the manufacturing companies

planned to  increase  inventories this fall.  A few firms, which  raised the

prices  of their products moderately, could not make the higher prices stick.

VIII-3

Employment

Total  employment  rose  modestly  in  the  District  in  June  and  July  as

firms in the  automobile  and aircraft assembly, airline, construction,

retail  trade, printing, paper products and service  industries added

workers.  In addition,  one automobile  company announced that it will  recall

3,100 workers  in September, and another will  recall  1,500 in the near

future.  A few business firms and local  governments, however, were  still

reducing their work  forces,  primarily through attrition.

Finance

A survey  of eight savings and loan  associations  in the Louisville

and Memphis  regions  found that, in June,  the dollar volume  of mortgage

loans made and acquired was  about four times greater  than  in June  of last

year.  Moreover,  during that month  these  associations were  able to  reduce

Federal  Home  Loan Bank  and other  borrowings.  At large District banks,

consumer installment loans rose  substantially, and commercial  and

industrial  loans increased moderately  in June  and July.  On the other hand,

outstanding  real  estate credit at these banks drifted lower.

Agriculture

The hot dry  weather over much  of the District  since mid-June  has

adversely affected the corn,  soybean and tobacco crops.  Some  areas went

seven weeks without a substantial  rain.  Although  there has been

irreversible  damage,  harvests are still  expected to be  sizable  if rain

falls  in the  next week or  so.  Vegetable, peach and apple crops  also have

been severely  affected.  In addition, dairy farmers probably will  be facing

higher operating costs  because of the  drought damage  to the alfalfa crop.

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Signs  of  the  economic  upturn  continue  to  be  evident  in  the  dis-

trict. 

Consumer  spending  for  general  merchandise,  autos,  and  housing  are

up.  Tourism  is  helping to  maintain  the  momentum.  There  is  strong  demand  for

products  produced  by  several  important  industrial  sectors,  and  the  financial

sector  is  busy.  Employment  is  up  slightly.  However, agricultural performance

is  still  mixed,  and mining  related business  is  still  depressed.

Consumer  Spending:  Despite  oppressively muggy weather, the  recovery

fueled  increase  in consumer  spending  shows no  sign  of  ending.  Leading the  way

are  large  Twin  Cities  retailers,  who  continue  to  report  healthy  sales  in-

creases  in  the  district.  One  reported  its  best  sales  in  two  years,  while

another  is  experiencing  its  best  June  and  July  in  "a great  many years."  The

region's  largest  retailer  had  a whopping  sales  increase over  the

previous month.  Sales  in cities  appear to be  strongest.  Another indicator  of

retail  strength  is 

the  5  percent  increase  in  sales  tax  revenues  paid  in  one

district  state  to date.

Housing  activity  is  continuing to  build.  Twin  Cities  housing  sales

for the  first  half of 1983  finished around 40  percent higher than  in  the  first

half  of  1982.  June  sales  were  up  over  15  percent  from  May  sales  and  South

Dakota  sales  were  up  35  percent  over  the  same  period.  Building  permits  in

Minneapolis/St.  Paul  are  running  at  close  to  twice  the  rate  of  a  year  ago.

Condominium  and 

luxury  home  building  appear 

to  be  particularly  strong 

in

Billings,  Montana.  Activity  is  also up  in Fargo  and Bismarck, North Dakota.

IX-2

In  addition  to  the  positive  economic  outlook,  state  low-interest

housing  programs  are  helping  the  trend  to  continue.  South  Dakota and  Minne-

sota housing programs  seem particularly  active.

Auto  sales  are  also  moving  ahead  at  a  rapid  clip.  One  of  the  big

four  domestic  manufacturers  said  that  June was  its  best  month in  Minnesota in

three  years.  The  trend  is  evident  in  other  district  states,  too.  From  the

Upper  Peninsula  of  Michigan  to  Montana, district  directors  report  auto  sales

to  be  good. 

Large  automobile  sales  have  been  particularly  strong  in  South

Dakota, showing a 60 percent  sales  gain  over 1982.

Competitive  factory  financing  and  an  imminent  sales  tax  increase  in

Minnesota  are  complementing  the  economic  upturn  in  producing  these  good  fig-

ures.

Tourism: 

Tourism  plays  a  large  role  in  the  district's  summer  eco-

nomic  picture,  and  provides  further  evidence  of  the  district's  improving

condition.  Tourist  information  inquiries  were  up  10  percent  over  a year  ago

in  both  Montana  and  Minnesota, and  are  also  higher  in  the  Upper  Peninsula of

Michigan  and  in  the  Indianhead  region  of  northwestern  Wisconsin.  Mount  Rush-

more,  South Dakota  had 28 percent  more visitors  over the July  4th weekend this

year  than  last  year.  The  majority  of  respondents  to  a July  survey  of  Minne-

sota  resorts  reported  that  business  was  up  this  summer, and  that  they plan  to

invest  in  resort  expansion  projects.  Sundecks,  for  example,  are  a popular

investment.  Similar  sentiments  are  reported  in  Montana.

The  economy  affects  more  than  just  the  number  of  visitors,  though.

Many  tourism  officials  perceived  a trend  toward  shorter  vacations,  with less

lengthy  stays  at  resorts.  One  official  attributed  this  to  consumer  uncer-

tainty  about  the  economic  outlook.

IX-3

Industrial  Activity:  Signs  of  improvement  continue  to  be  seen,  with

some  exceptions.  In  Minnesota, one  large  multi-sectoral manufacturing concern

reports  that  unit  sales  are  much  further  ahead  than  a year  ago.  A  manufac-

turer  of  large  computer  mainframes  is  having  trouble  meeting  the unexpectedly

strong demand  for  its  products.  A logging equipment manufacturer in  the Upper

Peninsula  of  Michigan  has  hired  more  workers.  And  other  sectors  in  the  wood

product  industry  report  encouraging  signs,  too.  Both  waferboard  and  coated

printing  paper  demand  is  very  strong.  Even  with  increased  demand,  though,

South  Dakota  manufacturing is  still well below capacity.  And as  reported  last

month, mining and  its  related  industries are  still  in  a bad  state.  A taconite

operation,  open  during  June  in  Minnesota,  closed  recently  and  won't  reopen

until late October.

The  economic  upturn  is  not  the  only  reason  for  these  generally  en-

couraging  signs.  Some  firms  report  that  the  recession  forced  them to  adopt

improved  cost  containment  and managerial strategies,  which  are contributing to

a healthy profit outlook.

Agricultural  Conditions: 

Agricultural  conditions  are  still  mixed.

While  the  dry  conditions  in  Montana  were  somewhat  alleviated  by  recent  rains

in  the  northeast  section  of  the  state,  crops  are  still  reported  to be  in  only

fair to  good  condition  statewide.  The  northwestern and western parts  of  South

Dakota are  still  suffering  from drought conditions.  Also,  corn borer  infesta-

tions  are  widely  reported.  But,  while  crop  conditions  are  behind  normal  in

Minnesota, they  are  catching  up.  And  in  North  Dakota  and  the  rest  of  South

Dakota,  crop  conditions  are  good  to  excellent. 

Price  performance  is  also

mixed.  While  corn  prices  are  moving  up,  soybean  and  wheat  prices  are  only

IX-4

holding  equal to  last year's  low prices.  A recent  survey of district  agricul-

tural lenders  showed that  farm spending was  no  higher than  it  was  last year.

Employment:  Employment  conditions continue to  improve  throughout  the

district.  The  seasonally  adjusted  district  unemployment  rate  fell  in  June to

8.0  percent,  down  from 8.5  percent  in  April  and  8.2  percent in  May.  District

employment  grew  about  10,000  workers  in  June,  the  first  such  increase  since

January.  A director  reports  that  South  Dakota  Job  Service  placements  are  way

up,  and  the  Conference  Board's  Help  Wanted  Advertising  Index  corroborates

these  data.  The  Minneapolis  index  was  16  percent  higher  in  June  than  in  May,

and was  13  percent  higher than  in  June 1982.

District  employment  should continue to  improve as  output  and  capacity

utilization  pick up.

Financial  Developments:  District  member banks'  performance  reflects

the  recent  strength  of  the  district  economy.  Total  lending  in  June  and  July

was  up  by  nearly  a billion  dollars,  with  both  country  banks  and  large  Twin

Cities  banks  sharing  in  the  growth.  Total  deposits  also  grew  substantially

during  this  period,  although  a few  large  Twin  Cities  banks'  deposits  fell  in

July.  When  compared  to  July  1982,  total  loans  and  deposits  grew  in  July  by

14.3  and  9.6 percent,  respectively.

TENTH  DISTRICT-KANSAS  CITY

Overview.  The business  recovery  in the  Tenth District  appears  to be

quickening,  led by strong  growth  in  retail  sales  in recent  weeks.  New car

sales  are  improving, with  some depletion of  stocks  below desired  levels.

Other  retail  inventories,  as well  as  materials  inventories,  are generally

viewed  as  satisfactory.  A moderate  slowdown in  housing activity  is  expected

for  the  rest  of  the  year, with  demand for mortgage funds weak at  thrift

institutions.  Record yields were recorded  in  the  harvest of winter wheat,

but  corn yields will suffer  if  extreme high  temperatures  continue.  Loan

demand  at  commercial  banks has  increased moderately, with  most of  the  increase

in  consumer  loans.  Deposits  are  also up  moderately.

Retail  Trade.  Retailers  report nominal  sales  gains  in  the  3 to  10  percent

range  for  the  first  half  of  1983  compared  to  the  same  period a year  earlier,

with  particularly strong  growth in  the  past 4 to  8 weeks.  Sales  of  apparel

are  showing  considerable strength  due  in  part  to  the  beginning  of  back-to-

school  sales.  Retailers  expect  sales  to  continue growing  through  the

remainder  of  1983.  Inventory  levels  are  generally  satisfactory, and  little

further  correction  in  these  levels  is  expected  during  the  rest  of  the  year.

Purchasing Agents.  For  about  half  of  the firms  contacted,  input prices

remain lower  than  in July  of  last year.  But most  input prices  either have

increased  over  the  last  three  months  or have  quit  falling.  Most  purchasing

agents  expect prices  to  increase  somewhat  over  the rest  of  the year,

although  a few  foresee no  further  changes.  Firms  are  generally  satisfied

with current  inventory  levels  and  plan to  keep  inventories  low as  the  recovery

proceeds.

X-2

Auto  Dealers.  Automobile dealers  report  improved  sales  in  the  first

half  of  1983  compared  to  the  first  half  of  1982.  Dealers  have  depleted  their

stocks  of  1983  model  cars,  in  part  because  of  the  attractive rates  offered

by  captive  financing  companies.  Inventories  of  larger  cars  are especially  low.

Most  dealers  express  optimism  about  the  outlook  for  car  sales but  state  that

sales  could be adversely  affected  by  increases  in  interest  rates.

Housing Activity  and  Finance.  Housing  starts  are  about  double last  year's

rate, with  single-family  starts  improving more  than multi-family  starts.  Because

sales  of  new homes  are  also  higher,  inventories  remain low.  For  the  rest  of

1983,  the  improvement  in housing  starts  is  expected  to  moderate  because  of

recent  increases  in  interest  rates  and  uncertainty  about  future  rates.  Even with

a moderate  slowdown, however,  housing  starts  this  year  are  expected  to  signifi-

cantly  exceed  housing  starts  last  year.  Most  savings  and  loan  associations

report  an  improvement  in savings  inflows  in  the  first half  of  1983  compared  to

the  first half  of  1982,  and  continued  improvement  is  expected  through  the  third

quarter.  Mortgage  rates  range from  12  percent  on variable  rate mortgages  to

13  5/8  percent  on  fixed  rate mortgages.  At  those  levels,  demand for  mortgage

funds  is  reported  to  be weak at  almost  all  institutions.  Mortgage rates  are

expected  to  remain  steady  until near  the end  of  1983  and  then  decline  slightly.

Agriculture.  Harvesting  of  winter wheat  throughout  the  Tenth District

is  virtually  complete  with record  crop  yields.  Most wheat  farmers  stayed  with

the  PIK  (Payment-In-Kind) program  resulting  in  a  significant  amount  of  wheat

being  plowed  under  to  comply with  acreage  restrictions.  Some  District  farmers

receiving  PIK  payments have used  the  receipts  from sales  for  debt  repayment, but

most  grain  received  is  being held  rather  than  sold  in  the market.  Corn  growers

report  little  damage yet  from persistent high  temperatures  but damage will  likely

escalate  sharply  if  the heat  persists.  Corn released  from  the  reserve program

is  being  held for  cattle  feeding rather  than being  sold  in  the market.  The

overall condition of  livestock  in  the District is  good,  in spite  of  slower  weight

gain in  cattle  due  to  heat  related  factors.  There is  little  evidence  of  herd

expansion activity by hog  producers.  Although farmland  values  throughout  the

Tenth District  are  reported by  bankers  to  be  stabilizing  or  rising  slightly,  not

much land is  changing hands.  The PIK program  appears  to be  aiding  farmers  as

they  have increased loan  repayments  and  are making  fewer  requests  for  renewals

or  extensions  of  existing  credit.

Banking.  Tenth District banks  report  a moderate  increase  in  loan demand

due mainly  to  growth in  consumer  loans,  especially  automobile  loans.  Although

residential  mortgage lending  also  increased,  the  demand  for home  loans  is

expected  to  decline sharply  in  the  coming  months  as  mortgage rates  drift  upward.

Commercial  and  industrial loans  increased very slightly  at  Tenth District banks,

and  agricultural  lending  remains  flat  throughout  the  District.  Tenth District

banks  report  no  change  in  loan quality  since  last  month's survey.  The  prime

lending rate  is  10.5  to  11  percent,  unchanged  from  last month.  Deposits  are up

moderately at  Tenth District banks.  Growth  in money  market  deposit accounts,

money market  certificates,  and  small saver  certificates  is  responsible  for  most

of  this  increase.  About  half  the  responding  banks  report  increases  in IRA and

Keogh accounts.  Demand  deposits,  conventional NOW  accounts,  and  Super-NOW

accounts  remain  constant.  Tenth  District banks  are  allowing  large  CDs  to  run

off,  reflecting  expectations  of  only  modest  loan  demand  in  the  immediate  future.

XI-1

ELEVENTH DISTRICT-DALLAS

The  recovery  in  the  Eleventh  District  is  strengthening despite

continued 

weakness 

in 

energy-dependent 

manufacturing. 

Industrial

production in Texas  has  been  climbing  since  last December.  Residential  and

retail  construction  is  booming. 

Retail  sales  are  up  in  most  major

metropolitan areas,  but  sales  in energy-dependent  communities  and  along  the

Mexican  border  remain  well  below  year-earlier  levels. 

Oil  and  gas

drilling,  production  of  oilfield  equipment,  and  the energy  service sector

remain weak, but  some  signs  of  improvement  have  emerged.

Manufacturing  production  in  this  District  is  responding 

to

increased  demands  from the  construction  industry and  from  sectors tied  to

the national  recovery.  The  turnaround  in  these  sectors  has  been sufficient

to  overshadow  energy-related  weakness. 

Total  manufacturing  employment

increased  in  June,  the  first  increase  in more  than  a year. 

Strong  demand

for  primary  metals,  construction  supplies,  and  electronics  pushed  durable

goods  production up  despite declines  in  fabricated metals  and nonelectrical

machinery. 

Oil  drilling  activity  recently  picked  up,  but  production  of

oilfield  equipment  is  not  expected  to  respond  until excess  inventories have

been worked off  by  the  first half  of  1984.  Increased  production in  apparel

and  chemical  industries  together with higher  operating rates  at  Texas  oil

refineries  helped  to  accelerate  growth  in nondurable  goods  production.

XI-2

Residential construction  is  still  the  strongest  sector  in  the

District  economy.  Apartment and  condominium  construction  is  proceeding

faster  than  ever  before  in most  of  the major  SMSAs  in  Texas.  Occupancy

rates  continue  to  fall,  and  respondents  are  concerned  that  the market  will

be  tremendously  overbuilt  by  the  time new projects  are  completed.  Starts

of  single-family homes  are  roughly twice  last  year's  slow rate,  but  rising

mortgage  rates  may  curtail  activity  during the  second half  of  this  year.

Builders  expect  the  recent  increase  in  the  FHA/VA  rates  to  reduce  sales  to

first-time  home buyers.

The 

year-to-date  permit  value  of  commercial  construction  is

slightly below last  year's level.  This  reflects  the  slowdown  in new office

projects  in  Dallas  and  Houston.  Office  construction in other  Texas  SMSAs

is  accelerating.  Moreover,  some  of  the  slack  in  the  Dallas  and  Houston

markets  is  being offset by  increases  in retail,  industrial, and  government

construction projects.

Projections  of  farm income  in  Texas  have  been  adjusted  downward

for  1983  because  of  drought  conditions  in West Texas.  In-kind  transfer

payments  from the PIK program will  tend  to mitigate  income  losses. 

Crop

yields  on  PIK acres  are  likely  to be higher  than yields  on  planted  acres.

Texas  ranchers have  a higher  proportion of  the nation's  cattle-on-feed this

year  than  last.  This  will  result  in  a greater  share  of  revenues  as  well.

Department  store  sales  for  the District  are  only  slightly  ahead of

last  year's,  largely because  of year-over-year  sales  declines  along  the

Border  and  energy-dependent  Gulf  areas.  In  non-energy dependent  regions,

the  highest  rate  of  sales  gains  are  reported  for  home  appliances,

XI-3

furniture,  and  home  furnishings.  Growth in  apparel  sales  slowed  in  July

but  this  reflects  a normal  seasonal  occurrence. 

Moderate  increases  were

reported  throughout May  and  June.  Sales  in  the Border  areas  are  stable  to

increasing but well  below a year earlier. 

Houston  area  sales  fell  off

again  in  July  after  showing some  signs  of  life  in May  and June.

Auto  sales  remain relatively  strong and  are  increasing  throughout

the District.  Sales  in  June  and  July were well  above  year-earlier  levels

when  special  incentive  financing  plans were  not  being used.  Auto  sales

picked  up  in Houston  during  the  last  two  months  after  being  stable  at  low

levels  for  almost  a year.  Availability is  becoming a growing problem  for

dealers  in  the  stronger markets.  Accordingly, respondents  are  planning  to

place  larger  orders  for  1984 models.

District  member banks  are  still  facing  slack  loan  demand,  largely

because of  sluggish business  loan  demand.  Growth in  business  loans  at  the

large  banks  has  been  trending  downwards  since  the  fourth  quarter of  1982.

This  has  been offset  with an  increase  in  security  purchases  and  real  estate

lending. 

Long-term  financing  of  large  real  estate  projects has picked up

through  the  use  of  "mini-perms,"  7-  to  10-year  fixed  rate  financing

packages. 

Deposit  trends  have not  changed.  Demand  and  time  deposits  have

slowly declined while  growth  in  savings  deposits  continues  strong.

XII-1

TWELFTH  DISTRICT --  SAN  FRANCISCO

In  recent weeks,  the  recovery  in Twelfth District  economic  activity has  gained

momentum, with  nearly  all  manufacturing  and  mining  industries  experiencing some

degree of  improvement  in orders.  Consumer  spending  increased  at  an  accelerated  pace,

widening  year-to-year  gains  in  retail  sales.  Western homebuilding  activity  also

continued  to  pick up  through  June,  in  contrast  to  the  national  slowdown.  In  the

manufacturing  sector,  even  the  capital  goods  industries  are  reporting  increased

demand.  While  the  recovery  appears  to  be  extending  into  the  third  quarter,  a

slowdown  in home  sales  in July  suggests  that  the  pace  could  slacken.  Commercial  and

industrial  lending  at  Twelfth District banks  continues  to  be  weak, but  the  weakness

is  due  to  firms'  improved  cash  flow  and  access  to  the  bond  and  equity markets.

Moreover,  although District  banks  have  begun  to  experience a  slight  outflow  from

MMDA's,  that  movement has  been  offset by  a  shift  into  longer-term and  higher yielding

consumer  certificates.

Consumer  Spending

Respondents  throughout  the  Twelfth District  report  that  retail  sales  have  been

rising  at  an  accelerated  pace.  Major  department  store  chains  in Southern  California

reported  that  sales  rose  sharply  in June  and  ran  nearly  17  percent  above  the  year-

earlier  level.  In  the Pacific  Northwest,  sales  at  some major  stores  were  up  as  much

as  30  percent.  Business  apparently  remained  strong  through  July.  Since  competition

for  sales  is  extremely  intense  and  prices  are  up  only  a  few  percentage  points,  most

of  the  gain  represents  increased volume.  Retailers  report  that  inventories  are  low

and  they are  not  planning  any  significant  buildup  as  long  as  the  price  increases

realized  on merchandise  remain  small  relative  to  interest  carrying  costs.  Sales  of

durable  goods,  including  expensive  items  such as  furniture  and  appliances,  are  rising

XII-2

even  faster  than  nondurables.  Consumer  credit  outstanding is  growing, but  the

delinquency  rate  is  declining.  Sales  of  automobiles  have  been  rising  far  above  year-

earlier  levels  and would be  greater  if  some  models were more  readily  available.

Manufacturing  and Mining

The  recovery has  now  extended  in varying  degrees  to  nearly all  Twelfth  District

manufacturing  and mining industries,  except  those  engaged  in  energy  production.  The

important  lumber  industry, which was  one  of  the  first  sectors  to  show  improvement

because of  the  turnaround  in  national  homebuilding activity,  continues  to  boost

production  and  employment,  despite  some  recent weakness  in  lumber  prices.  The

aluminum,  copper  and  other metal  industries  are  raising  their  capacity  utilization

rates  as  orders  continue  to  strengthen  from  such  important metal  consumers  as  the

automobile,  appliance,  container  and housing  industries.  Even  the  West's  major

capital  goods  producing  industries--including  those  that manufacture machinery,

electronic  equipment,  trucks  and  aircraft--are  experiencing a modest pickup  in

orders.  Not  only has  consumer  and  defense  demand  for  these  goods  increased,  but

business  demand  has  risen.  Improved  airline  profitability is  finally  enabling  the

world's  airlines  to  boost  orders  for  commercial  aircraft.

Construction and  Real  Estate

Through June,  indicators  of housing  activity  in  the  West were  exceedingly

strong.  Regional  housing  starts  continued  to  rise  to  a level more  than  double  that

of  a year  earlier,  and  permit  activity  pointed  to  still  further  gains  in  the months

ahead.  But  in  the  last  month  as  mortgage  interest  rates  have  risen, home  sales  are

reported  to  have  slowed.  As  yet,  there are  no  signs  of  overbuilding.  Developers

have  been proceeding  very cautiously,  building mainly  on  a pre-sold basis  and  holding

their  speculative  units  to  a minimum.  But  many respondents  fear  that  even  a modest

further  increase  in mortgage  rates,  say  50  basis  points,  could  cause  a substantial

XII-3

decline  in  residential  construction  during  the  second  half  of  1983.  Even with  the

recent  increase  in  rates,  they  expect  the  average  level  of  starts  during the  last  six

months  to  be moderately  lower  than  the  hectic  first-half  pace.  They  point  out  that

the majority  of  the  new units  started have  been in  the  lower-price  category  aimed  at

the  first-time buyer  and  that  the  recent  increase  in  conventional  mortgage  rates  to

nearly  14  percent will  price  a sizeable number  of  potential  homebuyers  out  of  the

market.  Some  builders  already are beginning  to  "buy  down" mortgages  once  again  to

keep  effective  interest  rates  affordable.  In the  nonresidential  construction  sector,

activity  continues  to  lag behind  the  year-earlier  pace  as  vacancy  rates  remain  high

for  office  and  other  commercial buildings.  The  rising  level  of  permits  issued  points

to  increased  spending  in  the  months  ahead however.

Agriculture

California  farmers  have been  experiencing  sharply  declining  prices  for  fruits

and  vegetables  in  the  past  two months  as  crops  have been higher  than had  been

predicted  when flooding  early  in  the  year  caused  late  plantings.  Prices  for  these

items  are  still  above  levels  of  a year  ago,  however,  and  California  farmers  are

expected  to  experience  a year-to-year  increase  in net  income  from  fruits  and

vegetables.  The  heavy winter  rains  also  have  had  a positive  side  effect  in  working

down  excess  inventories  of  many tree  crops  at  higher  prices.  California  farmers  also

are  expected  to  benefit greatly  from  the  combined  effects  of  the Federal  payment-in-

kind  (PIK) program and  the Midwestern  drought  in boosting  prices  for  cotton  and

grains.  The  Federal  government  is  having problems  fulfilling  its  PIK  inventory

return obligation  to  California  cotton  growers,  however,  in  that  those  farmers  do  not

have  sufficient  cotton  under  loan  to  the  government  to  compensate  for  the  huge

acreage  taken  out  of  production.  Elsewhere  throughout  the  District,  smaller  gains  in

net  farm  income  are  expected, except  perhaps  in Utah, where net  income  could  be  down

because  of  recent  flood  damage  to  the  farm  sector.

XII-4

Financial  Institutions

Commercial  and  industrial  lending at  Twelfth District  banks  has  shown  continued

weakness  in  recent  weeks,  following  the  typical  pattern  in  the  early  stage  of

recovery.  Banks  attribute much of  the  weakness  to  improvement  in  sales  and  cash

flow, which  is  reducing  their  need  for  bank financing.  The  inventory  liquidation

which has  accompanied  increased  sales  has  reduced  their  need  for  short-term  bank

borrowing, while weakness  in  capital  spending  continues  to  depress  businesses'  need

for  long-term bank  financing.  In  addition,  the  improvement  in  bond  and  equity

markets  has  given  large  firms  the  opportunity to  turn  to  those  sources  for  long-term

capital.  Banks  in  the  region  also have  begun  to  experience  their  first  outflows  from

MMDA's  which had  risen  to  over  21  percent  of  their  total  deposits.  Since  mid-June,

both  industrial  and  business  MMDA's  at  District banks  have  shown  slight  declines.

However,  the  slight  outflow appears  to  have  been offset  by  a shift  into  longer-term

consumer certificates  as  depositors  attempt  to  lock  in  relatively attractive  long-

term  rates.

