FEDERAL  RESERVE  press  release 

For Use  at  4:30 p.m. 

July 20, 1984 

The  Federal Reserve Board  and  the  Federal  Open Market 

Committee today  released  the attached record  of policy actions 

taken by  the Federal Open Market  Committee  at  its meeting on 

May  21-22,  1984.  

Such records  for  each meeting of  the Committee  are made 

available a few days  after  the next  regularly  scheduled meeting 

and  are  published  in the Federal Reserve Bulletin  and  the Board's 

Annual Report.  The  summary descriptions  of  economic  and  financial 

conditions  they  contain are  based  solely on the  information that 

was  available  to  the  Committee  at  the time  of  the meeting.

Attachment

RECORD  OF  POLICY ACTIONS OF  THE 
FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 

Meeting Held  on May  21-22,  1984 

Domestic policy directive 

The information reviewed  at  this meeting suggested  that  growth in 

real  GNP, while moderating from  the  annual rate  of  8-3/4  percent  recorded 

for the first  quarter, was  continuing  at a relatively  rapid  pace  in the 

current quarter.  Thus  far  in  1984,  average prices,  as measured  by  the  fixed

weight  index for  gross domestic  business  product, appeared  to  be  increasing 

at  about  the  same  rate  as  in  1983.  

Industrial  production rose  nearly 1-1/2  percent  in April,  after 

slowing  to  an  increase of  1/2  percent in  March.  Gains  in April were  widespread 

across most major product and material categories.  Auto  production declined, 

however,  primarily reflecting reduced  output  at  plants  producing  small cars 

and  the  less popular large-size models.  Some  plants  producing fast-selling 

models were  encountering capacity  constraints.  The  rate  of  capacity utiliza

tion in manufacturing rose  1 percentage  point  further  in April to  82.3  percent, 

somewhat above  the 81.8  percent  average  for  the  1967-82  period.  

Nonfarm payroll  employment  surged  by 400,000  in April.  The  rise was 

attributable  in  large  part  to  a rebound  in employment  at  construction sites 

after a weather-related  decline in March and  to  substantial  employment  gains 

in  service industries.  In manufacturing, employment  rose  by  100,000,  about 

the  same  as  the  average monthly increase over  the previous  twelve  months,  and 

the  length of  the average  factory workweek reached 41.2  hours, its  highest

5/21-22/84

-2-

level  in nearly two  decades.  Despite  continued gains  in employment,  the 

civilian unemployment rate was  unchanged at  7.8 percent  in March and April, 

as  the labor  force  increased appreciably.  

Total retail  sales  climbed  2.9 percent  in April, about  offsetting 

declines  in  the  preceding two months.  Sales  gains were  reported  at  all 

major types  of  stores but  were particularly strong  at  automotive  outlets 

and  at  general  merchandise, apparel,  and  furniture  and  appliance  stores.  

Sales  of new domestic automobiles, which had  dipped  in March, rebounded 

in April  to  an  annual  rate  of  8-1/4 million units  and  then  surged  to  a rate 

of  about 8-3/4 million units  in  early May.  

In April,  private  housing  starts  recovered  from  a sizable decline in 

March and,  at  an annual  rate of  nearly 2 million units,  matched  their  advanced 

first-quarter  pace.  Building permits  for residential  construction were  un

changed  in April  at  an annual  rate  of  slightly more  than  1.7 million units, 

somewhat  below the  level earlier  in  the year.  In  the  first  quarter,  sales  of 

new houses  continued  at  about  the  same  pace  as  in the  fourth quarter  of  1983, 

while  sales  of  existing homes  rose  appreciably.  

Business  investment  spending moderated from the  extraordinarily 

rapid rate  of  expansion  in  the  second  half  of  1983,  but remained  brisk.  

In  real  terms,  fixed  investment  spending  rose  at  an  annual rate  of  about 

14-3/4  percent in  the  first  quarter.  Data on shipments  and  new orders  of 

nondefense  capital  goods  have moved erratically in recent  months;  both 

series  declined sharply  in April  after exhibiting  considerable strength  in 

some  earlier months of  1984.  But  other recent  information, including  survey 

reports  that  indicate upward  revisions  in business  spending plans,  generally 

suggests  continuing  strength in  business  fixed  investment.

5/21-22/84

-3-

The producer price  index for  finished  goods was  unchanged in April, 

after  increases  of  about  1/2 percent  per month in  the  first  quarter.  A 

reversal  of  the  sharp  runup  in food  prices  contributed  to  the  favorable 

performance  in April.  The  consumer  price  index  rose 1/2  percent  in April, 

slightly more  than  the average rate  in  the  first quarter;  large  increases  in 

prices  of energy-related  items  and  some  commodities  accounted for  the April 

rise.  Over  the first  four months of  the year, the  index of average hourly 

earnings increased  at  about  the  same pace  as  in  1983.  

In  foreign exchange markets  the  trade-weighted value  of  the  dollar 

against major  foreign currencies had  increased  about  5-1/4  percent  since late 

March  to  a level  close  to  its peak  for  the  floating rate  period, reached in  the 

first  part of  January.  Increases  in U.S.  interest rates  relative  to  foreign 

rates,  together  with labor unrest  in  some European  countries and  conflict  in  the 

Persian Gulf  area, apparently contributed  to  the dollar's  appreciation.  The 

merchandise trade  deficit widened  further  in  the first  quarter,  as  a surge  in 

non-oil  imports  exceeded  a rise  in  exports.  

At  its meeting on March 26-27,  1984,  the  Federal  Open Market  Committee 

had  decided  to  seek  to  maintain pressures  on  reserve  positions  that  were deemed 

to  be  consistent with growth of  M1,  M2,  and  M3  from March to  June at  annual  rates 

of  around 6-1/2,  8, and 8-1/2  percent  respectively;  it was  decided that  initially 

those pressures  should  be  close  to  those  that  had  emerged  in  the  days  preceding 

the  March meeting.  The members had agreed  that  greater restraint  on reserve 

conditions would be  acceptable  in  the  event  of more  substantial growth of  the 

monetary aggregates,  while somewhat  lesser  restraint might  be  acceptable if

5/21-22/84

growth of  the aggregates  slowed  significantly.  It  was  also  agreed  that  the 

need  for greater or  lesser  restraint would  be  considered in  the  context  of 

the continuing  strength of  the  business  expansion, inflationary pressures, 

and  the  rate of  credit  growth.  The intermeeting  range  for  the  federal  funds 

rate, which provides  a mechanism for  initiating  consultation of  the  Committee, 

was  set  at  7-1/2  to  11-1/2  percent.  

Ml  changed  little in  April,  but data available  for  early May  suggested 

a considerable strengthening.  Given  the  pickup  in early May,  it  was  estimated 

that  growth of  M1  since March was  roughly in  line with the  6-1/2  percent annual 

rate  of  expansion  sought  by  the  Committee  for  the  March-to-June  period.  Ex

pansion  in M2 was at  an annual  rate  of  about  7-1/4  percent  in April,  close  to 

the  rate  specified  by  the  Committee  for  the  three-month period, while  growth 

in M3,  at  an  annual rate  of  10-3/4  percent  in April, was well above  its  8-1/2 

percent March-to-June growth path.  From  the  fourth quarter of  1983  through 

April, M1  grew at  a rate  a little  below the  midpoint of  the Committee's  range 

of  4 to  8 percent  for  1984;  M2  increased  at  a rate  in  the  lower  part  of  its 

6 to  9 percent  longer-run  range;  and M3  expanded  at  a rate  a bit  above  the 

9 percent  upper  limit  of  its  range.  

Total  domestic  nonfinancial debt  appeared  to  be  growing  at  a pace 

above  the  Committee's monitoring range  for  the year.  Credit growth  acceler

ated  in April  because of  a faster  pace  of borrowing by  the  federal government; 

business  borrowing  also  remained brisk, with most  borrowing  still  concentrated 

in  the  short-term  area.  Growth in  business loans  at  domestic  offices of  U.S.  

commercial  banks  slowed  from  the vigorous  pace  of  recent  months, as  banks

5/21-22/84

-5-

booked  a sizable  volume of  loans  offshore  and  firms  shifted more  of  their 

borrowing  to  the  commercial paper market.  In  the  household  sector,  consumer 

installment  credit  expanded at  an annual rate of  about  17  percent  in the 

first  quarter and appeared to  have  remained strong  in April;  mortgage 

borrowing  also was  continuing  to  grow at  a rapid  pace.  

Total  reserves  showed little  net  change in April,  as  a decline in 

excess  reserves  offset  further increases  in  required  reserves.  In  the  three 

complete  reserve maintenance periods ending  May 9, adjustment  plus  seasonal 

borrowing  at  the discount  window averaged  somewhat  less  than $1.2  billion 

compared  with about  $1.1  billion at  the time  of  the  previous meeting.  In 

the  current two-week  statement  period  ending May 23,  average  borrowing was 

running considerably higher, in  excess  of  $4 billion, because  of  advances  to 

a large  bank that was  experiencing substantial outflows  of  funds  caused  by 

market  uncertainties about  the  bank's  underlying  condition.  

The  federal funds  rate rose  from an  average  of  around  10  percent 

in  the  period  immediately preceding  the March FOMC meeting  to  about  10-1/2 

percent  recently.  Most  other interest  rates  moved considerably higher  over 

the  intermeeting interval,  generally rising  about  1/2  to  1-1/4  percentage 

points  in  both short-  and  long-term markets.  Commercial  banks  raised  their 

"prime" rate  twice  during the  period,  by  a total  of  1 percentage  point,  to 

12-1/2  percent.  On April  6 the  Federal Reserve announced  an  increase of  1/2 

percentage  point  in  the discount  rate  to  9 percent.  The  increases  in market 

rates  apparently reflected  continuing  strong  credit  demands  as  economic 

activity expanded,  the  absence of  rapid progress  in  reducing  the  federal

5/21-22/84

-6-

deficit,  and  related concerns  about  future  inflationary pressures  and  a 

possible  need for a more restrictive  provision  of  reserves.  Late  in  the 

intermeeting  period, market  conditions  also  reflected a heightened  degree 

of  anxiety and  sensitivity to  potential  liquidity  strains,  and  especially 

the  persistent  rumors  that  a major bank was  in  serious  financial difficulty.  

There  were also  renewed  concerns  about  the  possible  implications  of  continuing 

international debt  problems,  particularly  in  the  light  of  increased  interest 

rates.  

The staff  projections  presented at  this  meeting  continued to  suggest 

that  real  GNP would grow at  a much more moderate  pace  over  the  balance  of  the 

year and  in 1985,  in  line with the  slower pattern characteristic of  maturing 

business  expansions.  The  unemployment rate  was  projected  to  decline over  the 

period  and,  while current  evidence of  growing cost  and  price pressures  was 

limited,  the  rate  of  price  increase  was  expected  to  pick up modestly from 

its  recent pace.  

In  the Committee's  discussion  of  the economic  situation and  outlook, 

the  members noted  that  the  expansion in economic  activity  did  indeed  appear 

to  be moderating  from an unsustainable  pace  in  the  first  quarter, but  the 

extent  of  the  slowdown  remained in  question  as did  the  prospective degree of 

upward  price pressures  as  the expansion  continued.  In  the  course  of  the 

discussion, the members gave  considerable emphasis  to  uncertainties  inherent 

in the  unusually sensitive  conditions  in  financial markets  and  volatile 

market  attitudes.

5/21-22/84

-7-

It was  noted  that growth in nominal GNP might moderate  relatively 

little  if  business  and  consumer  spending remained  strongly  buoyed  by a 

highly stimulative  fiscal  policy.  In  that  connection members  commented 

that  credit  growth had  shown no  sign  of  slowing  so  far and  there  were, as 

yet, no  significant  indications  of  a stiffening  in loan  standards  and 

credit availability;  in fact,  there were  indications  of  aggressive  lending 

practices in  real estate  and  other areas.  On  the other  hand,  some  members 

stressed  the  cyclical  tendency  for  a maturing expansion  to  slow and they 

saw  some  evidence already pointing  in that  direction.  It  was  also  pointed 

out  that  there  had been  a sizable  rise in  interest  rates  over  the  past 

several weeks;  current  rate  levels,  particularly against  the  background 

of  concerns  about  potential  liquidity problems,  could  have a considerable 

effect, after some  lag,  in curbing  expenditures  in  interest-sensitive 

sectors  of  the  economy and,  more broadly,  in  fostering more  cautious 

consumer  and  investor attitudes.  Developments  in  financial markets  had 

already  contributed  to  a more guarded  investor  climate  in  some  respects, 

as  reflected  in  some declines in  stock prices  and  a tendency among  investors 

to  back  away  from  the  long-term debt  markets.  The  problems  of  a major 

commercial bank had  sensitized  markets to  other potential problem  areas 

such  as  outstanding loans  to  less  developed  countries  that  were experiencing 

debt  servicing difficulties.  In  general,  it was difficult  to evaluate how 

such uncertainties  -- which were  seen as  likely to  persist for  some  time 

even if  the  most immediately pressing  problems were resolved  -- would 

affect  business  and  consumer  spending.

5/21-22/84

-8-

Most of  the members,  as  they  had at  previous meetings,  expressed 

concern that  growing capacity  constraints,  declining  unemployment, and  the 

prospect  of  reduced  productivity growth might  be  conducive  to  greater  in

flationary pressures  over  time.  Individual members  also  commented on  the 

development of  price and wage  pressures  in some  industries  and  occupations.  

While  indications  of  greater inflationary pressures were  still  limited, 

there  was  a danger  that  they might  become more widespread  later in  the  year.  

In  that  connection  some members  commented  that  the  terms  of  the wage  settle

ments in  the  automotive industry  later  in  the year,  should  they  prove  to  be 

higher  than  the generally restrained  pattern  to  date, might have  a pervasive 

effect  on other  settlements, while others  thought  the  circumstances  in  that 

industry  were unique.  

A more optimistic  view of  the  outlook  for  inflation emphasized 

the  possibility of  currently relatively favorable  wage-cost developments 

continuing  for  some  time.  In  particular,  productivity growth might  not 

diminish  as  much  as  some  observers  expected, given  the prospect  that  many 

businesses would  continue  their  efforts  toward  greater operating efficiencies.  

One member  also  observed that  the  relatively rapid  growth  in  the labor  force 

over  the  course  of  recent months,  if  it  persisted, would  have  favorable 

wage-cost  implications.  

In  the Committee's discussion of  policy for  the weeks  ahead,  most 

of  the members supported  a proposal  to maintain  the  current  degree  of 

restraint, although  some  sentiment  in  favor  of  marginally greater  restraint 

was  also  expressed.  In  the view of  most members, no  significant  change  in

5/21-22/84

-9-

policy -- in  either direction -- was desirable  at  this  time  in  light  of  the 

performance  of  the economy, the  behavior of  the monetary aggregates,  and 

conditions  in financial markets.  Under  present circumstances,  it  was 

argued,  any  significant further restraint would produce  added strains  in 

interest-sensitive  sectors  of  the  economy such as  housing and  agriculture 

and would  incur an undue risk of  a pronounced effect  on already somewhat 

unsettled  financial markets, with adverse effects  on economic activity.  

At  the  same  time, the  apparent strength of  the  ongoing  expansion  and 

inflationary concerns  argued  against  any significant  easing.  An argument 

advanced in favor of  slightly greater  restraint was  that  such a policy 

would  tend  to  improve  the  prospects of  achieving  a desirable moderation 

in  the rate of  business expansion and progress  over time  in  containing 

inflation.  

The members noted  that,  according  to  a staff  analysis,  implementa

tion of  approximately the  current degree  of  reserve  restraint  was  likely to 

continue  to  be  consistent with attainment of  the  growth objectives  for M1  and 

M2  that  the  Committee  had previously established  for  the  second  quarter.  

Growth in M3  was  expected to  exceed  the  second-quarter  objective  because de

pository institutions were  currently making more  active  use of  managed 

liabilities  than had  been anticipated  to  finance  their  share  of  the large 

rise  in  total  credit.  

A few members  favored raising  the  current  intermeeting  range  for 

the  federal  funds  rate  by a small  amount  as  a technical adjustment  to  bring 

the  present  trading  level  of  the  federal  funds  rate closer  to  the midpoint  of

5/21-22/84

-10-

the  range.  However, most of  the members  preferred  to  retain the  current 

range which  they  believed was  likely  to  encompass  the  probable  trading range 

over the  intermeeting period.  

At  the  conclusion of  the  discussion, all but  one member agreed 

that  no  change  should  be  made at  this  time  in  the  existing degree of 

pressure  on reserve positions.  The members  anticipated that  this  policy 

would  continue  to  be associated with growth of  M1  and  M2  at  annual  rates  of 

around  6-1/2  and 8 percent  for  the  period  from March to June and  with growth 

of  M3  at  an  annual  rate  of  about 10  percent,  somewhat  above  the  objective  set 

in March for  the  second  quarter.  It  was  agreed  that  the  intermeeting range 

for  the federal  funds  rate would  remain at  7-1/2  to  11-1/2  percent.  It  was 

also  recognized  that,  within  the  context of  this  overall policy approach, 

operations might  need to  be modified  if  unusual financial  strains  appeared 

to  be  developing.  

In  keeping with the  Committee's  usual practice,  the members  contem

plated  that  operations might  be  adjusted during  the intermeeting  period toward 

implementing somewhat greater  or  somewhat  lesser  restraint  on  reserves  if 

monetary growth  should  prove  to  be  significantly  faster  or  slower  than targeted 

for the  current  quarter.  In  the  view of  most members,  the  implementation of 

open market  operations  should be  equally sensitive  to  the  potential  need  for 

greater  or  lesser  restraint over  the weeks ahead.  Any such  adjustment should 

not  be  made  automatically but  should be  undertaken only  after  an appraisal  of 

the  strength  of  economic  activity and  inflationary pressures,  and  evaluations 

of  conditions  in  financial and  banking markets and the  rate  of  growth in  total 

domestic nonfinancial debt.

5/21-22/84

-11-

At  the  conclusion  of  the  meeting, the  following  domestic  policy 

directive was  issued  to  the  Federal Reserve  Bank  of New York: 

The  information  reviewed at  this  meeting  suggests 

that  growth in  real GNP, while moderating  from the 
unusually  strong  first-quarter  pace,  remains  relatively 
rapid  in  the  current  quarter.  In April,  industrial 
production  and nonfarm  payroll employment  rose  sub
stantially  following decreased  growth in  March;  the 
civilian unemployment  rate was unchanged  at  7.8  per
cent  in March and April  as  the  labor  force increased 
appreciably.  Retail  sales  grew rapidly  in April  after 
two  months  of  decline,  and  housing  starts  recovered 
to  a rate equaling  their  first-quarter average.  
Information  on outlays  and  spending  plans  generally 
suggests  continuing  strength  in business  fixed 
investment.  Since  the beginning  of  the  year,  prices 
and  wages  have continued  to  rise  at  about  the  same 
pace  as  in  1983.  

M  changed  little  in April on  average, but  data 

available  for early May suggest  a considerable 
strengthening.  In  April M2  grew about  in line  with 
expectations while M3  expanded more  rapidly than 
anticipated.  From  the fourth quarter of  1983  through 
April, M1  grew at  a rate  a little below the  midpoint 
of  the  Committee's  range  for  1984;  M2  increased at  a 
rate  in the  lower  part  of  its  longer-run range, while 
M3 expanded  at  a rate  a bit  above  the upper limit  of 
its  range.  Total domestic nonfinancial debt  apparently 
is  growing  at  a pace  above  the Committee's  monitoring 
range for  the  year, with borrowing by businesses 
continuing to  be  concentrated  in the  short-term 
markets.  Interest  rates  have  risen  considerably 
further  since  late March.  On April  6, the Federal 
Reserve announced  an  increase  in  the discount  rate 
from  8-1/2  to  9 percent.  Recently, day-to-day market 
conditions  have reflected  considerable  sensitivity 
to  potential  liquidity strains,  as  highlighted by 
problems  of  one  large  bank, and to  uncertainties 
about  the  financial  and  budgetary outlook generally.  

The foreign  exchange value  of  the  dollar against 

a trade-weighted average of major  foreign currencies 
has  risen considerably further since late  March to 
a level  close  to  the  peak  in  early January.  The

5/21-22/84

-12-

merchandise  trade deficit widened further  in  the  first 
quarter,  as  a sharp rise  in  non-oil imports offset  a 
substantial  rise  in exports.  

The Federal  Open Market  Committee  seeks  to  foster 

monetary and  financial  conditions  that  will help  to 
reduce inflation  further, promote growth in  output  on 
a sustainable  basis,  and contribute  to  an  improved 
pattern of  international transactions.  The  Committee 
established growth ranges  for  the broader aggregates 
of  6 to  9 percent  for both M2 and  M3  for  the period 
from the  fourth quarter of  1983  to  the  fourth quarter 
of  1984.  The Committee  also  considered  that  a range 
of  4 to  8 percent  for M1  would be  appropriate  for 
the same  period,  taking account  of  the possibility 
that,  in  the light  of  the changed composition of  Ml, 
its  relationship  to  GNP over  time may be  shifting.  
Pending further experience,  growth in  that  aggregate 
will need  to  be  interpreted  in  the  light  of  the 
growth in  the other  monetary aggregates,  which for 
the  time  being  would  continue to  receive substantial 
weight.  The  associated  range  for total  domestic 
nonfinancial debt  was  set at  8 to  11  percent for  the 
year  1984.  

The Committee understood  that policy implementation 

would require continuing  appraisal  of  the relationships 
not only among  the various measures of  money and  credit 
but  also  between  those aggregates  and  nominal GNP, 
including  evaluation  of  conditions  in domestic  credit 
and  foreign exchange  markets.  

In  the  short  run,  the Committee  seeks  to maintain 
existing pressures  on  bank  reserve positions.  This  is 
expected  to  be  consistent with growth  in M1, M2,  and 
M3  at  annual  rates  of  around 6-1/2,  8, and  10  percent, 
respectively, during  the period  from March  to June.  
Somewhat  greater reserve restraint  might be  acceptable 
in  the  event of  more substantial  growth of  the monetary 
aggregates, while somewhat  lesser restraint  might be 
acceptable if  growth of  the monetary aggregates  slowed 
significantly.  In either case,  such  a change  would be 
considered  only  in the  context  of  appraisals  of  the 
continuing  strength  of  the  business  expansion, infla
tionary  pressures,  financial market  conditions,  and 
the  rate  of  credit  growth.  The  Chairman  may call  for

5/21-22/84

-13-

Committee  consultation if  it appears  to  the Manager 
for Domestic Operations  that  pursuit  of  the monetary 
objectives and  related  reserve  paths  during  the period 
before  the next  meeting is likely  to  be associated with 
a federal  funds  rate  persistently outside  a range  of 
7-1/2  to  11-1/2  percent.  

Votes  for  this  action:  Messrs.  Volcker, 

Solomon, Boehne,  Corrigan, Gramley, Mrs.  Horn, 
Messrs.  Martin, Partee, Rice, and  Wallich.  
Vote  against  this action:  Mr.  Boykin.  (Absent 
and not  voting:  Mrs.  Teeters.) 

Mr. Boykin dissented  because he believed a directive  calling  for 

somewhat  greater reserve  restraint  and  marginally lower monetary growth 

would improve  the  prospects  for  curbing  inflation and  achieving sustainable 

expansion without  incurring  a material  risk of  unsettling financial markets.

