FEDERAL  RESERVE  press  release 

For Use at 4:30 p.m. 

October  5, 1984 

The  Federal Reserve Board and  the  Federal Open Market 

Committee today released  the attached  record  of policy actions 

taken by  the  Federal Open  Market  Committee  at  its meeting on 

August 21,  1984.  

Such records  for  each meeting of  the Committee  are made 

available a few days  after  the  next  regularly  scheduled meeting 

and  are  published in  the Federal  Reserve Bulletin and the Board's 

Annual Report.  The  summary descriptions  of  economic  and  financial 

conditions  they  contain are  based  solely on the information  that 

was  available  to  the  Committee  at  the  time  of  the meeting.

Attachment

RECORD OF  POLICY ACTIONS  OF THE 
FEDERAL  OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 

Meeting Held  on August  21,  1984 

1.  Domestic policy directive 

The  information reviewed  at  this  meeting suggested  that  the 

expansion in  economic  activity was  continuing at  a  relatively  strong pace, 

though moderating from the  annual  rate  of  about  7-1/2  percent  recorded  for 

the  second quarter.  Thus  far  in  1984,  average prices,  as  measured  by  the 

fixed-weight price index for  gross  domestic business  product,  appeared 

to have  risen more  slowly than  in  1983.  

Industrial  production rose  0.9 percent  in July,  the  same  as  the 

increase  in the  preceding month which had  been revised  upward.  Production 

of durable  consumer goods increased  sharply, while output  of  nondurable goods 

rose  little on balance.  Output  of  business  equipment  remained  sizable  though 

somewhat  below the  advanced  pace  of  other  recent months.  The  rate  of  capacity 

utilization in  manufacturing reached  82.6  percent  in  July,  its  highest  level 

since early  1980.  

Labor market  reports  for July gave mixed  signals.  Nonfarm  payroll 

employment  rose  300,000  further, just  a  little less  than  the  average gain 

over  the  first  six months  of  the  year.  However,  the  civilian  unemployment 

rate, which had  plunged  to  7.1  percent  in  June,  returned  to  its  May  level 

of  7.5  percent,  as  the  survey of  households  showed a  sharp drop  in  employ

ment  after  two  months  of  especially large  increases.  For  the  three-month 

period  ending  in July,  both measures of  employment  reported  a  sizable 

increase  of  nearly 1 million jobs.

8/21/84

Retail  sales  fell 0.9  percent in July,  after  rising  considerably 

in both the  first  and  the  second  quarters  of  the  year.  Sales  declines were 

reported at  nearly all major types  of  stores  but were especially  pro

nounced  at  general merchandise, apparel,  and  furniture and  appliance  stores 

where growth had  been especially strong  earlier.  Sales  of  new domestic 

automobiles  were a little  above  the  annual  rate of  about  8-1/4  million units 

recorded  for  the  first  half  of  the  year;  but  they dropped back  to  a rate of 

about  7-1/2  million units  in  the  first  10 days  of  August, in part  because 

some  popular models were in  short  supply.  

Housing starts  fell  in  July to  a rate appreciably below  the 

average  in  the second quarter.  Starts  of  single-family units, declining 

for  the  third  month in a row, were nearly 14  percent below  the second

quarter  average;  multifamily starts,  though  edging down  in July,  remained 

above  the  average in  the  preceding  quarter.  Newly issued  building  permits 

declined  almost  12  percent  in July,  with issuance  down  by  comparable margins 

for  both single-family and  multifamily construction.  

In  contrast  to  the slowing  in the  consumer and housing  sectors, 

business  fixed  investment  continued to  expand  quite  rapidly,  and  commit

ments  for future  spending  remained  high.  Shipments  of  nondefense capital 

goods  rose  further in June  and were up  nearly 6 percent  for  the  second 

quarter as  a whole.  New  orders  for  such goods  increased  about  5 percent 

in  the  quarter and  the backlog of  outstanding  orders  continued  to  rise.  

Incoming  information  on prices  and  wages indicated  a continuation 

of  recent  favorable  trends.  The  producer  price  index  for  finished goods

8/21/84

-3-

increased  0.3 percent  in  July, after three  months  of virtually no  change.  

Data on  consumer prices  in July were  not  yet  available, but  in June the 

consumer  price index had  risen 0.2  percent  for  the second  consecutive  month.  

Over the  first  seven months  of  1984,  producer  prices  increased  at  an annual 

rate  of  about  3 percent,  and  over the  first  half of  the year,  consumer 

prices  and  the index of  average hourly earnings  rose at  annual  rates  of 

about  4 percent  and 3-1/2  percent  respectively.  

In  the period  following the July FOMC meeting,  the foreign 

exchange value  of  the  dollar against  a trade-weighted average  of major 

foreign  currencies rose  about  2 percent further to a new high in  early 

August;  subsequently the  dollar's value  fluctuated in  a range  a little 

below the peak.  Over most of  the  intermeeting  interval  exchange  markets 

were quite volatile, apparently reflecting changing perceptions  among 

market  participants about  the  outlook for  interest rates,  inflation, 

and economic  activity  in  the United  States.  The  merchandise trade 

deficit in  June was  somewhat  above  the May level,  and  for the  second 

quarter as  a whole  the  deficit  was little  changed  from the  high first

quarter rate.  

At  its meeting on July 16-17,  1984,  the Committee  had  decided 

that  open market  operations  in  the period  until  this  meeting should  be 

directed  initially  toward maintaining existing  pressures  on reserve 

positions.  That  action  was expected  to  be  consistent  with growth in 

M1,  M2,  and M3 at  annual  rates  of  around  5-1/2,  7-1/2,  and 9 percent 

respectively during  the  period  from June to  September.  The  Committee

8/21/84

also agreed  that  somewhat  greater restraint  would  be acceptable  in  the 

event  of more substantial  growth  of  the monetary aggregates,  while 

somewhat  lesser  restraint  might be  acceptable  if growth of  the monetary 

aggregates slowed  significantly.  Any such adjustment would be  considered 

only  in  the  context  of  appraisals  of  the  continuing  strength of  the 

business  expansion, inflationary  pressures,  financial market  conditions, 

and  the  rate  of  credit  growth.  The  intermeeting  range  for  the federal 

funds  rate, which provides  a mechanism for  initiating  consultation of 

the Committee, was  set  at  8 to  12  percent.  

M1  contracted at  an  annual  rate  of  1-1/2 percent  in July, after 

increasing at  an average annual  rate  of  about  12 percent  in May and June.  

Data for  early August, however,  suggested  some  rebound  in M1 growth.  

Growth in  M2 was  at  an annual  rate  of  about  5 percent  in July, a relatively 

slow pace  that  was due  in  part  to  the  sluggishness  in M1, while expansion 

in  M3 was  relatively well maintained at  an annual  rate of  a little  below 9 

percent.  Despite the decline in M1  and  comparatively  slow growth in M2  in 

July,  these aggregates  remained well within the Committee's  objectives  for 

the  year.  From the  fourth quarter of  1983  through July,  M1  grew at  a rate 

a bit above  the midpoint  of  the  Committee's  range of  4 to  8 percent  for 

1984;  M2  increased  at a rate a little  below the midpoint of  its  longer-run 

range of  6 to  9 percent.  Over  the  same  period, M3  expanded  at  a rate 

somewhat  above  the upper  limit  of  its  range  of  6 to 9 percent.  

Expansion of  total  domestic nonfinancial debt  was  estimated to 

have  remained  at  an annual  rate of  around  13  percent  in July, keeping

8/21/84

-5-

growth  thus  far  in  1984  at  a pace  above the  Committee's  monitoring range 

of  8 to  11 percent  for  the  year.  A pickup  in growth of  federal debt  offset 

some  slowing in  expansion of  private debt,  as merger-related borrowing 

lessened.  Total  credit  at U.S.  commercial banks  expanded  at  an estimated 

annual rate  of  9-1/4  percent  in July, after  rising only  slightly in  June.  

The  acceleration primarily reflected a shift  from liquidation to  accumulation 

in holdings  of  U.S.  Treasury  securities;  growth  in business  and  consumer  loans 

showed little  change  from the  pace  in June.  

Total reserves  decreased  in  July at an  annual  rate  of  about  2 

percent,  after  expanding  rapidly over  the  two  preceding months.  The 

contraction  reflected a marked deceleration in  growth of  required  reserves, 

associated with weakness in  transaction  accounts as  demand  deposits  fell 

following  a sharp increase  in  June,  and a reduction in  excess  reserves  from 

the  relatively high June  level.  In  the  two  complete reserve maintenance 

periods  since  the July FOMC meeting,  adjustment plus  seasonal  borrowing 

continued  to average in the  neighborhood of  $1 billion.  

Despite  little  change  in  the  average  level  of  borrowing  from  the 

discount window, the  federal funds  rate  tended  to  drift  higher  over  the 

intermeeting period;  recently  funds traded  in  a range  of  11-1/2  to  11-3/4 

percent, up from about  11-1/4  percent at  the  time  of  the  Committee meeting 

in  July, as  banks  seemed  to  be  somewhat  reluctant  to  borrow from  the  discount 

window and  they bid more aggressively for  funds  in the  market.  Some  other 

very short-term  rates  rose  slightly over  the  intermeeting period  but  most 

short-  and long-term rates  declined,  with yields  on bonds  falling about  5/8

8/21/84

to  3/4  percentage  point.  Stock price  indexes  advanced  9 to  10 percent  over 

the  interval  on record  trading volume, as  the market  reacted positively 

to  interpretations of  the  future  course  of  monetary policy in connection 

with the  Federal Reserve's midyear report  to  the  Congress, and  to  incoming 

data on  economic activity,  prices,  and money  supply growth.  

The  staff projections  presented  at  this  meeting  continued  to  sug

gest  that  expansion in  real  GNP would moderate  over  the  balance of  the  year 

and  in 1985,  a pattern of  growth often characteristic of maturing business 

expansions and rising  utilization of  productive  resources.  The unemployment 

rate was projected  to decline somewhat  further  over the  period and,  though 

current  information on  cost  and  price  pressures  remained quite  favorable, the 

rate  of  price  increase was  expected  to  pick  up  a little  from its  recent  pace.  

In  their discussion of  the  economic situation  and  outlook, Committee 

members generally  agreed  that  the expansion in  economic  activity was  continuing 

at  a relatively  strong  pace,  although  they  expected  the  rate  of growth to  slow 

appreciably over  the next  several  quarters.  They  recognized, however, that 

the  outlook for  economic activity  and  for  prices  and wages  remained  subject 

to  substantial  uncertainties.  These  were especially pronounced  because of 

the  distortions  created  by  unprecedented  deficits  in  the  federal  budget and 

the  balance of  payments,  the  strength of  the dollar, and  the  sensitive  state 

of  domestic  and  international  financial markets.  

A number of  members  pointed  to  indications--such as  in housing,  retail 

sales,  and  steel  production--that  the  rate of  expansion  might be  moderating 

appreciably and  some members  commented  on  the  emergence  of  more  cautious

8/21/84

-7-

attitudes among businessmen in many parts  of  the  country.  Members  also 

referred  to  the  cyclical  tendency  for expansions  to  lose  momentum over 

time and  to  the  risks  inherent  in  the various  imbalances  and  financial 

strains  that  were  affecting the economy.  Some  members,  however,  continued 

to view  the  risks  as  mainly  in  the direction of more  rapid  expansion  than 

was generally  expected, given the  economy's  current momentum, the  strength 

of  business  investment, and  a highly stimulative  fiscal  policy.  With 

regard  to the  nearer-term outlook, it  was  noted  that  a prolonged  strike 

in  the automobile  industry  could  have a considerable  impact,  at  least 

temporarily,  in retarding  the  overall expansion.  

The members expressed  somewhat  diverging views  on  the  outlook for 

inflation.  Some  placed  considerable stress  on the  prospect  that  price and 

wage pressures  might  increase  as  the  economy's  productive  resources  became 

more  fully employed.  An  inflationary  threat  was also  seen in the possibility 

of  a sizable  decline in  the  foreign exchange  value of  the dollar.  Likewise, 

a number of  members expressed  concern that  an  excessive wage  settlement  in 

the  automobile  industry, if  it  were to  occur, would  tend  to  have an  in

flationary impact  on  other  wage negotiations,  with widespread  consequences 

for wage-cost  pressures  in  the  economy.  

Members who were relatively  optimistic  about  the  outlook for 

inflation  stressed, among  other  factors,  the  prospects  for  continued good 

gains  in  productivity.  They commented  in  particular about  the  renascent 

and  apparently strong  determination of  businessmen to  hold  down their 

costs  and  to  improve the  efficiency  of  their  operations.  Moreover, the

8/21/84

large investments  in  capital during  recent  quarters would,  it  was  argued, 

help  to enhance  productivity over  time.  One member also  observed  that, 

while  a sizable  decline in  the foreign  exchange value  of  the dollar 

would  tend to  increase  upward price  pressures,  such a result  might well 

be  more limited  or  delayed  longer than  usual  in  light  of  the relatively 

sluggish pace  of  economic  activity abroad  and consequent efforts by  foreign 

competitors  to  retain recently enhanced  U.S.  market shares  through aggres

sive pricing.  

At  its meeting  in July,  the  Committee had  reviewed and  reaffirmed 

the basic  policy objectives that  it  had  established in January for  growth of 

the monetary  and  credit  aggregates in  1984 and had  set  tentative objectives 

for growth in  1985.  For 1984  the  policy objectives included  growth of  4 to 

8 percent  for  M1  and 6 to  9 percent  for  both M2  and M3  for  the period  from 

the  fourth  quarter of  1983  to  the  fourth  quarter of  1984.  The  associated 

range for  growth in  total  domestic  nonfinancial debt  was also  reaffirmed  at 

8 to  11  percent  for  the  year  1984.  Given developments  in  the  first  half of 

the year, the  Committee anticipated  that M3  and particularly nonfinancial debt 

might  increase  at  rates  somewhat  above  the  upper limits  of  their  1984  ranges.  

The  tentative ranges  established  for  1985  included  reductions of  1 and  1/2 

percentage  point  from the upper  limits  of  the  1984  ranges  for M1  and M2, 

respectively, and  no  changes  in the  range  for M3  and  the  associated range 

for  total  domestic nonfinancial  debt.  

In  the  Committee's discussion  of  policy implementation for  the 

weeks  immediately ahead,  a majority of  the  members expressed  a preference

8/21/84

-9-

for  continuing  to  maintain about  the  current  degree  of  restraint  on  reserve 

positions.  A number of members,  while  finding  the  current  approach  to  policy 

implementation acceptable, nonetheless  were  prepared  to  look  toward  some  slight 

easing of  reserve  conditions,  either  currently or  soon  should monetary growth 

fail  to  pick up  from  recent  trends.  They believed  that  such an approach  would 

likely  be  consistent with attainment of  the  third-quarter  objectives for 

monetary growth that  had been set  at  the  July meeting, given the  shortfall 

in the  aggregates  since  the meeting,  and would also be  consistent with signs 

of  some weakening  in  the  rate  of  economic growth relative  to  expectations.  

Moreover,  in  the view of  at  least  some  of  these members,  some  lessening  in 

the degree  of  reserve  restraint  would appropriately  tend  to  offset  the unusual 

pressures  that  had developed  in  the  federal  funds  market during June  and July.  

Those  pressures were not  associated  with any change  in  the  degree of  reserve 

restraint, but  they appeared  to  reflect  the  emergence  of  more  conservative 

reserve management  attitudes  on the  part  of  banks.  Other members  commented, 

however, that  any active effort  to  ease reserve  conditions would  be un

desirable  at  present,  and  could well be  misinterpreted, unless  clearly 

related  to  emerging weakness  in monetary growth in  the  context  of  appreciably 

slower-than-expected  expansion in  economic  activity.  

One Committee  member indicated  a preference  for  somewhat  tighter 

reserve  conditions  so  as  to  help  assure  moderate rates  of monetary expansion.  

In  this  view, the near-term pressure  on interest  rates  that might  result  from 

such an  approach  to  policy implementation could  well  preclude  the need  for 

greater,  and more disruptive,  rate  increases  later.  On  the  other hand,  other

8/21/84

-10-

members commented  that  further  restraint would be  undesirable except  in the 

context of  rapid  monetary growth against a background  of  greater  strength 

in  economic  activity.  It  was  viewed  that  current  reserve  conditions  had 

become  restrictive  enough, as  pressures  on  financial  institutions  and 

borrowers had  cumulated over a number of months,  so  that  the  risk of an 

unduly rapid  spurt  of money and  credit  growth was  relatively low.  

In discussing  how operations might be  adjusted  during the  inter

meeting period  if monetary growth  should prove  to  be  significantly faster 

or  slower  than  targeted  for  the  current  quarter, most members  felt  that 

the  implementation of  open market operations  should  be  sensitive  to  the 

potential  desirability of  somewhat lesser  restraint  over the  weeks  ahead, 

as well  as  to  the  possible need  for some  greater restraint  should monetary 

growth resume  at  an  excessive  rate  against  a background of  greater economic 

ebullience  than  seemed  to  be  taking place  currently.  As  compared with 

conditions  at  the  time  of  the previous  meeting, the monetary aggregates 

had weakened--with M1,  for example,  closer  to  the middle  of  its  longer-run 

range--and  there  were more indications  of  a moderation in  the  expansion 

of  economic  activity.  It  was  understood  that  any intermeeting  adjustment 

in  reserve  pressures would not  be  made automatically in  response to  the 

behavior  of  the monetary aggregates, but would be  undertaken only  in  the 

context  of  appraisals  of  the  strength  of economic activity and  inflationary 

pressures, and  evaluations  of  conditions  in domestic and  international 

financial  and  banking markets  and  the  rate of  credit  growth.

8/21/84

-11-

At  the  conclusion of  the  discussion, all  but  one member  indicated 

their  acceptance  of  a directive  specifying no  change  at  this  time  in  the 

degree  of pressure on  reserve  positions,  but  calling  for  a  response  to  any 

significant  deviation in  the  aggregates  from expectations  against  the 

background of  economic  and  financial developments.  The members  anticipated 

that  this  approach to  policy  implementation would  be  consistent  with growth 

of  the various  aggregates  at  rates for  the  quarter  close  to  those  specified 

at  the  previous  meeting.  Specifically, M1  was  expected  to  grow at  an annual 

rate  of  around  5  percent  or  slightly less  for  the  period  from June  to 

September, a  little less  than expected  at  the  previous  meeting  reflecting 

the  contraction  in M1  in July.  The  annual  rates  of  growth for  M2  and  M3 

in  the  third  quarter  would continue  to  be  7-1/2  and  9  percent  respectively.  

The  intermeeting  range  for  the federal  funds  rate  was  left unchanged  at 

8  to  12  percent.  It  was  also  recognized  that, within  the  context  of 

this  overall  approach, operations  might need  to  be modified  if  unusual 

financial  strains  appeared  to  be  developing.  

At  the  conclusion of  the meeting  the  following  domestic  policy 

directive was  issued  to  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New York: 

The  information reviewed  at  this  meeting  suggests 

that  the  expansion in  economic  activity  is  continuing  at 
a  strong  pace, but  there  are  indications  of  a moderation 
in  the  rate of  growth.  In  July,  industrial  production 
and nonfarm payroll  employment  rose  further,  but  retail 
sales  fell  after  rising  considerably  in  earlier months 
and housing  starts  declined  to  a  rate  appreciably below 
the  average  in  the  second  quarter.  The  civilian un
employment  rate  increased  0.4  percentage  point  to  7.5 
percent.  Information  on  outlays  and  spending  plans

8/21/84

-12-

continues  to  suggest  strength in  business  fixed  invest
ment.  Since  the  beginning of  the year,  average  prices 
and  the  index  of  average hourly earnings  have  risen 
more slowly  than in  1983.  

In  July, M1 declined  after  two months  of  rapid 
growth, though  data for early  August  suggested  some 
rebound,  while M2  expanded at  a relatively  slow pace.  
M3  growth, however,  remained comparatively sizable.  
From  the fourth quarter  of 1983  through July,  M1  grew 
at  a rate  a bit  above  the  midpoint  of  the  Committee's 
range  for  1984;  M2  increased at  a rate a little  below 
the  midpoint  of  its  longer-run range, while M3  expanded 
at  a rate  above the  upper  limit  of  its range.  Growth 
in  total  domestic nonfinancial  debt  appears  to  be 
continuing at  a pace  above  the  Committee's monitoring 
range for  the  year,  reflecting very large  government 
borrowing  along  with strong  private credit  growth.  
Most  interest  rates  have fallen  considerably  since 
the July meeting of  the  Committee,  with the  largest 
declines  generally in  intermediate  and  long-term 
bond markets.  

The  foreign exchange  value of  the  dollar against 

a trade-weighted average  of  major foreign  currencies 
rose  further  to  a new high in early August  and  since 
then has  fluctuated in  a range  just  below the  peak.  
The merchandise  trade deficit  in  June  was somewhat 
above  the  May level,  and  for the  second  quarter as 
a whole  the  deficit was  little  changed  from the  high 
first-quarter  rate.  

The  Federal Open Market Committee  seeks  to  foster 

monetary  and financial  conditions  that  will help  to 
reduce  inflation further,  promote growth in  output  on 
a sustainable basis,  and  contribute  to  an  improved 
pattern of  international transactions.  In  furtherance 
of  these  objectives  the  Committee  agreed  at  the  July 
meeting  to  reaffirm  the  ranges  for monetary growth  that 
it  had  established  in  January:  4 to  8 percent  for M1 
and  6 to  9 percent  for both  M2  and  M3  for the  period 
from the  fourth quarter  of  1983  to  the  fourth quarter 
of  1984.  The  associated  range  for  total  domestic  non
financial debt  was  also  reaffirmed at  8 to  11  percent 
for  the  year 1984.  It  was  anticipated  that  M3 and 
nonfinancial  debt  might  increase  at  rates  somewhat 
above  the  upper limits  of  their  1984  ranges,  given

8/21/84

-13-

developments  in  the  first half  of  the year,  but  the 
Committee  felt  that higher  target  ranges would  provide 
inappropriate  benchmarks  for evaluating  longer-term 
trends  in  M3  and  credit  growth.  For 1985  the Committee 
agreed  on  tentative  ranges  of  monetary growth, measured 
from the  fourth quarter of  1984  to  the  fourth  quarter 
of  1985,  of  4 to  7 percent  for  M1, 6 to  8-1/2  percent 
for M2,  and 6 to  9 percent  for M3.  The associated 
range  for nonfinancial  debt  was  set  at  8 to  11  percent.  

The Committee understood that  policy  implementation 

would require  continuing appraisal  of  the  relationships 
not  only  among the  various measures of money and  credit 
but  also between those  aggregates  and  nominal GNP, 
including evaluation of  conditions  in  domestic  credit 
and  foreign exchange  markets.  

In  the  implementation of  policy  in  the  short  run, 
the  Committee seeks  to maintain  existing  pressures on 
reserve positions.  This  action is  expected  to  be  con
sistent with growth in  M1  at  an  annual rate  of  around 
5 percent  or  slightly  less,  and  in M2  and  M3  at  annual 
rates  of  around 7-1/2  and 9 percent respectively during 
the period  from June  to  September.  Somewhat  greater 
reserve  restraint  would  be  acceptable  in  the event  of 
more substantial  growth of  the monetary aggregates, 
while somewhat  lesser  restraint  would  be  acceptable 
in  the event  of  significantly  slower growth.  In  either 
case,  such  a change  would be  considered  only  in  the 
context  of  appraisals  of  the  continuing strength of  the 
business  expansion, inflationary pressures,  financial 
market  conditions,  and  the  rate  of  credit  growth.  The 
Chairman may  call  for  Committee consultation if  it 
appears  to  the  Manager  for  Domestic Operations  that 
pursuit  of  the  monetary objectives  and  related  reserve 
paths  during  the  period before  the  next  meeting is 
likely  to  be  associated with a federal  funds  rate 
persistently  outside a range of  8 to  12  percent.  

Votes  for  this  action:  Messrs.  Volcker, 

Solomon, Boehne,  Boykin,  Corrigan, Gramley, 
Mrs.  Horn, Messrs. Martin, Partee,  Rice,  and 
Ms.  Seger.  Vote against  this  action: 
Mr.  Wallich.

8/21/84

-14-

Mr. Wallich dissented  from this  action because he preferred  a 

directive  calling  for a somewhat  greater degree of  reserve restraint  and 

marginally  lower monetary growth in  the  third  quarter.  In  his  view such 

a directive was more likely  to  help  avert more  serious inflation and 

financial pressures  later.  

2. 

Authorization for domestic open market  operations 

At  this  meeting,  the  Committee  approved  a temporary increase 

from $4 billion to  $6 billion in  the  limit  on  changes between Committee 

meetings  in  System Account  holdings  of  U.S.  government and  federal agency 

securities specified  in paragraph  1(a) of  the  authorization for domestic 

open  market  operations.  The  increase was  effective for  the  intermeeting 

period  ending with the  close  of  business  on  October 2, 1984.  

Votes  for this  action:  Messrs. Volcker, 

Solomon,  Boehne, Boykin, Corrigan,  Gramley, 
Mrs.  Horn, Messrs.  Martin, Partee,  Rice, 
Ms.  Seger, and  Mr. Wallich.  Votes  against 
this  action:  None.  

This  action was  taken on the recommendation of  the Manager for 

Domestic  Operations.  The  Manager  had  advised  that  projected  increases  in 

required  reserves  and  currency might  require  net  purchases  of  securities 

over  the  intermeeting  interval  in  amounts close  to  the  usual  $4 billion 

leeway.  A likely  rise  in Treasury  balances  at  Federal Reserve Banks  would 

add  to  the need  for System purchases  of  securities.  Accordingly,  the 

Manager requested  the  temporary  increase  in  the  limit  to  provide  the 

necessary leeway for handling  that  contingency.

