SUMMARY  OF  COMMENTARY  ON  CURRENT  ECONOMIC  CONDITIONS
BY  FEDERAL  RESERVE  DISTRICTS

October  1984

TABLE  OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY 

............... 

....... 

........................ 

First District - Boston 

....................................... 

Second  District - New  York ....................................... 

Third District - Philadelphia 

........................................ 

Fourth District - Cleveland  .... 

.......... 

..................... 

Fifth District - Richmond  .................................. 

Sixth  District - Atlanta  ..................................... 

Seventh  District - Chicago  ............................... 

.... 

Eighth  District - St.  Louis .................................... 

Ninth  District - Minneapolis  ...................... 

.......... 

Tenth  District - Kansas  City  ....... 

... 

........ 

................ 

Eleventh  District - Dallas  ............................................... 

Twelfth  District - San  Francisco 

................. 

.............. 

i

I-1

-1

l-

IV-1

V-I

VI-

VI-1

VmI-1

IX-1

X-I

XI-1

XH-l

SUMMARY*

The  economic  expansion  has  slowed  in  most  districts,  but  a

resurgence  in  consumer  spending  suggests  that  the  slowdown  may  only  be a

pause  in  a  recovery  that  has not  run  its  full  course.  With  the  exception  of

Boston,  which  reports  a continuation  of  steady  growth,  the  districts  report

moderating  economic  recoveries  in  the  third  quarter.  Slower  growth  has

been  especially  apparent  in  residential  construction  and  manufacturing

activities.  Agricultural  conditions  are  mixed.  Generally,  crop  conditions

continue  to  improve,  but  low  prices  are  expected  to  keep  most  districts'

farm  income  depressed.  There  is  a  very  bright  spot,  though,  in  the  econ-

omy.  Consumer  spending  in  September  and  early  October  was  robust

throughout  the  country.  These  developments  in  real  economic  activity  are

reflected  in  financial  conditions:  business  loans  have  been  somewhat  weak,

while consumer  loans have  been  strong.

Construction

Part  of  the  recent  slowdown  in  the  recovery  can  be  attributed

to  residential  construction  activity.  While  the  reports  are  mixed,  half  the

districts  report  that  housing  starts  have  weakened,  even  though  they  re-

main  at  a  high  level. 

Philadelphia,  Cleveland,  St.  Louis,  Minneapolis,

Dallas,  and  San  Francisco  all  report that  either housing  starts or  home  sales

have  slowed.  New  York  and  Atlanta  are  the  only  obvious  exceptions;

housing  is  reportedly  doing  quite  well  there.  Several  districts  also  report

strength  in  commercial  construction.

*Prepared  at the  Federal  Reserve  Bank of  Minneapolis.

Manufacturing  and  Industry

The  slowdown  in  the  recovery  is  also  being  caused  by  some

slowing  in  manufacturing  activity.  Although  manufacturing  continues  to

expand  in  most  districts,  it  is  doing  so  at  a  modest  pace.  New  York,  for

example,  reports  that  upstate  managers  recently  experienced  a  slower

growth  of  new  orders  and  a considerable  number  of actual  declines.  Simi-

larly,  Philadelphia,  Cleveland,  St.  Louis,  and  Dallas-districts  that  specifi-

cally  report  on  new  orders-say  that demand  generally  remained  unchanged

or  declined  somewhat  in  recent  weeks.

Agriculture

Agricultural  conditions  are  mixed.  Most  areas  expect  average

to  above  average  crop  yields  this  year.  For  example,  Minneapolis  reports

favorable  crop  conditions  in  its  district,  and  St.  Louis  expects  its  crop

production  to  be  near  the  1982  levels.  However,  crop  prices  remain  low

and  continue  to  fall.  Minneapolis  reports  that  the  farm  price  index  for

Minnesota  fell  3  percent  between  July  and  August.  With  low  and  declining

prices,  districts  expect  cash  receipts  and  farm  income  to  be  depressed  this

year.  Only  Richmond  is  optimistic  for  its  farm  sector.  It expects  produc-

tion  gains  to  outstrip  falling  prices,  leaving  farmers  with  higher  cash  re-

ceipts and  income  than  last  year.

Consumer  Spending

Consumer  spending 

is 

the  clear  bright  spot  in  virtually  all

district  reports.  While  somewhat  restrained  in  most  of  July  and  August,

consumers  started  to  spend  again  in  September  and  early  October.  Rich-

mond  reports  that  consumer  activity  is  back  on  its  earlier  strong  trend,

with  a  significant  rebound  in  durable  good  purchases.  Atlanta  reports  that

retail  sales  were  generally  robust  in  September,  with  department  store

sales  in  its  metropolitan  areas  outpacing  those  in  the  nation.  St.  Louis

points  to  retail  sales  as  the  greatest  strength  in  its district  economy.  Only

Chicago  and  San  Francisco  report  that  consumer  spending  has  been  mixed.

Both  see  some  weakness  in  durable  good  sales.  San  Francisco,  however,

notes a  recent  pickup  in  retail  sales  in the  Pacific  Northwest.

Overall,  inventories  appear  to  be  satisfactory  relative  to  sales.

Finance

Loans  at  commercial  banks  generally  mirror  the  slowdown 

in

the  recovery  and  the  recent  strength  in  consumer  spending.  Business  loan

demand  is  reported  to  be  sluggish  and  very  soft  in  several  districts.  Yet

most  districts  that  report  on  consumer  loans  say  these  loans  are  quite

strong  and  are  expected  to  remain  so.  Philadelphia,  for  example,  reports

that  over  the  past  six  weeks  business  loans  in  its  area  grew  only  between

zero  and  2.5  percent,  while consumer  loans  grew  from  4  to  10  percent.

I-1

FIRST  DISTRICT-BOSTON

Steady  economic growth continues  in  the  First District.  Retailers

report generally satisfactory  sales gains.  Manufacturers  are experiencing

good order  rates, although a few sectors  remain weak.  Price  increases

remain moderate in both manufacturing  and  retail, although several  contacts

mentioned  tight local  labor markets.  Deposit  growth and  demand  for bank

loans continue  strong, although  two nationally-oriented banking

organizations reported  some  slackening  in business  loan demand.  The

outlook is  optimistic, in spite  of  some concern  that  tax  policy changes

will occur  after  the  elections,  regardless  of  the  outcome.

Retail

Retailers in  the  First District  continued  to make  reasonable  sales

gains in September, although performance  relative to plan was mixed.

Several merchants expressed mild  concern with  inventory  levels.  Price

competition is widespread,  and prices  are holding  steady or rising  only

slightly.

Sales  reported for September ranged  from 8 to  14 percent above

September 1983 on a comparable  stores basis.  The department  store chain

with 8 percent  growth was under plan,  but  forecasts  improved results  for

the  next  several months.  The 14  percent increase was  "way over"  that

discount chain's  plan.  These  two  chains also  reported wide  sales variance

across stores  - customers  appear to  be quite  responsive to  local

promotions, upgraded  store interiors,  and  local competition.  Hard goods

and toys  continued  to outpace  sales of  men's and ladies'  clothing.

I-2

Inventories were generally  "as usual,"  except when unanticipated

sales changes  left  them above or  below plan.  Several merchants  cited stiff

competition in supplier and retail markets  as explanations  for stable or

moderately increasing prices.  However, markups have  been maintained at

normal levels.  One chain  had difficulty  in finding  new headquarters and

warehouse  space  and  faces an extremely  tight local  labor market.

Manufacturing

Manufacturing  activity in the First  District  continues  to  expand.

Some  sectors report greater  strength than others.  Firms or divisions

producing computers and  semiconductors,  automobile-related and  (less

uniformly) housing-related products report  healthy growth.  Products

related  to  the  commercial aircraft,  utilities, and  off-the-road equipment

industries remain in  the doldrums.  Exporting  continues to be  dampened by

the  strong  dollar while overseas  plants  are performing  satisfactorily.

While order  rates and  sales are  rising,  one respondent  said

backlogs had  fallen  because  the  firm had  geared  up production.  The

Purchasing Management Association of Boston also  reported an  easing of

backlogs  in September.  Inventories are  generally at  satisfactory levels

relative  to  sales.

Prices  are  rising very moderately, perhaps  1-5  percent.

Respondents mentioned strong domestic  price competition as well as  imports

(or  the  threat  of  imports)  benefiting from  the  strong dollar.  When

suppliers  attempt to raise prices  "too much" (more  than 3-5  percent),  firms

take  their business  elsewhere.  Very  tight  input market conditions reported

by  a high  technology firm have moderated recently.  Wage settlements have

I-3

also been moderate  recently, reducing  cost pressures.  However, two  firms

complained  of  increasing tightness  in the  New England  labor market  for

professionals.  One  has  reinstituted an in-house training  program.

Capital  spending  is  up.  The  reasons are  varied.  Some  firms  are

combining productivity  improvement with expanding physical capacity.

Others  are making  only labor-saving  replacement investments because  of

existing  excess  capacity.  Purchasing managers also  indicated  increased

capital  spending  in  September, and expect  continued higher levels  over  the

next 3-6 months.

Commercial Banking

Larger  regional  banks, who  have been experiencing very  strong

corporate  loan demand  since  the  beginning of  the year, note a moderation in

that demand  within  the  last  30  days.  Consumer  loan demand  continues to  be

strong, however.  Smaller regional banks,  particularly  those located  in

areas dominated by  high technology firms,  report  continued  strength in  both

corporate and consumer lending.  Two  contacts noted a definite  increase  in

commercial real estate investment  and construction loan activity  during  the

past  60 days.

No  changes were  reported on  the  liability side.  Deposit growth

continues  to  be  strong.  Intense competition  for consumer time  deposits has

kept  these  interest  rates  high.

One  large  regional  bank  contact expected  corporate  lending  to  pick

up  in  the  next  30  days, while other respondents expected  essentially

unchanged conditions.  Interest  rates are expected  to continue unchanged  or

to  decline  slightly  over  the  next  30 days,  but  to  rise  slightly after the

elections.

II-1

SECOND  DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Introduction

Economic  activity  in  the  Second  District  grew moderately  in

recent  weeks,  but  at  a  slightly  slower  pace  than 

in 

late  summer.

Consumer  spending  continued  to  show  improvement  in  September  and  early

October,  and  generally  met 

the  expectations  of  retailers. 

Most

purchasing  managers  report  growth  or  stability  of  new  orders  but  a

growing  minority  reported  actual  decreases.  Business 

loan  demand  was

mixed  across  banks,  and 

in 

the  aggregate  was  essentially  flat. 

The

office  market  softened  in  some  areas  while  remaining  strong  in  New

York  City.  Homebuilders  will  be  busy  through  the  remainder  of  1984,

and in parts of  the District are optimistic about next  year.

Consumer Spending

The  pace  of  consumer  spending 

in 

the  Second  District  shows

continued 

improvement. 

According  to  area  retailers,  the  strengthening

in  department  store  sales  which  began  in  late  August  has  continued

through  the  first  week  in  October.  September  sales  gains  varied

widely  among  respondents,  averaging  about  8  percent  over  levels  of  a

year  ago,  and  generally matching  expectations.  The  region  on  average

outperformed  the  nation's  sales  growth,  but  business  in  New  York  City

was  not  as  good  as  in 

the  rest  of  the  District. 

Inventories  remained

mostly  on  target,  averaging  15  percent  over  last  year,  partly  with  the

help  of  promotional  markdowns.  However,  one  higher-income  department

store  chain  reported  inventories  22  percent  over  1984  as  a  result  of

11-2

sluggish business  since June.

Business  Activity

Economic  activity  continued  to  expand 

in  recent  weeks,  but

the  pace  is  slowing.  Reports  by upstate  purchasing managers  indicated

significantly slower growth  of new orders  and faster delivery  times  in

September.  While  the  majority  of  firms  faced  conditions  that  were

unchanged 

from  the  prior  month  or  still 

improving, 

the  proportion

reporting  actual  decreases  of  orders  grew  to  nearly  one-third  in

Buffalo. 

Major  plant  construction  or  expansion  projects  were

announced  by  several  firms  across  the  state,  such  as  manufacturers  of

electronics,  chemicals,  plastics,  and  furniture. 

The  Army  will

station  a  new  division  in  economically  depressed  Jefferson  County,

generating  up  to  20,000  construction  jobs.  The  unemployment  rate  in

New  York  state,  seasonally  adjusted,  fell  from  7.7  percent  in  August

to  7.0  percent  in  September,  while  the  New  Jersey  rate  held  steady  at

6.2 percent.

The  cost  of  electricity  on  Long  Island  is  of  growing

concern.  The  state  Commerce  Department  reports  that  400  firms  have

threatened  to  close  or  relocate 

in  response  to  recent  and  expected

future  rate  hikes  associated  with  the  Shoreham  nuclear  plant.

Financial Developments

Business 

loan  demand  at  regional  banks  in  the  Second  District

has  been  mixed  in  recent  weeks.  Overall  volume  was  essentially  flat,

as  has been the  case nationwide.  Borrowing by car dealers is  reported

to  be  down,  reflecting  lower-than-usual 

inventories  at  the  end  of  the

II-3

model  year.  In  contrast,  service 

industry  demand,  particularly  by

advertising  agencies,  has  been  strong.  Upstate  bankers  indicate  that

loan  demand 

from  the  manufacturing  sector  was  especially  weak 

in

Western  New  York,  but  was  fairly  strong  in 

the  Syracuse  area.

Borrowing by retailers also was  geographically mixed.

Construction and Real Estate

Residential  construction  is  operating  at  capacity  in  the

District,  and  activity  through  the  end  of  the  year  may  be  restrained

only  by  unfavorable  weather  or  shortages  of  skilled  labor  and

subcontractors.  Demand  appears  to  be  driven  primarily  by  rising

incomes, 

and  current  interest  rates  seem 

to  have 

little 

downward

effect.  Planning  for 1985  is  unusually active  for  October  in  New York

City's  northern  suburbs.  Homebuilders  generally  expect  a  repeat  of

this year's strong performance.

The  office 

leasing  market  softened  considerably 

in  parts  of

the  Second  District.  High  levels  of  speculative  construction  are

still 

taking place  despite  sluggish  demand 

in  areas  such  as  Fairfield

County  and  northern  New  Jersey. 

On  Long  Island,  in  spite  of

electricity  rate  fears,  demand 

is 

fairly  strong  but  some  observers

question  whether  it  will  be  sufficient  to  absorb  the  large  amounts  of

space  coming  on  line.  The  market  in  Midtown  Manhattan  continues  to  be

very  active,  and  the  likelihood  is  increasing  that prime  space will be

scarce  and  rents  will  rise  by  year-end. 

Downtown,  concern  about

potential  oversupply  seems 

to  have  abated.  Demand  seems  stable,  and

very  large  blocks  of  space  are  scarce.  Still,  observers  predict

longer  phase-in  periods  for  recently  announced  construction  projects.

III-1

THIRD  DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Third  District  business  contacts  have  given  a  mixed  report  on  the  economy  in

October.  Manufacturers  continue  to  see  a  deceleration  in  the growth  of  industrial  activity  and

realtors  indicate  that  sales  are  down  about  15  percent  compared  to  last  year  at  this  time.  In

contrast,  retail  sales  remain  very  strong  in  the  Third  District  and  the  financial  sector  is  sailing

along,  but  with some  slight softness  in the  demand  for commercial  loans.

Looking  ahead,  a  healthier  business  climate  is  anticipated  in  the  manufacturing

sector  and  realtors  are  looking  for  sales  to  pick  up  by  about  5  percent  by  March.  The  growth

rates  of  both  consumer  loans  and  retail  sales  may  slow  in  early  1985  if  interest  rates  rise,

according  to local  business  spokesmen.

MANUFACTURING

Third  District  manufacturers  continue  to  see  a  slight  deceleration  in  growth,

according 

to 

the  October  Business  Outlook  Survey. 

This  month,  35  percent  of  the

manufacturers  surveyed  say  industrial  activity continues  to  increase,  while  13  percent  report  a

decline.  A  slight  majority  say there  has  been  no  change  since  September.

Specific  indicators  turned  in  a  positive  performance,  although  it  was  slightly  less

robust  than  last  month.  About  half  of  the  executives  polled  cited  gains  in  new  orders  and

shipments.  Over  two-thirds  of  the  respondents,  however,  reported  no  change  in  producers'

backlogs,  delivery  time,  employee  payrolls,  and  the  length  of the  average  workweek.

The  six-month  outlook  for  manufacturing 

is  better  this  month 

than  last.

According  to  the  survey,  growth  is  expected  to  continue: 

50  percent  of  the  respondents

anticipate  a  healthier  business  climate  by  March  and  only  13  percent  expect  worse  conditions.

Gains  are  expected  in  new  orders,  shipments,  delivery  times,  employee  payrolls,  length  of  the

average  workweek,  and  capital  expenditures.

Industrial  prices  for  both  raw  materials  and  finished  goods  are  relatively  stable

this month,  as  about  three quarters  of the  executives  polled  report  no  change  since  September

III-2

in  either  prices  paid  or  prices  received. 

The  outlook,  however,  does  show  widespread

expectations  of  price  hikes  within  six  months.  Eighty-three  percent  of  respondents  anticipate

higher  costs  by  the  end  of  the  first  quarter  of  1985,  while  54  percent  foresee  receiving  more  for

the goods  they sell.

RETAIL

Demand  is  still  strong  in  the  retail  sector.  After  a  little  summer  sluggishness,

area  retailers  are  meeting  or  exceeding  their  sales  expectations,  with gains  of  10  to  20  percent

over  last  year's  receipts.  Third  District  merchants  project  a  strong  ending  for  1984,  although

sales  may  not  match  those  of  last  year's  exceptional  holiday season.  Over  the  next  six  months,

the  rate  of  growth  in  retail  sales  is  expected  to  slow  somewhat.  Sales  at  the  end  of  the  first

quarter  are  likely  to stand  at about  8  percent  over  a year  earlier.

Inventories  are  up  about  10  percent  over  last  year  and  are  heavier  than  usual, but

are  in  line  with  sales  expectations.  The  proportion  of  sales  made  on  credit  remains  stable  at

about  60  percent  at  area  department  stores.

FINANCE

Loan  demand  in  the  Third  District  is  softening  slightly  on  the  commercial  side.

Bankers  report  a  range  of  0  to  2.5  percent  growth  in  C&I  loans  over  the  past  six  weeks,  with

most  of  that  growth  coming  in  the most  recent  2  weeks.  Bank  executives  anticipate  a  pickup  in

commercial  loan  demand  within  the  next  six  months  in  conjunction  with  further  maturation  of

the  economic  expansion.

In  the  consumer  lending  area,  financial  contacts  report  4  to  10  percent  growth

over  the  past  six  weeks.  On  a  year-over-year  basis,  consumer  loans  are  still  running  about  20

percent  ahead.  One  local  bank  reports  an  increase  of  50  percent  in  retail  loan  volume  over  a

year  ago,  principally  due  to  intensified  development  of  credit  card  operations.  Area  bankers

look  for  continued  growth  in the  consumer  area but at  a slower  pace.

III-3

The  prime  lending  rate dropped  from  12.75  to  12.50  percent  on  October  17  at  most

large  banks  in  the  area.  Third  District  bank  economists  predict  another  25  basis  point  cut

within  the  next  few  weeks.  Their  six-month  projections,  however,  show  a  prime  rate  of  about

15  percent  as  a  result of increased  credit  demand.

Deposit  growth,  in  general,  has  remained  flat  with  the  exception  of  savings

certificates  with  a  maturity  of  eighteen  months  or  more. 

This  may  reflect  consumers'

expectations  of  further  drops in  interest  rates  and  an attempt  to lock  in higher  rates  now.

REAL  ESTATE

Residential  real  estate  sales  have  been  flat  over  the  past  six  weeks  and  contacts

say sales  are  down  by  about  15  percent  compared  to  year-ago  levels.  They  attribute  this almost

entirely  to  high  mortgage  interest  rates.  Thirty-year  fixed-rate  conventional  mortgages  are

available  at  13.9  percent.  Adjustable  rate  loans,  negotiable  after  one  year  with  20  percent

down,  stand  at  11.5  to  12  percent.  Inventories  of unsold  houses  have  been  a  little  heavy  lately

as  a  result  of  the  mini-slump  in  sales  and  continued  new  construction,  mostly  of  townhouse  and

condominium  complexes.  Realtors  are  optimistic  for  the  future,  however.  Unit  sales  are

expected  to grow  by about  5  percent  from  their current  levels by  March  1985.

Commercial  real  estate  is  reported  to  be  experiencing  a  boomlet.  Building

permits  are  up  and  office  occupancy  rates  are around  90  percent  in  both  the  city  and suburbs.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary

Reports  from  this  District  indicate  moderation  of  economic  growth.

Employment  is  growing  slowly  and  pressures  to  avoid  price  increases  are

intense.  Retail  sales  gains  are  moderating.  Manufacturers  report  either

smaller  order  increases  or  declines  in  orders.  Inventories  are  near  desired

levels.  Housing  activity  continues  to  fall,  but  banks  report  business  and

consumer  lending remains  strong.

District Labor Market  Conditions

Labor  market  conditions  in  the  District  improved  in  September.  Employment

increased  and  unemployment  declined  in  Ohio,  reducing  the  unemployment  rate

to  9.2%  (s.a.),  2.3  percentage  points  below  its  year-earlier  level.

Manufacturing  employment continues  to  rise  slowly.

Prices

Firms  report  substantial  competitive  pressure  on  prices. 

A  survey  of

manufacturing firms  in  the  region  reveals  fewer  firms  are  raising  prices  and

more  are cutting  prices  than  three  months  ago, while  most  are  holding prices

steady. 

Those  firms  also  report  a  substantial  slowing  of  increases  in

prices  paid  for  commodities  and  services. 

Capital  goods  producers

anticipate  using  productivity  gains  primarily  to  moderate  increases  of

prices  charged  rather  than  to  widen  profit  margins,  despite  their  view  that

profit  margins  are very  narrow  for  this  stage  of  an economic  expansion.

Retail  Sales

General  merchandisers  in  this  District  report  double-digit  sales  gains  from

year-earlier 

levels 

for 

September. 

The 

increases, 

however,  were

IV-2

concentrated  in  the  first  part  of  the  month.  Gains  dropped  back  to  a

single-digit  pace  by  month-end  and  remained  there  through  early  October.

Retailers  expect  this  more  moderate  pace  to  continue  through  yearend,  with

one  analyst  anticipating  a  7%  -

8  1/2%  gain  for  the  year  as  a  whole.

Cutbacks  in orders have  kept  inventories  at acceptable  levels.

Area  auto  dealers  report  an  easing  in  early-October  sales. 

Low

inventory  rather  than  a  lack  of  demand  continues  to  be  cited  as  the  major

cause of  slower  sales.

Manufacturing

Firms  in  this  District  generally report  new orders  continue  to  rise  but  at  a

reduced  pace,  although  several  capital  goods  producers  report  order

declines.  Weakness  in  capital  goods  orders  is  generally  attributed  to

inventory  adjustment,  growth  of  imports,  and  slowing  of  business  fixed

investment  to  a  more  normal  pace  for  this  stage  of  the  business  cycle.  One

capital  goods  producer,  noting  the  strength  of  new  appropriations  for

capital  spending,  expects  orders  to  rebound  soon,  and  capital  spending  to

decline  in  late  1985  at  the  earliest.  Firms  experiencing  declines  in  orders

expect  to  use  order  backlogs  to  avoid  reducing  output,  but  only  for  a  few

months.  A producer  of  truck  parts  notes  that  there  was  a decline  in  orders

for  large  trucks  in  the  third  quarter  because  orders  had  been  bunched  into

the  first  half  to  avoid  tax  increases  effective  July  1.  He  expects  truck

orders  to  rebound  in  the  fourth quarter.

Steel  producers 

report 

soaring 

imports  and  customer 

inventory

liquidation  have  caused a reduction of  orders  and  production.  Together  with

excess  capacity,  this  weakness  in  demand  has  kept  transaction  prices  well

below  published  prices.  A  major  producer  estimates  it  will  be  late  in  the

first  quarter  of  1985 before  customer  inventory  targets  are reached.

IV-3

A  tire  producer  reports  orders  from  original  equipment  manufacturers

continue  very  strong  but  orders  for  replacement  tires  have  softened  in  the

last  two  months.  Despite  their having  operated at  capacity  for  many  months,

domestic  tire  producers generally  plan no  increases  in  production capacity.

Inventories

Inventories  generally  appear  to  be  near  desired  levels.  Most  manufacturers

report  inventories  of  materials  and  finished  goods  are  being  kept  level,

while  roughly  equal  numbers  of  firms  report  inventory  increases  and

decreases. 

Excessive  inventories  are  reported  in  the  steel  industry,

especially  at  steel  service  centers,  and  in  the  farm  machinery  industry.

Inventories  of truck and  automobile  tires  are  very  low  for  this  stage  of  the

business  cycle  but  manufacturers,  distributors,  and  retailers  seem satisfied

with  current  inventory  levels.  General  mechandisers  report  inventory  levels

are  satisfactory,  and  automobile  dealers  complain  that  inventories  are  too

low.

Housing

After  an unusual  one-time  surge  in  August  funded  by  proceeds  of  State  of

Ohio  mortgage  revenue  bonds,  housing  activity  in  September  resumed  its

downward  trend  of  recent  months.  Despite  signs  of  further  weakening  during

the  fourth  quarter,  market  participants  are  expecting  better-than-normal

sales  and  profits  for  this  stage  of  an  economic  expansion.  Nevertheless,

builders  and  realtors  are  undertaking  significant  steps,  including  reducing

building  on  speculation  and  lowering  employment  through  attrition,  to

weather the  slowdown that  they  forecast  will  continue  through  mid-1985.

Mortgage  lenders  report  considerably  fewer  applications  in  the  third

quarter  than  in  the  second,  with  applications  in  September  ranging  from

20-40%  below  expected  levels.  Lenders  indicate  that  high  mortgage  rates

IV-4

have  softened  demand  considerably,  and  a  recent  slight  drop  in  mortgage

rates  had  no  effect  on  borrowing.  Unlike  in  many  other  parts  of  the

country,  mortgage  borrowers  in  this  area  seem  to  be  particularly  cautious

about  adjustable rate  mortgages.

Commercial Banking

Loan outstandings  in  all  major categories  increased  at  Fourth District  banks

during  September.  Business  lending  increased  significantly,  after  being

relatively  flat  in  July  and  August.  Consumer  loan  demand  continues  to  be

strong  although  the  pace  of  lending  has  tapered  off  somewhat.  Bankers

expect  business  and  consumer  loan  demand  to  remain  quite  good  in  the  next

few months.

Evidence  suggests  that  district  banks  used borrowed  funds  to  accommodate

much  of  the  recent  loan  growth.  Although  savings  deposits  increased,  banks

experienced a greater  decline  in  transaction deposits.

FIFTH  DISTRICT  - RICHMOND

Overview

A  confluence  of  special  factors  is  making  it  very  difficult  to

evaluate  the underlying  condition of economic  activity in  the  Fifth District.

Seasonal  factors,  weather,  labor  negotiations,  and  especially  rising  imports

appear  to  be  masking  more  general  trends.  The  manufacturing  sector,  for

instance,  seems  to  be  making  further headway,  although  losses  in  the apparel

and  textile  group  are  continuing.  The  weakness  earlier  reported  in  the

retail  sector  now  appears  to  have  been  less  than  uniform,  and  the  earlier

momentum  of  retail  sales  has  been  recaptured  in  any  event. 

There  have

clearly  been production  losses  in  several  areas,  notably  coal,  textiles,  and

automobile  related manufacturing,  as  a result  of  labor  negotiations.  In  the

auto-related  sectors,  these  losses  should  be  made  up  rather  quickly.  Coal

production  continues  very  strong,  with  a  record  year  virtually  assured.

Construction activity remains  strong, but  somewhat  less  uniform than  in early

summer.  Loan  demand  is  essentially  stable,  with  consumer  installment  loans

back  on  trend,  and  there  have  been modest  inflows  of  consumer  deposits  into

District  financial institutions.

Manufacturing

Most  evidence  suggests  that  further  gains  in  employment  and  output

have  occurred  in  District  manufacturing  in  recent  weeks.  It  is  almost

certain that  the  machinery  and  equipment  and  electrical  equipment  industries

have  expanded  employment.  Also,  seasonal  strength  in  food  processing  and

tobacco  manufacturing  is  boosting  employment  and  output.  On  the  other  hand,

V-2

textile  and  apparel  producers  have  not  exhibited  their  normal  seasonal

strength.  Most  other  industries  have  shown  little  change  of  late,  and  some,

such  as  paper  producers,  continue  to  operate  at  extremely  high  levels  of

capacity utilization.

Manufacturers'  inventories  have  been  essentially  flat  recently,  and

there  appears  to  be  only  scattered  concern  that  they  might  be  excessive.

Plant  and  equipment  is  largely  in  line  with  perceived  needs,  although  there

is  decidedly  less  optimism  among  District  manufacturers  than  in  recent

months.  Prices  at  the manufacturing  level are practically  flat.

Consumer Activity

At  present,  consumer  activity  is  back  on  the  strong  trend  estab-

lished  earlier  in  the  year,  despite  some  isolated  spots  of  weakness  in

mid-summer.  Current  indicators  are  that  the  earlier  weakness  was  less

widespread  than  earlier  indicated,  and  was  concentrated  in  durable  goods.

Some  areas  are  now  reporting  a  significant  rebound  in  those  goods  more

recently.  Thus,  year over year gains  are once  again  in  double digits  almost

across  the  board.  As  an  aside,  some  respondents  seemed  surprised  by  the

suggestion that  August may have  been an  off month for  retail  sales.  One

other  factor,  however,  has  been unusual weather.  In  particular,  a hurricane

significantly  disrupted business  activity  in  a sizeable part  of  the District

in the  past month.

Construction

Commercial  construction  continues  to  lead  the way  for  the District,

especially  in  the  metropolitan  areas. 

The  pipeline  for  these  projects

remains  full,  as  new  plans  and  announcements  are  still  keeping  up  with

completions.

Housing  activity  is  by  most  indications,  making  a comeback  after  a

brief  respite.  Once  again,  major  strength  seems  to  be  concentrated  in  and

around  the  metropolitan  areas,  but  that  has  been  the  case,  more  or  less,

throughout  the  recovery.  All  in  all,  housing  construction  and  sales  are  at

or near the levels  reached earlier  in  the year.

Agriculture

Agricultural  cash  receipts  in  the  Fifth  District  are  expected  to

rebound sharply  from the  drought  dominated levels  of  a year  ago.  Preliminary

estimates  call  for  District  cash  receipts  rising  12  to  17  percent  over  1983

levels.  Larger  crop  production  as  well  as  increased  livestock  production

have  fueled  the  cash  receipts  increase,  more  than  outweighing  lower  crop

prices  experienced  this  season.  Production  cost  increases  were  modest  in

1984,  indicating  that  agricultural  net  cash  receipts  levels  will  also  show

improvement.

The Outlook

Expectations  around  the  District  are  very  mixed  at  present.

Manufacturers,  as  noted,  are  considerably  less  optimistic  than  in  recent

months,  perhaps  even  pessimistic.  Quite  a few  now seem  to  feel  that  current

levels  of  activity  are  unsustainable.  Much  of  this  lack  of  optimism  is

related  to  import  competition,  however.  Textile  and  apparel  producers  are

very concerned and  1984  imports  to  date  could easily justify  that concern.

Consumers  and  retailers,  on  the  other  hand,  are  seen  as  confident

and  still holding to  positive expectations, at  least  for  the  remainder of  the

V-4

year.  Retailers  are  described  as  cautious  with  regard  to  inventories,  but

indications  are  that  inventories  are  adequate  to  support  continued  strength

in  sales.  Retailers  are  not,  apparently,  inclined  to  risk  losing  sales  on

this  account.

There  is  little  sense  that  inflation  poses  any  near  term  threat.

Prices  are expected to  rise  only very  little in  coming months.

VI-1

SIXTH  DISTRICT  - ATLANTA

The  Southeast's  economy  continues  to progress  in  spite  of  nagging  difficulties

in  several  areas.  The  strong  dollar  and  high  mortgage  interest  rates  have  retarded

manufacturing  employment  growth  and  dampened  somewhat  the  region's  usually  dynamic

housing  industry.  Inadequate  dealer  stocks  of  popular  automobile  models  and  drought-

reduced  crop  yields  have  countered  the  general  expansion.  On  the  positive  side,  steady

consumer  spending  continues  to  be  the  principal  impetus  behind  the  region's  growth,

followed  by  swelling  defense-related  payrolls,  strong  commercial  construction  and  a

rebound  in  housing,  and  improving  tourism.

Employment  and  Industry. 

In  August,  the  District  unemployment  rate  of  8

percent  continued  near  the  level  that  has  prevailed  since  last  April.  Florida  and  Georgia

posted  unemployment  rates  slightly  over  6  percent,  contrasting  sharply  with  Alabama

and  Mississippi  at  11.2  and  11.3  percent,  respectively.  Weakness  in  some  industries

has  been  offset  by  strength  in  others.  Expectations  for  forest  products  have  been

revised  downward  as  a result  of  slackening  demand  for  housing  and  Canadian  competition.

In  spite  of  productivity-enhancing  investments  by  domestic  textile  and  apparel  firms,

foreign  producers  continue  to  increase  market  share  due  to  the  strong  dollar.  Chemical

companies  are  reacting  to  foreign  competitive  pressures  by  reducing  production  costs

and  shunning  large  projects  that  could  result  in  excess  capacity.

In  contrast,  defense  and  related  industries  are  boosting  payrolls  throughout

the  region. 

Shipyards  doing  Navy  work,  high-tech  electronic  firms  and  aerospace

companies  are  all  experiencing  rapid  growth.  Appliance  producers  expect  their  record-

breaking  sales  to  continue  through  year-end.  Oil  and  gas  drilling  activity  should  remain

strong  in  the  months  ahead  and  show  signs  of increasing  stability.  Carpet  manufacturers

report  strong  sales,  especially  for  commercial  use.

VI-2

Consumer Spending.  Retail spending  through  September  exceeded  its  year-ago

level  by  a  substantial  margin.  Retailers  in  the  Southeast  reported  varying  sales  gains

for  August,  but  generally  robust  September  sales.  The  Atlanta,  Orlando,  Jacksonville,

and  Miami  metropolitan  areas  continue  to  outpace  the  nation  in  department  store  sales.

Clothing,  electronic  items,  and  housewares  are  early  fall  best  sellers.

A  low  inventory  of  popular  models  weakened  auto  sales  during  August  and

September,  according  to  car  dealers  throughout  the  region.  Although  August  car  and

truck  registrations 

in  the  Southeast  fell  sharply  from  previous  months,  year-to-date

figures  were  19  percent  ahead  of  the  same  period  last  year.  A  major  auto  producer's

sales  in  the  region  and  the  nation  advanced  10  and  18  percent,  respectively,  in  the

first  nine  months  of  1984  compared  to  1983.

Construction.  Residential  construction  in  the  Southeast  remained  surprisingly

buoyant  through  early  October,  particularly  in  central  Florida  and  the  Nashville  area.

However,  single-  and  multifamily  building  permits  are  down  from  their  year-ago  levels.

Builders  believe  that  uncertainty  about  the  overall  state  of  the  economy  and  the  impact

of  government  deficits,  in  particular,  is  keeping  interest  rates  high  and  limiting  housing

activity.  The  downward  creep  in  mortgage  rates  over  the  past  three  months  has

increased  the  popularity  of  fixed-rate  contracts.  Mississippi's  housing  market  got  an

infusion  of  new  money  from  the  state's  $175-million  housing  bond  issue  designated  for

below-market-rate  home  mortgages.  Commercial  construction  continues  to  surge,  with

office  construction  leading  the  way.

Financial  Services.  Total  loans  by  large  commercial  banks  were  up 

in

September  over  August.  Both  commercial  and  residential  real  estate  loans  showed

continued  strength  in  August  and  September,  while  some  leveling  off  occurred  in  business

loans.  Contacts  attribute  slower  business  lending  to  corporations  reaching  desired

inventory  levels  and  moderating  economic  growth.  They  also  report  that  a  large  share

VI-3

of  commercial  real  estate  loans  in  September  was  for  the  building  of  office  parks,

strip  shopping  centers,  and  hotels.  August  mortgage  commitments  at  S&Ls  dropped  9

percent  from  July  and  were  11  percent  below  commitments  for  the  same  month  last  year.

Tourism.  Early  fall  activity  in  the  tourism  industry  exceeded  its  year-earlier

performance.  Visitor  center  registrations  were  up  in  every  state  except  Tennessee.

Many  attractions  posted  double-digit  increases  in  attendance.  Boosted  by  strong business

and  improved  convention  travel,  hotels  seemed  to  have  filled  more  rooms  without

lowering  rates.  Despite  poor  average  daily  attendance  of  38,000  at  the  World's  Fair,

New  Orleans  hotels  have  enjoyed  a  12  percent  increase  in  occupancy  and  a  $10  average

increase  in  room  rates.

Air  traffic  remains  strong  at  most  District  airports.  Contacts  cite  renewed

travel  interest  following  the  Olympics  and ideal  weather  as  two  main  factors  contributing

to  the  overall  high  level  of  tourism  activity  in  the  District.  The  start  of  the  school

year  has  not  dampened  travel  to  the  extent  expected.

Agriculture.  Significant  changes  have  occurred  in  the  prospects  for  soybeans

and  cotton  in  the  region  over  the  last  month.  A  late  summer  drought  in  Georgia  has

caused  projected  soybean  production  to  fall  by  12  million  bushels  for  an  approximately

$75-million  decline 

in  revenue. 

On 

the  other  hand,  weather  has  favored  cotton

production,  causing  estimated  yields  to  approach  or  surpass  record  yields  of  previous

years.  The  net  effect  of  these  changes  is  likely  to  be  a  modest  decline  in  net  revenue

to  the  region's  producers  of  major  crops.

The  US.  Department  of  Agriculture  projects  a  larger  domestic  supply  of

orange  juice  this  year  than  in  the  1983-84  season.  The  Florida  crop  is  expected  to  be

about  30  percent  smaller  than  in  1980-81,  the  last  year  without  freeze  damage.  Citrus

canker  has  not  yet  been  found  in  bearing  groves  but  was  discovered  in  a  seventh  Florida

nursery.

VII-1

SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.  Developments  of  recent weeks suggest  that  economic  activity

in  the  Seventh District has  plateaued, but  few observers are apprehensive  over

an  imminent general  recession.  Total  employment  in  the five-state area has

shown very little  improvement  since  early  in  the year and job  seekers are  abun-

dant.  However, surveys by consultants  indicate increases in  salaries of  over

6 percent  in  1985.  Apparent  settlement of  the  threatened auto  strike  removes

a shadow over many District centers,  but  the  terms  of  the agreement perpet-

uate  the  region's competitive disadvantage  of high  labor costs.  Except  for

new cars,  small  trucks and vans,  retail  sales were  disappointing in  the third

quarter.  Steel  output appears  to have  started up  again, after  a sharp  slump,

and  steel  executives here anticipate effective government actions  to  curb  im-

ports.  Mechanical  capital  goods  demand  remains weak with new disappointments

in  farm and  construction equipment,  and  slower  sales  of  heavy trucks.  Housing

activity is  slipping while most nonresidential  construction has  upward momentum.

Delivery leadtimes on  goods have shortened.  Most inventories  are under close

control,  but stocks of  general merchandise  are described as  "high."  Prices  are

fairly stable with  competition restraining increases  in  most markets.  Many

District  farmers are hard-pressed  by heavy debts, unprofitable  prices,  and  de-

clining values of  farmland and  used equipment.

General  Outlook.  Despite vexing problems, quite  serious  in  some sectors,

business  and consumer  confidence  in  the  Seventh District  remains  generally sound--

but not  ebullient.  It  is  now recognized that  the national  expansion has  been slowing

since  last  spring, but  only  a few  isolated voices are apprehensive  that  a general

recession is  at  hand.  Relatively  stable prices  and lack  of  speculative buying

by  consumers and  businesses  have been welcome  surprises.  Recent  easing  of  in-

terest  rates  has  allayed  fears voiced  earlier of  a new credit  crunch.  Apparent

VII-2

settlement  of  the auto  negotiations  removes a storm cloud.  However, there  is

widespread worry  over huge federal deficits,  enormous  foreign  trade deficits,

and  the  shaky  state of  some financial  institutions and  some foreign debtors.

Serious  imbalances, in  short,  are  seen to  be financial  rather  than physical.

Employment Growth Slow.  Through August  1984,  the rise  in payroll  em-

ployment since December 1982  in  the  five District  states was only half  as  great

as in  the nation. District  employment has remained  well below  the  level  of  the

late 1970s.  Since  February, a large portion of  the District  including  the  en-

tire states of  Illinois  and  Iowa have witnessed no  growth  at  all  in  employment.

Hiring  surveys and  projections of  activity by  industry indicate no  significant

improvement in  the months  ahead.  Job  seekers are  abundant, although many are said

to be poorly  trained and qualified.  Despite  slack labor markets,  private surveys

indicate Chicago area employers plan  average increases in  salaries  in  excess of

6 percent for  1985,  slightly more  than  in  1984,  and close  to  the national  average.

Employers are making intense  efforts  to  curtail  soaring  costs  of medical  benefits,

but have had  only  limited  success  so  far.  The new UAW pact  retains medical bene-

fits  intact.  Chicago  teachers  threaten a strike  if  their medical plan is  made

contributory.  Strike threats  loom in  the  trucking  and airline industries where

employers are trying  to  force  substantial  compensation concessions  to  get  labor

costs more in  line with  those of non-union competitors.

Evaluating the  Auto Settlement.  Rank-and-file approval of  the  three-year

UAW-GM pact and  the  tentative Ford  settlement  seem to  remove  the  threat of  a major

work stoppage  that  had been overhanging  the District  economy  all year.  Unlike

earlier years of  auto  contract  renewals,  there are no near-term contract  ex-

pirations of  importance to  be faced  in the farm and construction  equipment  in-

dustries.  Thus,  the durable goods  industries of  the Midwest appear  to be enter-

ing  an extended period  of  labor  peace.  The new auto  agreements, valued  at  roughly

VII-3

25  percent  over three years  (depending on  actual  costs  of  COLA, medical benefits,

job  security provisions,  retirement improvements,  etc.)  have been  greeted by  some

as  "modest" and noninflationary,  but other  observers point out  that  they  extend

and  reinforce the heavy  labor  cost differential  that has  been a major factor

in  the  competitive disadvantage  of  the  region relative  to  other  regions  and  abroad.

At  the end of  the  contract,  the average  annual labor  cost  per  active production

worker  in  the  auto  industry will  substantially  exceed $50,000.  Pressures

for  investments in  labor-saving  equipment and foreign sourcing  can be  expected  to

intensify.

Steel  Slump Over?  Raw  steel  production in  the Chicago and Detroit  dis-

tricts dropped by  more than a third  from mid-May  to  late  September before  turning

up  in  early October.  The  accompanying decline  in  steel  shipments in  the third

quarter was more  than  seasonal,  in  contrast  to  earlier expectations.  Except  for

the hard-hit  farm sector,  steel  consumption has held at,  or near,  expected levels.

Therefore,  the  decline is  attributed  to  increased  imports  and  inventory liquidation.

The  fourth quarter  is  expected  to  see  improvement, bringing  industry shipments

for the  year  to  about  75  million  tons,  well above  1983,  but  several million tons

less than  expected  earlier  in  the year.  Higher mill  shipments  in  the  fourth

quarter will  reflect  greater consumption in  the motor vehicle  industry  and nonre-

sidential construction,  stabilization  of  inventories, and reduced  imports.  Industry

leaders have been assured  that  the Administration  "means business"  in restricting

imports  from third-world countries, up  till now uninhibited by  restraints.  Im-

ports are  expected  to  return gradually  to  20  percent of  domestic usage, down  from

the  26 percent ratio  for  the first  8 months  of  1984.

Capital Goods.  Producers  of  mechanical  capital goods  still  report  general

weakness.  Defense orders  continue to  expand, but  are of  relatively  small  importance

in  the District.  Orders for oilfield  apparatus and materials handling equipment

have improved, but  from a very  low base.  Light  construction equipment  is  improved,

VII-4

but heavy  items,  such  as  outdoor cranes,  remain severely  depressed.  Farm equip-

ment  sales  are  running well  below last  year's  sad  level.  Orders  for heavy  trucks

dropped  in  the  third quarter, but demand  for medium trucks  and  truck trailers

remains vigorous.

Construction.  Homebuilding has declined  from last  spring, but  remains

near last  year's  level.  Sales of  new and used homes have held up  better than ex-

pected, partly because  the public has accepted  the  view that  high  rates are here

to  stay.  Conventional mortgage interest  rates quoted  range  from 13.5  to over 14

percent, plus  3 to  5 points, about  100 basis points below  the peak of  last  spring.

Almost  70  percent  of  new home mortgages are ARMs,  with initial  rates  ranging up

to  12  percent.  Nonresidential  construction  of  virtually all  types, with office

buildings leading,  continues  to  increase with a steady  stream of  sizable new

projects announced.

Retail  Sales.  Some major  retailers express  disappointment over  volume

in  recent months.  The  two-year boom in  appliances,  furniture and  other home

furnishings  appears  to have peaked  out.  Soft goods  have strengthened somewhat.

General merchandise  inventories  are generally excessive.  This has  led  to wide-

spread  price cutting  to  keep  inventories from rising  further.

Prices Fairly Stable.  Competition,  including a wide range  of  imported

goods,  is  keeping inflation in check.  A retail  analyst estimates general mer-

chandise prices average  less  than 1 percent above last  year,  the smallest  rise

in many years.  In the wholesale markets,  prices of  many metals have declined  in

recent months.  Increases  in prices  of  paper products,  gypsum board,  and  electronic

components have been  substantial, but may have levelled.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Consumer spending continued at a brisk  pace during  September and

early October in  the Eighth District, but home  sales were  down and most

other sectors  of  the  economy  experienced little change.  Expectations by

most  respondents are  that consumer  spending will remain strong  for  the

remainder of  the  year and that  manufacturing, transportation and

employment will rise  moderately, while construction  is  likely  to  drift

lower.

Consumer Spending

The  greatest  strength  in  District  economic  activity during

September and early October was  in  retail  sales.  At  six  department

stores,  sales were 8 percent higher than  the  comparable period  a year

ago, which was  then considered a relatively good  sales  period.  Better

quality apparel,  sports wear,  cosmetics and  consumer  electronics moved

particularly well, while  sales  of  furniture  and carpeting were below

year-ago levels.  At  each of  three  discount  stores,  sales  increases were

more  than 14  percent above  the year-ago  pace.  Promotions combined with

price markdowns were  successful  in moving merchandise.

Auto demand remained  strong in most  parts  of  the  District  during

September and early October.  In the  last week  of September, however,

sales  became somewhat  sluggish.  Seven  dealers reported  sales 11 percent

higher  in September  than  in the same month a year  ago, and  early October

was  nearly  as  good.  Reflecting  the  strong demand  and a continued

VIII-2

shortage  of  popular  models,  effective new car prices  increased at  the

retail level.

Realtors and developers reported that  single-family housing  sales

in September and early October were about 25  percent  below the  comparable

period of  1983, and new housing starts  declined  further.  In some  smaller

towns,  the  real estate  market was  virtually dormant.  The volume  of

construction activity, both  residential and nonresidential, however,

remained on a high plateau although  some  softness  is  beginning to

appear.  A building material  business  continued to operate at  capacity,

which its  owner  expected would  continue  through  the  end  of  the  year.

Industrial Production and Employment

Output of  manufacturing  firms generally  continued to  be  strong  in

September and early  October,  but  the  flow of  new orders remained

relatively unchanged.  Some  customers trimmed orders  temporarily in  order

to  reduce  inventories, and auto  assembly was interrupted by a strike.

Price changes have been modest, with  declines nearly matching increases.

Employment in manufacturing  changed little on balance,  but  retailers,

service firms  and government  increased their  employment moderately.

Transportation

A railroad reported  that  business had  been drifting lower  since a

peak reached in early  summer,  but  activity in  September was  still  6

percent larger  than a year ago.  Grain moved well  in  September because  of

the  Russian purchases.  Railroads are  increasing their orders  for  new

cars.  A Memphis-based  truck line  is  still  enjoying excellent business.

VIII-3

Barge  traffic on  the  Mississippi remained  flat at  a rather  depressed

level, and there are  still a large number of  excess  barges.

Finance

Total loans and leases  outstanding at  large weekly  reporting

banks decreased at a 3 percent  annual  rate  in  September.  This  decrease

comes after a 22  percent growth rate  during the  previous month.  A

falling  volume  of loans  to  financial  institutions was  primarily

responsible for  the  September  loan contraction.  Commercial and

industrial loans and consumer  credit  rose  at  slower  rates,  while real

estate loans increased at a slightly faster  rate than  in  the  previous

month.  While  total loans were  down, total deposits  were growing at  an

annual  rate of 26  percent, reversing  the  previous month's  decrease at  a

rate of  19  percent.

Agriculture

Early fall  cold weather  has  effectively stopped any  further crop

maturation and shifted  attention to  the completion of  harvest.  The lack

of rain during  September also has  diminished  soybean yields 3-4  bushels

per acre  in the  southern portion of  the District.  Despite  these recent

setbacks, harvests  for  most  crops are  expected to  be very good, near  1982

levels.

The  availability of hogs  for  slaughter  continues  to  surprise  the

market and should dampen what were  expected to  be  sharp  increases  in red

meat prices  during the  fourth  quarter.  Higher numbers  of hogs  for

slaughter, however, also  are  responsible for  low prices to  farmers;

recent prices  for  feeder  pigs were only 1 percent  above  the  1983  average.

IX-1

NINTH  DISTRICT  - MINNEAPOLIS

Modest  growth  continues 

in 

the  Ninth  District.  Unemployment  rates

and  other  labor  market  indicators  seem  to  have  improved  lately. 

Some  growth

in  consumer  spending  is 

reported,  but  not  for  homes.  Also  reported  are  scat-

tered  signs  of  commercial  and 

industrial  expansion. 

Indicators  of  recent

financial  activity  are  mixed--strong 

in 

the  Minneapolis-St.  Paul  area,  but

weak  in the  rural areas, where  farmers are  facing  low prices.

Employment

The  latest  available  data  indicate  that  labor  market  conditions  have

strengthened  a  bit.  Minnesota's  unemployment  rate  fell  0.1  percent  to  6.3

percent  in  August,  reversing  two  months  of  slight  increases.  Also  in  August,

employment 

in  Minnesota  reached  an  all-time  high. 

Improvement  was  partic-

ularly  notable 

in 

the  Twin  Cities  metropolitan  area,  where  the  unemployment

rate  dropped  to  4.5  percent  in  August. 

Indicative  of  continuing  strong  labor

demand, 

in  August  the  Minneapolis-St.  Paul  help-wanted  advertising  index  was

still 

about  47  percent  above 

its 

level  a  year  earlier  and  in  September  Minne-

sota's  initial 

unemployment  claims  fell  again.  This  Bank's  directors  continue

to  report  that  unemployment  rates  in  southern  Minnesota  and  the  Dakotas  are

low and that  rates  in  parts  of Wisconsin  and Montana  have  fallen  somewhat.

Consumer  Spending

With  the  exception  of  sales 

in  agriculturally  dependent  cities  and

towns,  retail  sales  of  general  merchandise  appear  to  be  following  the  trend  of

modest  growth  reported  last  month. 

One 

large  retailer  in 

the  Twin  Cities

reports  that  its  back-to-school  promotion  went  well,  particularly  in  Septem-

IX-2

ber.  Its  sales  figures  are  still 

running  ahead  of  plan. 

It  and  another  large

retailer  in 

the  Twin  Cities  say  that  apparel  sold  particularly  well.  Bank

directors 

from  diversified  cities 

around 

the  district 

report 

similar

findings. 

Large  chain  stores  in  Rochester,  Minnesota, 

report  a good  Septem-

ber,  although  smaller  stores  weren't  doing  as  well.  Mall  business  was  up

considerably  in  September 

in  Sioux  Falls,  South  Dakota,  but  only  modestly  in

Bismarck,  North  Dakota.

Mirroring  reports  for  the  nation,  motor  vehicle  sales  in 

the  district

seem  to  have  picked  up  a  bit  since  August. 

In  September,  a  domestic  manufac-

turer  was  surprised  to  find  both  its 

car  and  truck  sales  in 

this  region  up

substantially  over  year-earlier  levels.  District  inventories  of  vehicles  are

still 

low. 

Some  Bank  directors  in  agriculturally  dependent  areas  report  that

cars  and  trucks  have  been  moving  well  there,  too.

Home  purchases,  while  still 

up  from  levels  of  a  year  ago,  appear  to

be  falling  off.  Both  Bank  directors  and  district  realtors 

indicate  that

housing  affordability  has  deteriorated,  with  high  financing  costs,  prices,  and

taxes  mentioned  as  factors.  Mortgage  revenue  bonds  are  helping  to  prop  up

sales  in  parts  of  western Wisconsin, though.

Tourist  spending  in 

the  district,  which  may  have  been  somewhat  more

restrained this  summer than  last,  picked up with  the  arrival of the  fall  color

season.  In 

the  Upper  Peninsula  of  Michigan,  the  season  started  early  and  is

lasting  longer  than  expected.  Travel  to  parks  in  Montana  and  the  Dakotas  has

been  lower  this  year  than  last. 

While  some  attribute this  to  exchange  rates

inducing  Canadians  to  stay  home,  in  fact  more  Canadians  appear  to  be  crossing

the border this  year.  Canadian tourist  dollars  appear to  be  flowing elsewhere

than  parks.

IX-3

Commerce  and Industry

Scattered  reports  have  been  appearing  lately  about  commercial  and

industrial  production  and  expansion  in  the  Ninth  District.  Plans  to  build a

$100  million  office-hotel  complex 

in  Minneapolis  have  been  announced. 

Some

energy production  facilities  are being built  in  North Dakota, where petroleum-

related  activity  is 

running  at  a  record  rate. 

However,  construction permits

are  down 

in  Bismarck,  North  Dakota.  While  an  auto  parts  distribution  center

is  being  built  in  South  Dakota,  little  other  new  expansion  is  reported

there.  Building products  plants, which  are benefiting  from low  lumber  prices,

are  producing  at  high  levels  to  meet  building  demand.  While  pulp  and  paper

plants  are  still very busy, no  expansion plans  have  been announced  recently.

Agriculture

Most  of 

the  agricultural  sector  continues 

to  be  plagued  by 

low

prices, 

low  land  values,  and  high  debt  service,  none  of  which 

is 

likely  to

improve  soon. 

In  Minnesota  alone,  the  farm  price  index  fell  3  percent  between

July  and  August.  Despite  Soviet  purchases,  generally  favorable  crop  condi-

tions  may  push  production  up  enough  to  lower  prices  further.  For  example,

recent  estimates  indicate  that  the  nation's  corn  harvest  will  be  the  fourth

largest  on  record,  and  both  soybean  and  wheat  production  are  up  substantially

over  the  drought-  and  PIK-reduced  levels  of  1983.  Corroborating  this,  dis-

trict 

Bank  directors  report  favorable  crop  conditions  in 

the  district,  except

in 

the  dry  areas  of  the  western  Dakotas  and  northeastern  Montana. 

They  also

continue  to  report  severe  farm  debt-service  loads. 

The  only  ag  producers  with

some  reason  for  optimism  seem  to  be  those  selling  meat  animals. 

Lower  feed

prices  are  improving  the  profitability  of  hog  and  livestock  operations,  and

cattle prices  have  picked up a bit  recently.

IX-4

Finance

The  financial  sector  reflects  the  continuing  trend  of  urban  economic

growth  outstripping  rural  growth.  Both  deposits  and 

loans  at  large  Twin

Cities  banks  have  been  growing  faster  than  their  national  counterparts. 

From

mid-August  to  mid-September  in  the  Twin  Cities,  large  bank deposits  and  loans

grew  1.7  percent  and  2.8  percent,  respectively. 

The  comparable  national

figures were  only  -0.1  percent  and 1.1  percent.  Consumer  loan  growth  has  been

particularly  strong in  the  Twin  Cities.  Financial  activity in the  rest  of the

district  seems  to  be  slower, though, according to  this Bank's  directors.

TENTH DISTRICT--KANSAS CITY

Overview.  Some moderation continues  to  be apparent  in Tenth District

economic  activity.  While retail  sales  continue  to  improve,  housing activity

and mortgage demand  have  generally  slowed.  Inventories  of  retail goods  are

slightly larger  than desired, while  inventories  of materials  inputs  are at

satisfactory levels.  Price  increases  have  been  small, and are  expected  to

continue so.  Loan demand  is increasing slightly at  district  banks, while

deposits  remain unchanged.  Yields  of  fall-harvested crops varied across  the

district  while the  newly-planted winter wheat  crop  is in good condition.

Retail Trade.  Retailers  report  that  year-to-date  retail  sales  are  up

significantly over  a year ago, and  that  sales  continued to improve  in the  past

three months.  Inventories are  slightly larger  than desired for  some

retailers.  However, no major  trimming  is intended, because most  retailers  are

optimistic about  sales  through the remainder of  the year.  Prices remained

generally flat  in  recent months,  and no  significant  increases  are anticipated

through the  remainder of  the year.

Automobile  Sales.  Automobile  dealers  throughout the  Tenth District

continue to report  improved sales  in  1984  relative to  last  year.  Credit

market  conditions  are  satisfactory, and  financing  is available  both for

floorplanning and  car  buyers.  Most dealers  report  smaller  inventories due

mainly to  the  1985 model  introductions and partially  to  the  GM strike.

Dealers are optimistic  about  sales  for  the  balance of  1984 and early  1985.

Purchasing Agents.  Purchasing  agents  report  input  price  increases  of  5

to  10 percent  over  the  last  12 months, with virtually no  price  increases

during  the  last  three months.  Although metals  prices  are expected  to continue

to fall,  prices  for  other  inputs  are  generally expected to remain  stable

through the  end of  the year.  No problems with availability were reported  and

X-2

none  are expected.  Most purchasing agents  report  inventories at  satisfactory

levels,  and no substantial  changes  in  inventory  levels are  planned.

Housing Activity and Finance.  Residential  construction activity  is

softening.  Single-family starts  are generally  down, particularly  since

August.  Starts  in multi-family units  range from below year-ago  levels  to

about  the  same  levels.  Housing  starts are  expected to  slow through yearend  if

interest  rates  remain at,  or rise  above,  their current  level.  Sales  of  new

homes are  generally down  from last year  (except in  Colorado where  sales  have

been steady).  Building materials  are  in  good  supply and  are expected to

remain so.  Prices  for materials are  generally  steady.  Demand  for mortgage

funds  and mortgage  commitments at  savings  and  loan  associations  is  slowing

because of  slight  increases  in mortgage rates  over  the  past months,  and  also

because of  seasonal declines.  Most respondents  expect mortgage  demand  to

continue  decreasing, although rates  are expected  to  stabilize.  Savings

inflows  range  from much higher to  much lower than  last  year.  Increased

competition was  cited as  a contributor to  the  declines  at  certain

institutions.  Respondents,  however, generally anticipate  only very moderate

changes  in  savings  flows  for  the remainder  of  1984.

Banking.  Total  loan demand increased  slightly  last month at  Tenth

district  banks.  The  gains were distributed unevenly  throughout the district,

however, reflecting the  diversity  of  economic conditions.  Commercial real

estate  loans  and  commercial and  industrial  loans  increased where  strong

construction activity  is  underway.  The slight  increase  in consumer  loans  was

also  concentrated in  the  economically more  active areas  of  the  district.

Residential real  estate  loans  declined district-wide,  however, as  did

agricultural  loans.  Following money center  banks,  Tenth District  banks

reduced their prime  lending rates  by  three-quarters of  a percent early in

October to rates  ranging  from 12 3/4 to 13  3/4 percent.  Most  bankers  expect

the  prime  to  decline  slightly further, although they  expect a lower prime  to

have  little  effect on consumer  lending rates.  Consumer lending rates were

generally unchanged  from last month.  Total deposits remained unchanged  last

month  at Tenth District banks,  reflecting the  general  lack of  strong  loan

demand and  the  slow  pace of  the  district economy.  A slight  increase  in MMDA's

and  IRA and Keogh accounts  offset  a slight decrease  in  demand deposits  and

passbook  savings accounts,  while other deposits  remained constant.

Agriculture.  Fall harvest  is underway  in district  states.  Corn yields

in  New Mexico, Oklahoma, and parts of  Colorado and Nebraska are  average to

above  average  this  year.  Other parts  of  the  district have not harvested  corn

yet  due to  wet conditions,  and yields  in Kansas  and Missouri may be below

average.  Below average soybean  yields  in most  district  states  are  partly

attributed to  late planting  in the  spring  and  to  an early frost.  Reports  on

sorghum yields  are mixed.  Planting of  the winter wheat crop  is underway

throughout  the  district.  Though just  starting  in Kansas,  planting  is finished

in Oklahoma, Colorado  and parts  of  Nebraska, while other states  report 50  to

75  percent of  the  crop  planted.  The  crop  is in  good condition, and moisture-

conditions  are generally  favorable.  Very  little wheat  acreage will be used  as

pasture this  fall,  but  range  conditions  in  the  district  are generally  good.

Bankers  are generally pessimistic  about debt  repayment by farmers  this  year.

Production loans  will  be repaid, but  little  reduction of  intermediate and

long-term debt  is expected.  Some bankers  expect  problems  in  receiving  full

payment  of  interest on outstanding  loans.  Reports of foreclosures and partial

liquidations are mixed.  With  some  exceptions, most bankers  believe  that

agriculture's financial  stress  will worsen during  the  year ahead.

XI-1

ECONOMIC COMMENTARY

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

The Eleventh District's recovery continues  at  the slow  pace that

has  characterized  it  since mid-summer.  This  pace  represents  a reduction

from  the growth experienced in  the District  during much of  1983  and the

early portions  of  1984.  Overall  demand for District manufactured  goods  is

rising very sluggishly.  Oil  and gas  drilling currently shows  no

appreciable  growth.  Retail  sales  exhibit  an  irregular pattern of modest

expansion across product  lines.  Nonresidential construction-is  declining

slowly, but  the  level  of activity remains  strong.  Residential  construction

continues  to  slide, due to  large  declines  in multifamily building.

Improved weather has  boosted prospects  for  the District's  agricultural

sector.

District manufacturing  sales  growth  is  unchanged and  slow.  Demand

for  paper  and allied products  and electrical machinery  is  rising  steadily.

Stone clay  and glass  firms  report  flat  demand, with the decline  in

housing-related demand being offset  by strong sales  of  cement  for use  in

public works projects.  Some  lumber  and wood products  firms  report

increased  sales.  Primary metal manufacturers report  weak demand and  low

prices.  Sales  of  chemical  and allied products  remain unchanged, while

there  is  evidence  of weakness  in the purchase of refined  petroleum from

District producers.  Fabricated metal products  and nonelectrical machinery

manufacturers  report that growth  is  slowing, with the  increased demand

XI-2

coming primarily  from energy  firms  that  are replenishing depleted equipment

inventories.  Demand  faced by District  apparel manufacturers remains  low

primarily due  to continued strong competition from  imports.

The District's  rate of oil  and gas  drilling remains unchanged.

The  number of  active drilling rigs  in Texas  is declining, while the total

for the three District states  (including Louisiana  and New Mexico) was

virtually the same in  September as  in August.  Britain's  October oil  price

cut,  together with attendant movements  in  spot  prices,  represents  a

significant  contribution to  the  down-side risk faced by District  drillers

and may further discourage drilling  in  the District,  even if  OPEC countries

do not  also  cut prices.

Retail  sales  growth continues  at  a moderate pace,  owing chiefly to

increased promotional activity by stores.  Demand  for  consumer durables

remains  low,  but  sales  of men's  and women's  apparel  are strong.  Major

deparment  stores  are  building inventories  in  anticipation of a good

Christmas.

After  a summer of brisk sales,  a seasonal downturn has  begun to

affect  automobile dealers.  The  strike has had no  appreciable effect  so  far

on product  availability.  The recent  strike settlement has  offered hope to

dealers  that  supply problems will  not occur  for domestic autos,  but  import

dealers  report  inventory  shortages.  Prices  are  expected to remain  stable

through the first  of the year.

Nonresidential  construction value  is declining in  Texas,  although

it  remains  high and  is showing little  evidence of  abatement  in the other

District  states.  The number of nonresidential  construction projects  is

XI-3

increasing  in all District states,  including Texas.  Rising office vacancy

rates have discouraged new office construction in  some  District  cities,  but

retail  construction continues  at  a high rate.

Residential construction is slowing throughout the District,  owing

to a rapidly weakening multifamily activity.  Declines  in builders'

inventories  have  lately  reversed  the fall  in  single-family building, but

the recovery has  not  proven very strong.  Builders  speculate  that home

buyers  are waiting to see  if  mortgage rates will fall  further.

Growth in  deposits at  member banks  has  remained  flat  since the  end

of  the second quarter.  At  large District  banks, year-over-year rates  of

deposit  growth are  slowing markedly.  Deposits  at  these banks  fell

absolutely on  a month-over-month basis  in August  and September.  Growth in

loans  and securities  at  large  banks  also  is declining.  The rate  of

increase  in  real  estate  loans  is ebbing and  respondents  indicate that  a

significant portion of these  loans  is being used to  finance development

projects  outside  the District.  Business  loans  outstanding have  shown

almost  no change  since mid-summer.  While  consumer  loan volume at  large

banks  is well  above a year earlier,  it  has  also remained flat  since

mid-summer.

September and October  rains  have significantly reduced drought

problems  for Texas  farmers  and ranchers.  September cattle prices  are

generally higher  than a year  ago and third quarter  sales  are  estimated  at

40 percent  above the third quarter  of  1983.  Large harvests,  growing

surpluses,  and falling prices  characterize the outlook for  feed, food

grain, and cotton producers.

XII-1

TWELFTH DISTRICT -- SAN FRANCISCO

The Twelfth District  economic  expansion has  cooled dramatically.  In September

and  early October,  retail  sales  at  department  stores  and  automobile dealerships  are

reported  to have  shown no  significant  improvement  from August's  reduced pace.

Nonresidential  construction activity is  reaching  boom proportions  in  key

metropolitan  areas.  But  the  recent  slight  reduction  in mortgage  interest  rates  has

been insufficient  to  prevent  both  the  construction and  sale  of new homes  from

falling  further.  The  strong U.S.  dollar, and  consequent  increase  in  lower-priced

foreign  imports,  is hurting such  key Western industries  as  lumber and  primary

metals,  reducing the  overall  growth  of manufacturing employment  to  a crawl.  Prices

for  important  Western agricultural  products  continue  to  fall,  increasing the  debt

position of many  farmers.  Business  loan demand  at many District banks  sagged  during

the  third quarter,  and only  large banks  expect  a pickup  in  coming months.

Consumer Spending

Retail  sales  results were mixed  throughout  the  Twelfth District  states  in

September and  early October.  But overall,  sales at  major  department  stores  appear

to have  shown  little  or  no  increase  from August's  reduced  pace.  The  four major

department  stores  in  Southern California described back-to-school and early  fall

business  as  "disappointing".  In September,  their year-to-year gain  in  sales

narrowed to  8 percent compared with  13  percent  in August  and  17  percent  in  July.

Retailers attributed  this weaker performance  in  part  to unusually warm weather which

hindered  sales  of autumn  apparel.  But  the  fact  that  sales  of  furniture, housewares

and  appliances  fell  indicates  that  the housing  slowdown  is taking  a toll  on consumer

purchases  of durable household  items.  Retail  sales  also were disappointing  in Utah

and  Idaho.  In  contrast, retailers  in  the  Pacific  Northwest apparently  experienced a

pickup in sales  after  the mid-summer slowing.  Throughout  the District,  automobile

XII-2

and  recreational vehicle  sales  were reported  to have declined  in September, but

mainly  due  to  supply  problems.  Retailers generally have  lowered  their expectations

for  Christmas business.  But  department stores  still  expect  an average  year-to-year

sales  gain of 8-10  percent.

Manufacturing  and Mining

The growth  of manufacturing  employment in most Twelfth District  states  has

slowed  dramatically recently, both because  the  growth of  consumption of many key

products manufactured  in the  area has  slowed  but  also because  lower-priced  foreign

imports  are supplying on  increased  share  of U.S. markets.  The influx  of  imports  has

forced  further  cutbacks  in  employment in  the metals  and  lumber  industries  and

recently has begun  to undermine  domestic  paper orders  and prices  as well.  Moreover,

the  fact  that  inventories of  such  internationally-traded commodities  as  copper,

aluminum and paper have continued to  rise  suggests  that  domestic  producers may be

forced  to  cut  output  further.  If the Administration  approves  legislation recently

passed by Congress,  Pacific Northwest  forest  products  firms  could  receive

substantial  relief  from the  burden of high-cost  federal  timber  under  contract.

Still,  lumber market  conditions  are  so weak  that many  companies  are  expected to

operate  at  a loss  in  1984.  Rising  federal  expenditures  for defense  and  space

programs  and  increased business  investment  continue  to boost  employment  in  such

industries  as  electronic  equipment, aircraft and missiles  and  nonelectrical

machinery.  But  even in  those  industries,  employment growth  is  slowing.

Construction  and Real Estate

Housing  starts  in  the West  have shown  further weakness  recently, despite  a

slight  reduction in mortgage  interest  rates.  Western  starts have held up  somewhat

better than  those nationally but  still  are currently  running about  27  percent below

this  year's  peak  reached  in January.  Because builders  have reduced  the  construction

of new homes  about  in  line  with  the decline  in  sales,  their  inventory of unsold  new

XII-3

homes has  not  risen to  excessive levels.  Nevertheless, builders  expect Western

housing starts  to  fall  further  in  1984  and  1985,  even if  mortgage rates  remain at

current  levels.  Falling  permits reinforce  the  likelihood of  a further slowdown  in

regional homebuilding.  High  interest  rates  have not  impeded  the virtual  boom

underway in nonresidential  construction activity  in  the West.  Portland  is  doing

particularly well  in attracting investment  in high-technology manufacturing plants.

Office vacancy  rates  are  reaching disturbing  levels  in major metropolitan areas,

however, reducing rents  below year-ago levels.

Agriculture

In  general,  the Twelfth District  agricultural  sector continues  to  be  in  a

difficult period  financially, especially those  farms  which  are highly leveraged.

The  strength  of  the  dollar  is  reducing exports,  while  putting downward pressure  on

prices  through a large  influx of imports.  Summer and  fall  crops  in  the  region have

been especially  abundant,  further reducing prices.  Even  in  California where  total

net  farm income may be up  in  1984,  the  return on  equity generally will be

unsatisfactory.  In California,  above-normal production  this  year has  combined with

a carryover  of  surplus  inventory  to  depress  prices  for  such  commodities as  grapes,

nuts,  and  tree  fruits  to  or  below the  break-even point  for  many growers.

California's  cotton crop  is  progressing well, but  the  strong U.S.  dollar  and

prospect of  record world production continue  to  push  prices  lower.  The situation of

rice growers  is  especially  troublesome, since  such  countries  as  Taiwan  and Thailand

have  stepped  up  their  exports.  In  California, Utah and  other  Intermountain  states,

the  livestock  sector  has not  experienced  significant year-to-year improvement  in

prices.  Farm  land values  are  still  falling, while highly-leveraged  farmers  are

further  increasing their  debt position.  In Utah,  foreclosures  on farm  loans  are

reported  to be  rising  sharply.

Financial Institutions

XII-4

Commercial  and  industrial  loans  at many Twelfth District banks  sagged during

the  third  quarter, and bankers  report mixed  prospects  for  the  coming months.  At

large banks,  business  loans  (not seasonally adjusted) declined  at  a 3 percent  annual

rate  over the  third  quarter,  in  contrast  to  increases  of  7 and  23  percent

respectively during  the  first  and  second  quarters.  Still, most of  the  larger  banks

reported  continued strong  demand  from certain borrowers,  especially high  technology

firms, retailers, builders,  and  the  service  industries.  Moreover,  these banks

expect  improved  retail  sales,  strong capital  spending,  and  a slowdown in  the  growth

of corporate  profits  to  boost  overall  business  loan demand  in  the near  future,

although  lower  inventory  financing requirements will offset  some  of  this  expansion.

Smaller banks  -- especially those  located  in regions  dominated by  the mining,

lumber,  and energy industries  -- also have  experienced weaker demand  for  credit  in

recent months.  But  these  banks  generally do not  expect  business  loan demand to  pick

up, due  to  the  effects  of continued high interest  rates  and import penetration  in

depressing their  local  economies.  Moreover,  an  increasing number of  firms  in  their

market  areas  are  trying to  limit their  investment  to  an  amount  that  can be financed

with  internally generated  funds.

