SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON  ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY  FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICTS

June 1985

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY............................................................

First District - Boston...........................................I-1

Second  District - New York ...................................... II-

Third Distrct - Philadelphia...................................III-1

Fourth District - Cleveland..................................... IV-1

Fifth District - Richmond........................................V-1

Sixth  District - Altanta.........................................I-1

Seventh District - Chicago.....................................VII-1

Eighth District - St.  Louis....................................VIII-1

Ninth District - Minneapolis....................................IX-1

Tenth District - Kansas  City.....................................X-1

Eleventh District - Dallas......................................XI-1

Twelfth District - San Francisco...............................XII-1

SUMMARY*

The  pace  of economic  activity  in  all  Districts  seems  to  be  slowing

across  most  sectors.  Retail  sales  generally  continue  to  sag  yet  inventory

levels  appear  satisfactory and  the  outlook  remains  optimistic.  An  important

exception  is  auto  sales  which  are  strong  in  most  areas  and  the  strength  is

extending  to  suppliers.  While  primary  metals  manufacturing  is improving  in

some  areas,  manufacturing  growth  in  general  seems  to  be  modest  or  declining.

Residential  construction  is  a source  of  strength  throughout  the  country, but

signs  of  weakness  exist  in  parts  of  some  districts..  Non-residential

construction  is  mixed. 

Agricultural  conditions  remain  difficult  almost

everywhere,  but  financial  problems  appear  concentrated  in  the  Plains  states.

Mining  and  drilling  activity  is declining  throughout  the  country.  Bank  loan

activity is  mixed with most growth occurring  in  the consumer sector.

Consumer  Spending

Consumer  spending has  slowed  in  recent  weeks  and  continues  to  vary

widely across  the  country.  Six districts  report  generally weak sales;  strong

sales  are  reported  by  Richmond  and  St.  Louis.  Atlanta  and  San  Francisco

report  a  more  mixed  picture  with  significant  growth  in  much  of  their

districts  but  still  some  sluggishness  in  certain  areas.  In  general,  demand

in  the  automotive  sector appears  strong,  as  a result of  lower  interest  rates

and  promotions  by  manufacturers  and  dealers.  Retailers'  inventories  were

generally  at  satisfactory  levels,  but  Chicago,  Minneapolis,  and  Kansas  City

report  that  some  actions have been  taken to  reduce  stocks.  Automobile dealers

reported tight  inventories,  especially for imports,  in  three midwest Districts.

*Prepared at  the  Federal Reserve Bank  of New York.

The  outlook  for  consumer  spending  was  generally optimistic  across

the  country;  lower  interest  rates  and  increased  mailings  of  tax  refunds  were

commonly  expected  to  boost  demand.  Only  Dallas  mentioned  expectations  of

further slowing.

Industrial Activity

Manufacturing  activity  seems  to  have  slowed  in  much  of  the

country,  but  remains  varied  across  districts  and  industries.  Five  districts

reported  weak or  slowing  industrial  activity,  and  four  reported  stable  levels

or  only  modest  growth.  The  only  report  of  sharp  improvement  was  for

Missouri.  The  outlook  generally  is  for  little  change,  but  Philadelphia  and

Cleveland  report  moderation  of  growth  forecasts,  Dallas  reports  an  increase

in  optimism,  and  some  observers  in  the  Eighth  District  expect  a  slight

improvement.

Business  for  primary  metals  producers  was  mixed. 

Continued

distress  for  steelmakers  was  reported  in  the  Cleveland  district  and  in  the

Chicago  area.  Minneapolis  noted  that  iron  ore  processing  cutbacks  are  soon

expected.  However,  steel  and  other  metals  producers  report  gains  in  the

Dallas District as  well  as  in New York, Alabama, and the Detroit area.

Two  districts  report  slowing  in  high-tech  industries.  Boston  and

San  Francisco  both  report  weakness  among  semiconductor  firms  (with signs  of

recovery  only  in  Arizona),  attributed  to  weak domestic  demand.  Business  for

New England  computer manufacturers was mixed.  Suppliers  to  the  auto  industry

have  benefitted  from  that  industry's  strength,  according  to  reports  from

Boston  and Chicago.  Energy-related  producers  in  three districts  report  slack

demand.

There  were  several  reports  of  hardship  caused  by  import

competition  and  the  strong  dollar.  Reports  of  adverse  impacts  come  from

steelmakers  (Cleveland),  manufacturers  of  home  appliances  and  capital

equipment  (Chicago),  paper  producers  (Atlanta  and  Dallas),  the  lumber

industry  (San  Francisco),  and  apparel  and  textiles  firms  (Richmond  and

Atlanta).

Construction and Real Estate

Construction  activity  varied  greatly  across  the  United  States.

Residential  construction  has  been  proceeding  at  an  exceptionally  rapid pace

according  to  New  York,  Boston,  Minneapolis,  and  Richmond;  but  Atlanta,  St.

Louis  and  Kansas  City  report  some  areas  with  significant  weakness.

Non-residential  construction  slowed  in  the  New York  and  St.  Louis  districts,

and  Cleveland  indicates  that  no  new  construction  contracts  are  expected  for

the  next  few  years  due  to  recent  overbuilding.  In  contrast,  absorption  is

"strong  as  ever"  in  Atlanta.  The  market  was  "vigorous"  in  the  Chicago

district but  observers believe  a glut may develop  next year  when a great deal

of  space  comes  on  line. 

Industrial-  construction  has  been  increasing

according  to  reports  from Richmond.

Agriculture and Mining

Weak  prices  across  commodities  continue  to  compound  the  difficult

conditions  in  the  farm  sector.  Dairy prices  and output  are weakening largely

due  to  reduced  federal  support.  St.  Louis,  Dallas,  and  San  Francisco  report

attempts  to  reduce  inventory  in  livestock.  Good weather  and  early  planting

using  full  acreage  should  yield  large  harvests  in  the  autumn  in  most  areas

except  South  Dakota  and  Montana,  where  dry  conditions  currently  prevail.

This  may  put  additional  price  pressure  on  farmers.  Vegetable,  fruit,  and

poultry  producers  in  the  Mid-Atlantic  and  the  West  coast,  however,  seem  to

face  a much better outlook than others.

Most  natural  resource  industries  seem  to  be  hard  hit.  Dallas

notes  a  continued  slide  in  the  number  of  drilling  rigs,  primarily  due  to

declining  petroleum  prices.  Richmond  and  San  Francisco  report  employment

declines  in  mining.  Minneapolis  contacts,  however,  observe  a boom  in  the

wood  products  industry  as  a result  of  strong  construction  activity.  Forest

fires  in  the  Sixth  District  have  created  tremendous,  and  largely  uninsured,

timber losses.

Finance

Despite  the  sluggishness  of  retail  spending,  growth in  total  loans

seems  to  be  sustained  primarily by consumer  lending.  St.  Louis,  for example,

reports  a  retail  lending  increase  of  more  than  30  percent  over  last  year.

Chicago notes, however,  that  the  rapid  rise  in  consumer  credit  is  accompanied

by a rising  deliquency rate. 

For the most part, real  estate lending remains

strong,  while  weakness  in  commercial  lending  seems  widespread  and  Dallas  has

even  been experiencing  a decline  in  business  loan volume.  Only  Philadelphia

and San Francisco  report  continued strength.

Financial  pressures  in  agriculture  seem  to  remain  concentrated  in

the  Plains  states.  Kansas  City  reports  that  agricultural  bank  closings have

shut  many  farmers  out  of  the  credit  markets  due  in  part  to  higher  credit

standards  of  the  remaining  banks.  Chicago  adds  that  pressures  seem  to  be

increasing on the cooperative Farm Credit System.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Economic activity  in the  First District  remains  sluggish.  This

sluggishness  is  particularly apparent  in  the manufacturing sector, where

high  technology companies  continue  to  announce  layoffs  and  furloughs.

Firms  in more  traditional  manufacturing industries  report  that  employment

is  trending downward  in response  to  fairly  flat  order rates;  but,  for most,

layoffs are  not  required.  Inventory-to-sales  ratios are  said  to  be  higher

than desired but  coming down.  The  experience of  the  retail  sector is  more

mixed, with some  contacts  enjoying strong  sales  increases  and others seeing

a slowing  in growth.  Retailers  remain optimistic  about  the  rest  of  the

year and are currently ordering winter merchandise based  on  this  optimism.

Increases  in  both  industrial and  retail  prices  remain very moderate.  In

contrast  to  the  sluggishness  of  the manufacturing  sector and  the  confusing

signals  from retailing,  the  real estate market  is  booming.

Retail

Retail  results  continue to  be mixed  in  the First  District.  Several

retailers  enjoyed a strong  performance in May;  others  reported  some

softening  in sales  growth.  On both sides  of  the performance  scale,

however,  retailers with national affiliations felt  First  District  results

were at  least  as  strong  as  those of  their affiliates  elsewhere.

Merchants with  "upscale" customers  appear to  be  faring  somewhat

better than discount  stores, although  the difference  is  not great.  Several

contacts mentioned especially strong  sales  of  video-related merchandise,

computers,  and  VCRs.  Toys  and women's apparel are  also performing well.

Inventories  are higher than last  year  in  several cases,  but  are not

a source  of  concern among  the merchants  contacted.  In  one  case,

inventories  are high because sales  did not meet expectations;  another

supplier,  however, has  intentionally increased  inventories faster  than

sales  so  as  to  improve customer service.

Firms are  currently ordering  merchandise for next winter's  holiday

season and are building into  those  orders  expectations  for a good  sales

season - as  good or  better  than year-over-year growth  to  date.  A

contributing factor, according  to  one  contact,  is  that  interest  rate

declines  have  reduced  the costs  of  carrying  this merchandise.  Prices  are

steady.  Fall  prices for  one merchant,  for  example,  will be  only  2 1/2

percent  higher  than last  fall.

Manufacturing

A number of  First  District high  technology companies  have announced

layoffs  and  furloughs in  the  past  two months.  Layoffs have  been especially

prevalent  among manufacturers of  semiconductor  test  and  production

equipment;  most  of  these  layoffs  have been fairly  small,  affecting a couple

of  hundred  people  each.  The  largest  individual  layoffs  have been at

computer companies;  in one  case,  1,000 workers  in  the First District  have

been dismissed.  However,  the employment  situation in  the  computer  industry

appears to  be more varied than for  firms  selling  to  the  semiconductor

industry:  some computer companies  have  avoided  layoffs  but  are shrinking

staff  through attrition;  others  are  still hiring.  A slowing  in  domestic

orders  is  said  to be  the primary  reason for the  high tech companies'

difficulties.  The effect  of  the  slowdown has  been magnified by  the  rapid

expansion that  preceded it;  during this  expansion firms  added to  capacity

and built  up  staff in anticipation of  continued  rapid  growth.  Despite

current  difficulties, however, the  high  tech firms  contacted are  not

curtailing  their capital  spending plans;  these  expenditures are  seen as

necessary to  bring  out  new products  and  remain cost  competitive.

Firms  in more  traditional manufacturing industries  report  only

small  changes in  aggregate  order rates.  Although one  contact reported  that

overall  business was down and  would  require layoffs, most manufacturing

respondents have  seen order  decreases in  some divisions  offset  by  gains  in

others.  Sales  to  the  auto industry are good.  Sales  of  housing  related

products are mixed.  Sales  of  capital goods  depend very much on the

condition of  the customer's  industry, but  appear  to  be  holding steady

overall.  As  in  the  case of  high tech companies,  traditional manufacturers

have not  changed their  capital  spending plans.  For  the  firms  contacted,

planned expenditures  are about  the  same  as  or  less  than expenditures in

1984;  however,  spending  in 1984  is  said  to have  been unusually high.  The

emphasis  in capital spending  is  on increasing  productivity rather than

adding  to  capacity.  In  particular,  there  seems  to  be  little  need for

additional floor space;  according to  one  respondent,  today's machinery is

much more compact  for  the same  power and value.

Inventory-to-sales  ratios are  a little higher than desired but

coming down.  Industrial  prices  remain very well  behaved.  All  respondents

report  that price  increases  for materials  and  supplies  continue  to  be  very

modest;  several commented  that  they  are encountering greater  resistance  to

increases  in  their own prices.

Real Estate

The  real  estate market  is  booming,  especially in the Boston area.

Realtors  report a low number of  listings  while demand,  said  to  be  fueled  by

declining mortgage interest  rates,  is  running  very high.  Many  realtors

report that  it  is  a "sellers" market.  They  expect  this  situation to

continue  in  the near  future and  intensify if mortgage  interest  rates

decline  further.

New residential  construction centers on condominium developments

and higher-priced homes.  Realtors  report  that very  few moderately priced

housing units  are  being  constructed.  Also,  condominium conversions are

continuing  at  a rapid pace.

II-1

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Activity  in  most  sectors  of  the  Second  District  economy  slowed  in

recent  weeks.  Sluggishness  of  consumer  spending  has  continued  for  the  last

few  months,  although  many  stores  in  the  area were  still  doing  somewhat better

than  for  the  nation  as  a  whole.  Fewer  firms  reported  improving  business

conditions  than  did  earlier  in  the  year.  Commercial  real  estate  brokers

indicated  growing  concern  that  their "boom" may be  over.  A major bright  spot

was  in  residential  construction,  where  homebuilders  reported  the  best  market

conditions  in  years.  On  the  financial  side,  consumer  loan  rates  began  to

decline, reflecting  the  trend in general market interest rates.

Consumer Spending

The  pace  of  consumer  spending  in  the  Second  District  continued  to

slow  over  the  last  two  months.  Although  several  retailers  reported  that

business  in  the  metropolitan  area  was  slightly  better than  in  other  parts  of

the  nation,  gains  over  1984  averaged  only  about  2 percent  for  April  and  4

percent  for  May. 

Sales  for  some  merchants  continued  to  fall  short  of

expectations  by significant  margins.  Nevertheless,  inventories  were  generally

close  to  planned  levels,  and  promotions  continued  at  a normal  pace  with  few

special  price  markdowns. 

One  department  store  chain,  however,  reported

especially  weak  sales  even  with  extensive  promotions,  and  was  returning  some

unsold summer merchandise  to  suppliers.

Business Activity

The erratic  business  expansion  seems  to  have  slowed  recently  in  the

District.  While  the  majority  of  purchasing agents  still  reported  improved  or

stable  business  conditions,  fewer  firms  reported  improvements  in  May.  In

II-2

Buffalo,  moreover, more  firms  indicated  that  new  orders  had  fallen.  In  line

with  this  moderation  of  economic  activity,  firms  have  been  undertaking

inventory reductions  in recent weeks.

Major  capital  investment  projects  continued  to  be  announced,

however,  including  two  joint  ventures  involving  foreign  investors.  Toshiba

and  Westinghouse  will  retool  and  restaff  an  Elmira  plant  (which  had  been

closed  for  nine  years)  to  produce  TV tubes  and  computer  display  screens.  In

addition,  the  government  of  Yugoslavia  will  participate  in  a  project  to

convert  part  of  Bethlehem  Steel's  abandoned  Lackawana  plant  to  an  aluminum

mill.  These  undertakings  would  add  several  hundred  jobs  to  areas  facing

persistently high unemployment  rates.

Other  large  projects  recently  begun  or  announced  in  the  District

include  the  construction  of  a  new  shopping  mall  and  the  expansion  of  two

existing  ones  in  Niagara  County,  as  well  as  a  new  financial  center  and

corporate headquarters  in downtown Albany.

Construction and Real Estate

Residential  construction  activity  remained  robust,  with  builders

and  suppliers  reporting  the  best  market  conditions  in  many  years.  Lower

mortgage rates  have added  an  additional  stimulus  in  recent weeks,  according to

our  contacts.  Home  prices  have  risen  above  year-earlier  levels,  sharply  in

some  areas.  The  outlook  for  the  rest  of  the  year  is for  continued  strength,

and  some  homebuilders  already  are  optimistic  about  1986. 

Skilled  labor

remained  scarce  in  some  areas,  and  some  construction  schedules  have  been

delayed.  Observers  in  various  parts  of  the  District  also  reported  price

increases  for developed lots,  lumber,  or other materials.

The New York City  government has proposed major zoning  revisions  to

reduce  the  construction  costs  for  apartment  houses. 

The  changes  could

II-3

encourage  the  construction  of  up  to  5,000  new  units  annually,  at  25  percent

below current costs,  according to  the City's  estimates.

Real  estate  brokers  are  becoming  concerned  that  the  "boom"  in  the

region's  office market  may be  over.  Availability rates  remain very high, over

20  percent  in  some  areas,  yet  net  absorption  is  not  increasing.  The  outlook

is  uncertain,  with  the  strength  of  commercial  construction  depending  on  the

performance of  the general economy  in the coming months.

Our  contacts  also  expressed uncertainty regarding  the  impact  of  the

President's  tax  proposals.  Most  agreed  that  real  estate  would  be  a  less

attractive  investment,  especially  to  small  investors  and  syndications.  A

slower pace  of  investment  could  depress property values,  at  least  in  the short

run, but  one observer was  optimistic  about  the  longer-term  stimulus  of  the  tax

plan.  Some brokers  also believed that  investment  in Manhattan  and Long Island

might be  discouraged  to  some  extent  by  the  elimination of  state  and  local  tax

deductibility.  Fairfield  County  (Connecticut)  and  northern  New  Jersey  might

derive some  relative  benefit.

Financial Developments

Consumer  lending  rates  began  to  recede  from  their  recent  high

levels,  reflecting  the  downward  trend  in  market  interest  rates. 

Some

commercial  banks  in  the  District  already  have  cut  consumer  rates,  and  our

contacts  all  agreed  that  the  spread  between  consumer  and  market  rates  will

narrow  soon.  Auto  loan  rates  appeared  to  have  fallen  the  most  sharply,  and

bankers  expect  this  downward  trend  to  continue.  Rates  on  personal  loans  have

fallen  only  slightly  and  remain  very  high,  but  are  expected  to  decline

further. 

In  contrast,  credit  card  rates  have  not  declined  and  are  not

expected  to  fall  in  the  near  future.  Bankers  attributed  the  reluctance  to

lower  finance charges  to high operating costs.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT  - PHILADELPHIA

Economic conditions  in  the Third District  are mixed..Manufacturing activity

is  basically  unchanged  in  June for  the  third consecutive month.  Retail  sales

are flat  and,  for  some major  stores,  below expectations for  this  time  of  the

year.  The financial  and real estate sectors  are more positive.  Both commercial

and consumer loan  volume at area banks  in  June is  greater than  it  was  at  this

time  last  year,  but  the  rate  of  increase  is slowing. Mortgage lending  is

increasing rapidly, reflecting  increased  real  estate sales.  In  the  agricultural

sector,  some  area farmers  are under  financial  pressure, but  overall conditions

appear  to be better  than in  other parts of  the nation.

On balance,  the outlook for  the Third  District  economy,  although  weaker

than  it  was  a  few months  ago,  is still  positive.  In manufacturing, about  40

percent of the  industrial establishments  participating  in  the  June  Business

Outlook  Survey  anticipate  improvement  over  the  next  six  months. 

Retail

merchants expect  a slight  improvement  in sales  between now and the  start  of  the

holiday  shopping  season,  despite the present slowdown.  Area bankers  forecast

slower  but sustainable growth  in  commercial  lending  and  a  slackening  in  the

growth  of  consumer  credit  from  its  rapid pace earlier this  year.  Real estate

sales  and mortgage lending are expected to  accelerate as  long  as  interest  rates

do not  rise.

MANUFACTURING

Manufacturing  activity  in  the Third District remains  generally stable in

June for  the third month  in  a row, according  to  the  most recent  Business Outlook

III-2

Survey. 

Seventy  percent of this  month's  survey respondents  say  there has  been

no change  from May in their rate of  operations;  however,  the portion  reporting  a

decline  (18  percent)  exceeded the portion  indicating an  increase  (11  percent)

for the  first time since September  1982.  The rate of  shipments  in June was  the

same  as  in  May,  but  new  orders  dropped marginally, pulling down  producers'

backlogs and  delivery times. Although workforces were reduced  at  one-fifth  of

the  industrial  plants  surveyed  in  June,  most survey respondents  said  their

employment was  stable.

In reply to questions  about general business activity during  the  rest  of

the  year,  40  percent  of the June survey respondents  said they expect present

conditions  to persist, more than one-third look  for  improvement,  and  nearly  a

quarter  expect  further deterioration.  The outlook for  increased employment  and

capital  investment is  growing dimmer.  The portion of  manufacturers  scheduling

increases  in  expenditures  on new plant and equipment fell  to  20  percent of those

participating  in the  survey this  month, the lowest  level  yet this  year. 

Little

change  in factory employment is likely  in  the near  future.  Less  than 20  percent

of  the June  survey respondents plan  increases  in  either payrolls or  the  length

of  the workweek over the next six months.

RETAIL

Retail  sales  have been flat  in  the Third District  over the past two months.

Local merchants say there has  been no  increase in  sales  in  either  May  or  June

compared  to  April.  Sales  volume is also unchanged compared to  the  same period

last year.  Sales  of  home goods  and higher priced items  have  been  particularly

weak.

Cautiously  optimistic  is  the  term  store managers use  to  describe their

short-term outlook.  For the  months  remaining  until  the  Christmas  shopping

III-3

season,  retail  sales  are generally expected to  post gains  of 5 percent or more

above year-earlier periods, with the most  optimistic retailer forecasting  a  10

percent  increase. 

Lower  interest  rates  and  the  faster  pace of  income tax

refunds are cited as  factors  tending to boost consumer spending.

FINANCE

Borrowing  in the  Third District remains  strong,  with  both  business  and

consumer  loans  up  substantially  from  a  year  ago.  Consumer loan volume  is

approximately 25-30  percent higher than  it was  in  June 1984,  with  credit  card

and  automobile  loans  accounting  for  most  of  the  increase.  Commercial and

industrial  loan volume at  Third District  banks  in  early June is approximately 17

percent  higher  than  it  was  twelve months  ago.  Business borrowing is likely  to

ease off  in coming months,  however;  many borrowers  have  been  able  to  improve

their  balance  sheets  recently  and  are  likely to  have less need  for  borrowed

funds.  Lending officers see  economic  growth  tapering  off  further  over  the

summer,  resulting  in year-over-year  increases  of about 10  percent in  commercial

loan volume.

Mortgage lenders  report  large  increases  in the demand for  housing  finance

in  recent  weeks,  with  outstanding mortgage volume up  14-20 percent  from  last

year  at  commercial banks.  A major thrift  institution  in  the  Third  District  is

receiving  one-third  more  mortgage  applications  this  spring  than  last,  and

reports the dollar  volume of new mortgages made this April  to  be  three  times

greater  than  that  in April  1984.  The average rate on conventional, fixed-rate

30-year mortgages  is 12  percent  in mid-June.  Falling mortgage  rates  appear  to

be  the  major  force behind  the boom  in housing demand, offsetting any downward

pressure stemming  from concern over  the  effect of proposed tax  changes  on  the

cost  of home ownership.

III-4

Third District banks lowered their prime rate  to 9.5 percent on June 18.

Some  local  bank  economists  feel  interest  rates  in  general  will  drop  further

in  the  short-run,  but  they  expect  higher  interest  rates  later  in  the  year.

The  consensus  of  their  forecasts  is  a prime  rate  of  11  percent  by  December,

federal funds  above 8 percent, and  Treasury bills and  bonds  at  about 8 and 11

percent,  respectively.  Consumer  loan  rates  are  expected  to  fall  in  the

immediate future  and then parallel the movement  of other rates.

AGRICULTURE

The financial  and market conditions  of the Third District agricultural

sector  are  not  as  critical  as  in  other  areas  of  the  country.  Farms  in  the

Third District are not as highly leveraged as  farms  elsewhere, and farmland

prices have not declined  substantially.

Dairy  farming  is  the  weakest  of  the  District's  agricultural  industries,

as  the  end  of  the  federal  diversion  program  and  reduction  of  the  milk  price

support  have  contributed  to  lower  dairy  prices  and  incomes.  Other  important

farm  products  face  better  markets.  Poultry  sales  are  expected  to  increase

during the rest  of  the year, with prices  remaining stable.  Income  from fruit

and  vegetable  products  in  the  region  this  year  should  meet  or  exceed  the

level of last  year if prices hold at current levels.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

The  pattern  of  economic  activity  in  the  Fourth  District  has  changed

little  since  the  last  Beigebook.  District  employment  rose  slightly  in  May,

although  manufacturing  employment  was  unchanged. 

Cars  and  soft  goods

continue  to  sell  well,  while  big  ticket  department  store  hardgoods  are

beginning  to  recover  from  weak  sales  in  mid-spring. 

Manufacturing

production  remains  flat,  with  output  strong  in  automobiles  and  weak  in

steel.  Firms  continue  emphasis  on  cost-cutting  modernization  rather  than

expansion.  Multi-family  residential  construction  remains  volatile  because

of  tax  law  uncertainty while  office  construction  is  being  reduced  because  of

excess  space.  Business  loan  demand  has  been  flat  while  real  estate  and

consumer  installment  loan demand has  been  good.

Labor  Market  Conditions.

Ohio's  unemployment  rate  fell  from  9.0%  sa  to  7.7%  sa  in  May.  A  slight

rise  in employment was  accompanied  by  a  large  drop  in  the  labor  force,  which

is  a  phenomenon  not  witnessed  in  ten  years  of  data. 

Therefore,  some

analysts  agree  with  the  direction  but  not  with  the  magnitude  reported.

Pockets  of  high  unemployment  in  the  District  in  many  cases  are  attributable

to  continuing weakness  in mining  and  agriculture.

Retail  Sales.

Fourth  District  retailers  report  continued  sales  growth,  although  most

mention  brief  periods  of  weakness  in  early  May.  Car  sales  remain  strong.

Dealers  continue  to  have  problems  stocking  popular  domestic  models  and

IV-2

report  no  excess  inventories. 

Import  dealers  have  had  an  especially

difficult  time  obtaining  cars. 

Some  dealers  feel  the  market  is  becoming

more  competitive,  but  most  think  little  additional  discounting  is  possible.

Although  some  consumers  purchased  new  cars  in  April  and  May  specifically

because  of  below-market  interest  rates  that  recently  ended,  dealers  expect

strong  sales  to  continue  as  long  as  rates  in  general  do  not  rise  and

personal  income does  not  falter.

In  contrast  to  auto  dealers,  department  stores  report  that  sales  of

big-ticket  items  like  furniture  and  appliances  have  been  weak  since

mid-April.  These  items  are  beginning  to  recover  and  retailers  believe  this

may  be  due  to  the  arrival  of  tax  refunds.  Apparel  and  other  soft  goods

continued  to  move  exceedingly  well  and  sellers  expect  this  trend  to

continue.  Retailers  are  optimistic about  the  rest  of  1985.  Inventories  are

at desired  levels  and  most  stores  do  not  expect  to  cut  prices  further.  They

hope  to  recover  some  of  their  margins  lost  to  earlier  discounting  by  a

continued drop  in  their  costs  for  some  goods.

Manufacturing and  Investment.

A  survey  of  manufacturing  firms  in  the  midwest  indicates  new  orders  are

increasing  slightly  faster  than  in  the  first  quarter  but  inventories  are

being  decreased.  Planned  capital  spending  in  1985  exceeds  the  amount  spent

in  1984  but  by  a  substantially  smaller  margin  than  in  the  March  survey.

Surveys  of  manufacturing  firms  in  the  Cincinnati  and  Cleveland  areas  show

little  change  in  production,  new  orders  and  inventories.  The  consensus  of

the  three  surveys  is  that prices  paid  and  received  are  changing very  little.

Manufacturers  of  automobiles  and  automobile  and  truck  parts  report  that

their  capital  spending  is  almost  entirely  for  modernization  rather  than

expansion  of  capacity.  Even  when  a  new  plant  is  built  it  is  usually  to

IV-3

replace  an  old,  inefficient  plant.  One  manufacturer  of  truck  parts  reports

that  orders are  being  stretched  out  but  not  cancelled.  The  firm's  cash  flow

is  weakening,  so  the  firm may  cut  back  its  spending  on  plant  and  equipment.

Despite  a  sharp  increase  in  imports,  an  auto  producer  will  not  cut  prices

because  it  is  operating  at  full  capacity.  Major  steel  producers  continue  in

distress.  Prices  remain  soft,  imports  high,  and  profits  low  or  negative.

Most  major  steel  producers  are  reducing  their  costs  but  the  benefits  seem  to

go  into  lower prices  rather  than  higher profit margins.

Housing and  Construction.

Housing  market  participants  expect  a  moderate  rebound  in  housing

activity  in  this  District  during  the  second  and  third  quarters.  As  a result

of  a substantial  recovery  in  listings  and  closings,  realtors  have  cancelled

previous  plans  to  scale  down  operations.  Although  builders  expect  at  least

a  two-quarter  housing  rebound,  they  have  positioned  themselves  to  minimize

downside  risk  and  thus  will  forego  potential  profits  if  the  housing  reversal

is  stronger  or  longer  than  anticipated. 

Mortgage  lenders  are  less

optimistic  than  realtors  about  the  duration  and  strength  of  the  rebound.

Builders  expect  volatility  in  multi-family  housing  to  continue  in  this

District  until  there  is  less uncertainty over  tax-reform legislation.

Office  construction  in  the  District's  major  cities  has  been  robust  since

1980,  resulting  in  an  oversupply of  office  space.  Consequently,  all  of  this

District's 

major  cities 

are 

currently  experiencing 

a 

substantial

downtrending  or  complete  stoppage  in  new  contracts  for  office  construction,

which  is  expected  to  persist  over  the  next  three  to  four  years.  Generally

speaking,  the  office  construction  market  is  best  characterized  as  an

"orderly buyers'  market,"  inasmuch  as  prices  are  being discounted  10%  to  20%

but  suppliers  are not  panicky.

Commercial  Banking.

IV-4

District  loan  demand  has  been  mixed  with  loan  outstandings  at  large

banks  registering  a  slight  decline  over  the  past  month.  Business  loan

demand  has  been  flat,  and  contacts  anticipate  continued  softness  for

commercial  and  industrial  credit  into  the  Summer.  On  the  other  hand,  the

demand  for  real  estate  and  consumer  installment  loans  has  been  quite  good,

and  contacts  expect  consumer  loan  demand  to  remain  relatively  strong,

particularly with  lower  and  falling  interest  rates.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Two  distinct  pictures  emerge  from  the  District  economy  at  this

time.  Most  areas  and  sectors  are  offering very  upbeat reports.  Activity  is

generally  rising,  and  in  many  cases,  from  already  record  or  near  record

levels.  Such  reports  come  from  the  retail  sector,  the  construction  and

housing  sectors,  and  the  service  sector.  On  the  other  hand,  the  manu-

facturing  and  agricultural  sectors  are  giving  off  very  negative  signals.

The  manufacturing  sector,  in  particular,  is  reporting  declining  sales,

production, and  employment.  Manufacturers continue  to  cite  foreign competi-

tion  as  a major  factor  in  the  current  situation, and  quite  a few  are  appar-

ently  relying  more  heavily  on  offshore  production  themselves,  either  by

moving  production  facilities  or  by  importing  parts  or  materials.  In  ag-

riculture,  recent  rain has  ameliorated  difficulties  in  some  areas,  but  crop

outlooks  remain  less  than  satisfactory.

Manufacturing

Once  again,  as  earlier  in  the  year,  manufacturing  activity  has

slowed.  Our  respondents  report  declines  in  shipments, new orders,  and  order

backlogs during  the past  several weeks.  In  addition, manufacturing  employ-

ment  has  fallen  in  most  areas,  and  several  industries  are  generally  on

reduced  workweeks.  Most  indications  are  that while  these  conditions may  be

concentrated  in  the  textile,  apparel,  and  furniture  industries,  they  are  by

no  means  peculiar  to  those  segments  of  manufacturing.  There  appear  to  be

very  few,  if  any,  industry  groups  actually  showing  growth  at  this  time,

V-2

although several  related to  commercial  and  residential  construction activity

remain above year  earlier levels  of  activity.

Coal  production  remains  slightly  below  the  record  levels  of  last

year, but  is  still  quite  strong.  Mining  employment,  on  the  other  hand,  is

not  holding  up  so  well.  During  April  coal  mining  employment  in  West

Virginia was more  than  5 percent below the  year earlier level.

Consumer  Activity

Consumer  activity  in  the  District  appears  quite  different  from

manufacturing.  Sales  are  strong  and  rising  very  nearly  across  the  board.

Non-durables,  durables,  automobiles,  and services  are  all doing well in most

areas.  Despite  the  general  perception of  strong  sales,  automobile  dealers

are  aggressively  promoting  attractive  financing  arrangements.  Tourism  is

also  an  area  of  strength,  although  some  areas  report  slight  declines  from

the extraordinary levels  of  activity  a year  ago.  Tourist  activity,  in  fact,

is  prompting quite  a bit  of  development  activity  in  several tourist  oriented

areas  of  the District.

Housing and  Construction

Construction  activity  in  the  District  remains  almost  uniformly

strong, with  both  residential  and  commercial  building  contributing heavily.

Also,  there  is  little  indication  that  any  slowing  of  activity  is  in  pros-

pect.  Most  industry  observers  and  participants  expect  continued  buoyancy  in

construction activity  and  adequate  absorption  of  new  space.  Housing  sales

are  generally  robust,  and  are  even  reported  to  be  breaking  records  in  some

areas.  There  are  even  pockets  of  strength  in  industrial  type  building,

V-3

particularly around  industrial and  office  parks where new facilities make  up

most  or  all  of  the  activity.

Financial  Sector

District  financial  institutions  are  still  reporting  moderate  to

strong  growth  in  loan  demand.  Business  loan  demand  is  rated  as  flat  to  up

slightly,  since  although  business  needs  are  expanding,  businesses  are

perceived as  having quite a bit of  cash on hand.  Consumer demand  for  credit

is  generally  strong,  and  mortgage  credit,  of  course,  reflects  the  strength

of  the  residential real  estate market.  The  financial institutions  seem able

to  continue  financing  this loan  growth,  since deposit  growth is  also  holding

up  very well.

The  Outlook

The  outlook  around  the  District  reflects  the  state  of  business

activity.  Manufacturers,  as  a group,  do  not  expect  to  see  any  improvement

in  business  activity  over  the  next  six  months  or  so,  although  few  envision

any  further  actual  deterioration  of  the  economy.  In most  other  sectors  the

outlook is  much more  positive.  Clearly,  there  is  some  uncertainty  stemming

from  the  debate  on  taxes,  but  there  appears  to  be  general  agreement  that

business  investment will  continue  on  a strong  upward  path  for  at  least  the

rest  of  the  year.  Plans  for  construction  activity  and  purchases  of  produc-

ers'  goods  are  largely  in  place,  and  there  does  not  seem  to  be  any  general

tendency  to  cancel  or  otherwise  reduce  planned  investment.  Consumer  confi-

dence  remains  strong,  as job  and  income  growth  continue  despite  the  lull  in

manufacturing activity.

VI-1

SIXTH  DISTRICT  - ATLANTA

Indications  have  surfaced  that  southeastern  economic  activity  has  begun  to

slow  but  areas  of  strength  still  outweigh  weaker  sectors.  Labor  markets  have  shown

little  overall  employment  growth.  Conditions  have  not  improved  for  the  region's  import

sensitive  industries  such  as  textiles  and  apparel  where  employment  rolls  continue  to

shrink.  Consumer  spending  has  been  strong  for  seasonal  goods  and  the  outlook  for  new

car  sales  is  positive.  Real  estate  activity  has  been  diverse  in  recent  months  with  real

estate  loan  growth  strengthening  in  parts  of  the  region.  Commerical  building  remains

strong.  However,  total  loan  growth  has  begun  to  weaken  at  the  region's  large  banks.

Tourism  is  lackluster  in  some  areas  and  the summer  outlook  is  mixed.  Despite  continuing

financial  stress  in  agriculture,  little  acreage  is  being  idled  this  year.

Employment  and  Industry.  Labor  market  conditions  have  basically  remained

unchanged  from  the  last  reporting  period  with  the  District  unemployment  rate  hovering

around  8  percent.  A  notable  exception  was  that  Alabama's  unemployment  rate  moved

to  the  single  digit  range  for  the  first  time  since  June  of  1981.

Alabama's  recent  employment  growth  is  mainly  attributable  to  job  recalls

in  the  steel  industry  and  a  booming  construction  sector.  Construction  employment  is

up  over  seven  percent  from  last  year. 

Shipbuilding  has  revived  in  the  state;  new

defense  related  contracts  portend  still  more  job  growth  in  the  sector.

Imports  continue  to  batter  the  region's  textile  and  apparel  industry. 

In

Georgia  alone,  textile  and  apparel  employment  is  down  by  9,000  workers  from  a  year

ago.  Spokesmen  for  the  forest  products  industry  note  that  market  prices  are  stable

and  builders  are  buying.  The  strong  dollar  has  slowed  exports  of  the  region's  pulp  and

paper  mills.  Foreign  imports  have  impacted  coated  paper  products  and  new  orders  for

packaging  material  have  contracted  resulting  in  excessive  inventory  accumulations.

VI-2

The  chemical  industry  is  producing  at  a  constant  level,  however, 

industry

officials  note  a  recent  softening  of  product  prices.  Uncertainty  about  the  terms  of

the  new  federal  tax  policy  has  held  down  oil  and  gas  drilling  activity  in  Louisiana.

Consumer  Spending.  Retailers  in  Alabama,  Florida,  Georgia  and  Tennessee

reported  sales  growth 

through  May 

to  be  up  approximately  10  percent  over 

the

comparable  period  a  year  ago.  Retailers  in  Mississippi  reported  mixed  sales  activity

while  Louisiana  reported  activity  below  its  year-ago  level.  Strong  sales  of  seasonal

goods  such  as  summer  apparel,  home  furnishings  and  gardening  supplies  were  reported

throughout  the  region.

The  outlook  for  car  and  truck  sales  remains  bright  in  most  parts  of  the

region.  Manufacturers' 

incentive  programs  aimed  at  both  consumers  and  dealers  also

have  been  instrumental  in  boosting  sales  activity.

Financial  and  Construction.  Housing  markets  in  the  Southeast  have  been

mixed,  in  contrast  to  the  fairly  consistent  growth  of  only  six  months  ago.  While  the

Atlanta  and  Nashville  markets  may  have  been  stimulated  by  the  continued  decline  in

mortgage  rates,  New  Orleans,  and  Baton  Rouge  markets  remain  depressed.  A  factor

favoring  residential  activity  has  been  the 

intense  rate  competition  between 

local

mortgage  lenders.  Miami's  housing  market  has  been  slowing  down  and  overbuilding  is

apparent.  New  home  prices  in  parts  of  the  metropolitan  area  have  been  declining.

The  condominium  market  continues  to  look  bleak,  with  unsold  inventory  at  an  all-time

high  of  around  13,000  units.

Jacksonville,  Fort  Lauderdale,  and  Nashville  are  experiencing  a  further

upswing  in  nonresidential  building  activity.

VI-3

The  Atlanta  office  space  absorption  figures  are  keeping  up  with 

their

corresponding  levels  of  a  year  ago,  and  demand  is  seen  to  be  as  strong  as  ever.  Rents

are  rising  in  most  markets  despite  falling  occupancy  rates,  reflecting  expectations  of

continued  strong  demand.

Large  banks  in  the  district  have  reported  weakening  growth  in  total  loans

for  the  past  four  consecutive  months,  relative  to  the  same  months  of  last  year.  Business

lending,  which  showed  virtually  no  increase  from  April  to  May,  contributed  significantly

to  the  moderating  growth  of  total  lending.

Real  estate 

lending, 

the  strongest  component  of  total  loan  growth, 

is

responsible  for  much  of  the  expansion  of  total  loans  from  April  to  May.

Tourism.  Conditions  in  the  tourist  industry  are  mixed.  Most  major  vacation

destinations  appear 

to  be  faring  well,  but  other  locations  more  dependent  on  local

visitors  have  experienced  little  or  no  growth,  especially  in  areas  where  local  economic

conditions  are  weak.  Lodging  tax  receipts  for  April  showed  healthy  increases.

Attraction  attendance  has  also  shown  disparate  signs.  State  and  national

parks  report  excellent  visitations  thus  far  and,  along  with  some  private  mountain

attractions  and  resorts,  are  expecting  healthy  growth  this  summer.  However,  attraction

attendance  to  date  in  Florida  has  been  lackluster.

Agriculture.  Abnormally  dry spring  weather  in  Florida  has  resulted  in  almost

150,000  acres  of  woodland  being  destroyed  by  fire.  Most  forests  were  uninsured  and

the  loss  to  owners  will  amount  to  several  million  dollars.  Despite  earlier  concerns

about  farmers  obtaining  operating  credit,  reports  throughout  the  District  indicate  little

acreage  is  being  idled.  Various  farm  lenders  have  noted  no  substantive  increases  in

rejections  of  farm  loan  applications.

VII-1

SEVENTH  DISTRICT--CHICAGO

[Summary]-Observers of  economic  developments  in  the  Seventh  District  generally  view  the

current  situation  and  outlook  with  caution.  No  recession  is  anticipated,  but  neither  does  an

upturn  appear  in  prospect  from  the  sluggish  overall  trend,  and  weakening  manufacturing  sector,

of  recent  months.  Construction  of  office  buildings  and  stores,  rehabilitation  of  older

structures,  and  highway  and  bridge  work  continue  vigorous.  Residential  sales  and  building  are

rising  in  response  to  lower  mortgage  interest  rates.  Auto  and  truck  sales  are  at  high  levels,

and  a  large  rise  in  auto  output  over  last  year  is  planned  for  the  third  quarter.  Major  home

appliance  sales  are  at  record  levels,  but  the  recent  rise  is  centered  in  microwave  ovens,  many

imported.  Other  areas  of  consumer  spending  for  goods  have  flattened  or  declined.  Consumer

debt  levels  are  high,  and  delinquencies  are  up significantly  for  some  lenders.  Manufacturing

jobs  in  the  Seventh  District  have  declined  since  January,  adjusted  for  seasonal  patterns.

Employers  trying  to  force  down  labor  costs  in  air  transport,  auto  production,  trucking,  and

food  retailing  have  been  met  with  work  stoppages  and  costly  litigation.  Most  District  capital

goods  producers  have  experienced  only  limited  recovery,  at  best,  from  reduced  operating  rates

of  1982.  Some  lines,  including  heavy  construction  equipment,  railcars,  and  farm  machinery,

have  remained  at  very  low  levels,  with  numerous  plant  closings.  Steel  orders  are  rising,

chiefly  due  to  auto  industry  buying,  but  demand  and  pricing  remain  short  of  satisfactory

levels,  and  vigorous  cost  cutting  continues.  The  recent  weakening  in  personal  computers  and

semiconductors  has  had  relatively  little  impact  in  this  region.  Continued  declines  in

agricultural  commodity  prices  have  added  to  strains  on  farmers,  suppliers,  and  rural

communities.  Strains  on  farm  lenders  apparently  have  also  intensified.  Business  executives

are  studying  and  commenting  on  the  Administration's  tax  reform  plan,  with  mixed  reactions.

Tax  Plan  Reaction.  Most  District  executives  recognize  the  merits  of  the  Administration's

goal  of  simplifing  the  federal  income  tax  system  and  reducing  marginal  rates.  However,

VII-2

equipment  producers  strongly  oppose  elimination  of  the  investment  tax  credit,  and  many  are

concerned  about  the  effect  on  future  cash  flow  of  tighter  depreciation  rules  and  "recapture" of

so-called  windfalls  from  past  accelerated  depreciation.  Builders  decry  the  proposal  to  end  tax

credits  on  renovations  of  older  commercial  structures,  which  have  been  accounting  for  a

substantial  share  of  current  construction  activity.  There  is  also  concern  over  the  proposed

requirement  that  equipment  and  buildings  must  be  in  service  on  January  1,  1986,  to  qualify  for

existing  incentives.  However,  many  believe  that  the  abrupt  cutoff  will  be  modified  to  permit  a

more  gradual  transition.  Home  builders  will  strongly  oppose  elimination  of  deductibility  on

personal  returns  of  state  and  local  taxes  and  interest  on  second  homes.  Attitudes  of  state  and

local  governments  on  deductibility  of  taxes  are  mixed.  In  Illinois,  there  is  sentiment  that

existing  rules  comprise  a  subsidy  to  other  states  with  heavier  taxes.  Despite  these

apprehensions,  the  proposed  tax  legislation  does  not  play  a  large  role  in  projections  of  demand

or  profits  for  the  remainder  of  1985.

Import  Competition.  Heavy  import  competition,  attributable  largely  to  the  strong  dollar

and  lower  labor  costs  abroad,  is  gradually  squeezing  down  manufacturing  activity  in  the

District  in  a  broad  variety  of  industries.  It  is  widely  believed  that  the  growth  of  imports  is

understated  because  of  lags  in  "documentation"  at  ports  of  entry.  Meanwhile,  more  and  more

operations  are  being  shifted  abroad--to  Europe,  Latin  America  (especially  Mexico),  and  the  Far

East.  Examples  include  electrical  apparatus,  auto  parts,  household  appliances,  and  farm  and

construction  equipment.  Pressures  to  seek  lower  costs  abroad  are  so  strong  that  changes  in  tax

laws,  or  even  significant  weakening  of  the  dollar,  are  unlikely  to  arrest  the  trend.

Capital  Goods.  Seventh  District  capital  equipment  producers  continue  to  be  battered  by

the  strong  dollar.  A  more  sluggish  domestic  economy  apparently  also  has  cut  growth  of  capital

spending  plans  and  reduced  orders.  Demand  is  generally  weak  for  various  types  of  heavy  capital

equipment.  Railcar  orders  are  down  from  very  low  levels  last  year.

Motor  Vehicles.  Sales  of  cars  and  trucks  continued  strong  through  May,  helped  by  cut-rate

VII-3

financing,  dealer  incentive  programs,  and  easing  of  shortages.  However,  inventories  of  some

models  are  still  tight.  Planned  third  quarter  auto  production  would  be  highest  for  the  quarter

since  1977,  and  16  percent  above  year  ago.  Truck  sales  in  May  were  highest  ever  for  the  month.

Sales  of  medium  and  heavy  trucks  are  expected  to  rise  3-5  percent  in  1985,  with  only  small

gains  in  the  second  half.  Truck  trailer  orders  and  shipments  have  fallen  substantially,

following  the  surge  in  production  of  larger  and  tandem  trailers  last  year  in  response  to

changed  Federal  regulations.  A  small  Midwestern  auto  producer  has  given  notice  that  it  plans

to  end  car  production  in  the  U.S.  unless  labor  agrees  to  sizable  concessions.

Steel.  Steel  production  at  Chicago  area  mills  has  declined  somewhat  since  spring,  but

output  has  increased  in  the  Detroit  area.  Third  quarter  bookings  indicate  a  smaller  than

seasonal  decline  in  output,  mainly  because  of  auto  industry  needs.  Construction  fabricators'

backlogs  are  rising,  especially  for  bridges  and  commercial  buildings.  Demand  for  steel  remains

very  weak  for  heavy  industrial  projects,  oil  and  gas,  and  farm  and  construction  equipment.

With  continued  losses,  steel  companies  are  still  drastically  cutting  costs,  eliminating

marginal  facilities  and  workers  and  contracting  out  additional  functions.

Construction.  Office  and  retail  construction,  renovation,  and  highway  work  continue

vigorous  in  the  Chicago  area.  The  market  for  large  blocks  of  office  space  in  and  near  the  Loop

is  tight,  but  a  substantial  amount  of  space  is  available  in  smaller  blocks.  A  large  volume  of

new  space  will  hit  the  market  in  Chicago  next  year  and  may  cause  a  serious  glut.  A  record

volume  of  highway  contracts  will  be  let  by  the  State  of  Illinois  in  June.  No  shortages  of

materials  are  anticipated.

Mortgage  Rates.  Lower  interest  rates  are  boosting  housing  sales  and  construction.

Residential  building  has  strengthened,  with  midrise  suburban  rental  apartments  up  strongly,

perhaps  in  part  to  "grandfather" current  tax  treatment.  Home  resales  have  also  improved.

Fixed-rate  30-year  mortgages  are  being  quoted  by  Chicago  area  lenders  at  contract  rates  as  low

as  11.5  percent.  First-year  rates  on  adjustable  rate  loans  are  quoted  by  numerous  lenders  at

VII-4

rates  under  10  percent,  with  some  being  offered  at  9  percent  or  less.  Lower  rates  are

encouraging  a  shift  toward  fixed-rate  loans.

Consumer  Spending.  Major  chain  stores  in  the  Seventh  District  report  weaker  sales  growth

in  recent  months,  for  both  durables  and  nondurables.  Distribution  of  delayed  tax  refunds  did

not  discernibly  boost  spending,  according  to  a  large  retailer.  Consumer  buying  on  credit  has

been  heavy,  and  delinquencies  have  been  rising.  With  inventories  somewhat  heavy,  retailers

have  been  scaling  back  orders.  Total  shipments  of  major  home  appliances  have  been  at an

all-time  high.

Agriculture.  Low  commodity  prices  continue  to  plague  District  corn  and  soybean  farmers.

Average  farm  commodity  prices  fell  further  in May,  to  11  percent  below  a  year  earlier  and

lowest  for  the  month  since  1980.  Unexpected  weakness  in  livestock  prices  has  paced  the  decline

in  recent  months.  Hog  prices  are  down  14  percent  from  a  year  ago,  in  part  reflecting  large

increases  in  competing  supplies  of  poultry  and  escalating  imports  from  Canada.  Crop  plantings

progressed  well  ahead  of  normal.  Early  plantings  usually  enhance  yield  prospects.  Without  a

large  rise  in  crop  exports,  not  now  anticipated,  a  big  harvest  would  add  to  stocks  and  hold

prices  at  support  levels.

Recent  developments  are  reportedly  adding  to  the  pressures  on  the  cooperative  Farm  Credit

System.  Stock  requirements  of  several  PCAs  in  Iowa  were  frozen.  In  addition,  the  Omaha  FLB

raised  its  farm  mortgage  rates  75  basis  points.  These  developments  reportedly  triggered  a

"flight" of  good  borrowers  from  PCAs  and  FLBs  to  other  lenders.  In  some  cases,  the  flight  has

been  encouraged  by  heavy  advertising  of  lower  rate  loans  on  the  part  of  competitive  lenders.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Most District  economic  indicators have  declined recently.

Retailers, however, reported single-digit  sales  increases  in May over

year-ago  levels.  District employment declined slightly in April, though

the unemployment rate  remained unchanged.  Both residential and

nonresidential construction contracts  declined from the  year-ago level in

April.  District respondents  expect very little  change  in business

conditions  over the next  three  months.  Total loan growth at  large

District banks has  slowed  from last  year's pace.  Only  consumer loan

growth has  outpaced the year-ago growth rate.  In the agricultural

sector, the prospect  of large harvests has lowered  futures prices  for

most major crops  to  new life-of-contract  lows.

Outlook

A majority of District respondents  surveyed  early  in  the  second

quarter expects business  conditions  to  be  about the  same through

September of  this year.  Half of  those  surveyed  expect  the real volume  of

business  to  increase slightly, while one  fourth of respondents  expect no

change.  Prices near current levels  over  the next  three months  are

planned by about 60  percent of  respondents,  while almost 20  percent  plan

to  raise prices and only 2 percent expect  to  lower prices.  Survey

respondents  also indicate that no  work force  changes  are  planned  in the

near future.  Most respondents are  comfortable  with current inventory

levels  and plan no  change  in  those  levels  in  the next  three  to  six  months.

VIII-2

Consumer Spending

All indications  suggest  that  retail sales  in the District have

been fairly  good, a condition unchanged since  the  last report.  Some

District  department and discount  stores  reported  sales gains  of  5 to  10

percent  in May over last  year's  level.

Employment

Eighth District  payroll employment  declined  at  a 3 percent

annualized rate  in April, bringing  the  year-to-date rate  of  growth to

just  over 1 percent.  The District  unemployment rate  remained  unchanged

in April  at  7.5 percent despite  the  small decline  in  employment.  The

unemployment rate declined  slightly  in Arkansas and Kentucky while

Missouri's unemployment rate  remained unchanged and Tennessee  experienced

a small increase.

Business Activity

Business activity  in April, as  measured by an index  of  seven

indicators,  rose  sharply  in Missouri  at an  11 percent rate.  Arkansas

business activity  also  increased  in April, but  only  at  a 1 percent rate.

The business  activity  index was 1.5  percent  above the year-ago  level  in

both states  in April.

Construction

Total  construction contracts  in April declined  14 percent  from

the April  1984 figure.  Both  residential  and nonresidential construction

contracts  fell from their year-ago levels,  at 18  and 7 percent rates,

respectively.  Reports from the  District  suggest,  however, that  interest

in new homes  and home improvements  has  increased recently.

VIII-3

Banking and Finance

The most recent  bank  data indicate  a continuation of lending

trends  that have  been evident since  the beginning of  this  year.  Total

loans  at  large  weekly-reporting  District  banks  grew at a 12 percent

annualized rate  (not seasonally adjusted) over the  three  month period

ending  in  May.  This is  considerably slower  than the 24  percent  rate of

loan growth  for the  same  period of  the  previous  year.  Slower growth  in

both commercial and real estate  lending were  the  most important  factors

contributing  to  the  slower  overall loan  growth.  Commercial  loans grew at

a 10 percent pace  this  year  compared  to a 15 percent rate last  year while

real  estate  loans grew at  only a 5 percent rate  as  compared  to  a 17

percent rate over the  three  month period  last year.

Consistent with recent  experience,  consumer  lending has  grown

more  rapidly over the  past  3 months  of  this year  (33  percent)  than for

the  same  period  last  year  (12  percent).  Over  the  last  three  months,

however, the month to  month growth rates have been declining,  suggesting

a slowing  in  consumer borrowing.

Agriculture

Early planting and timely rains  have lowered futures  prices for

most  major  crops  to  new lows.  With export  demand weak, it appears  as  if

grain, soybean, and  cotton prices  will  stay near  current levels  unless

yields  are below average.  Cattle  supplies  remain abundant  with producers

still  attempting  to  market a large number of overfinished animals.  Hog

prices have  increased  somewhat recently,  partially  in  response  to

widening  restrictions  on  the importation of hogs  from Canada.

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT  - MINNEAPOLIS

Mixed  signals  have  recently  been  received  from  key  indicators  of  the

Ninth  District  economy.  While  labor  market  conditions  have  continued  to

improve  generally,  most  of  the  improvement  has  been  seasonal.  Some  slackening

of  the  pace  of  consumer  spending  has  been  noted  throughout  the  district,

although car  sales  and housing  activity  rose  in  some parts.  The  wood products

sector  is 

the  only  resource-related  industry  reporting  good  news,  while  bad

news  is  still the norm for  agriculture.

Employment

Labor  market  conditions  have  continued to  show  improvement,  although

most  improvement  has  been  seasonal.  The  Ninth  District's  seasonally  adjusted

unemployment  rate  fell  a  bit  in  April  to  just  under  6  percent,  despite  a

slight  drop  in 

seasonally  adjusted  employment. 

Also,  the  increase  in  April

employment  was  less  than  normal 

in 

the  Minneapolis-St.  Paul  metro  area.  But

April's  unemployment  rate  in 

the  Twin  Cities  dropped  a 

little 

more  than  sea-

sonally  to  only  4.2  percent,  and  teenage  unemployment  there,  at  around  10

percent,  is  about  as  low  as  in  any  metro  area  in  the  nation.  Normal  seasonal

employment  increases  were  noted  in  South  Dakota,  dropping  the  state's  un-

employment  rate  to  5.1  percent  and  the  Sioux  Falls  MSA's  rate  to  4.4  per-

cent.  This  April's  unemployment  rate  in  North  Dakota  remained  unchanged  from

last  April's,  at  6.4  percent. 

A  Bank  director  notes  that  North  Dakota's

stagnation  was  primarily  in 

the  state's 

western  part,  which  has  been  adversely

affected  by  a  curtailment  of  energy  production  projects. 

Bank  directors

IX-2

report  that  Montana  has  been  suffering  from  deteriorating  conditions  in  its

agricultural  and  resource-related  sectors;  the  state's  unemployment  fell

between  March and April at  less  than the  seasonal norm.

Consumer Spending

Some  softening  in 

the  district's 

consumer  purchases  of  general  mer-

chandise was  noted in  May and early  June.  One  large  retailer, noting that  its

April  sales  were  better  than  expected,  speculated  that  some  of  its  normal  May

business  may  have  instead  come  in  April  this  year.  By  May's  end,  the  re-

tailer's  year-to-date  sales  were  up  10  percent  over  last  year's.  Another

large  retailer  found  that  large  discounts  were  the  only  way  to keep  business

brisk  in May,  curbing  store profits.  Furthermore, this  retailer's  inventories

are  still  high  and  will  have  to  be  brought  back  in  line  by  more  discounts.

Recreational clothing--particularly jogging togs--has  been  an  excellent  seller

thanks  to  the  unusually  warm  weather 

in 

the  district's 

population  centers.

Bank  directors  concur  that  retail  sales  are  generally  flat-to-slowing through-

out  the  district, with the possible exception of  eastern  South Dakota.

Low-cost  financing  deals  have  propped  up  car  sales  into  June.  Two

large  domestic  manufacturers  have  been  left  with 

low  current  inventories  of

trucks  and  cars. 

Both  manufacturers  have  experienced  year-to-date  vehicle

sales--especially  truck  sales--in  excess  of  last  year's  good  results. 

Sales

were  off  in Montana, though, and  also  slowed in  Sioux Falls,  South Dakota.

Aided  by  falling  interest  rates,  housing  activity  generally  has

grown.  Sales  of  Minneapolis  homes  are  up  a whopping  31  percent  this  April,

compared  with  last  April.  A  major  home  builder  association  reports  that  its

members  had  a  record  number  of  homes  in  the  planning  and  building  stages.

Apartment  construction  has  also  taken  off  in  the  Twin  Cities  metro  area,  due

to  a combination  of  low  interest  and vacancy  rates  as  well  as  to  attempts  to

IX-3

beat  the  possible  enactment  of  federal  tax  laws  unfavorable  to  real  estate

investment.

Early  reports  from tourist  centers  indicate  that  the  pace  of  tourist

spending--an 

important  contributor  to  the  district's 

economy 

in 

summer--is

above  last  year's  level  in  several  spots  in  Minnesota.  But tourist  spending

in  North  Dakota  and  Montana  has  been  slowed  by  the  strong  U.S.  dollar,  which

has  kept  Canadian  visitors  away.

Resource-Related  Industries

District  Bank  directors  report  mixed  conditions  across  several  key

resource  sectors.  Imports,  input  substitution, and scrap  iron processing have

all  hurt  the  iron  ore  business  in  northeastern  Minnesota. 

As  a  result,  ex-

tended shutdowns  in  ore processing later this  summer  have been  announced.  Oil

and  gas  exploration  is  way  down 

in  North  Dakota  and  Montana,  with  the  recent

cut  in  British  oil  prices  boding  ill 

for  future  exploration  in  these  states.

Indicative  of  this,  a  Bank  director  notes  that  only  30  rigs  were  operating  in

North  Dakota  last  month,  compared  with  70  in  operation  a  year  earlier.  In

contrast,  high  demand  for  housing  and  paper  is  spurring  the  wood  products

sector.  A  Bank  director  reports  that  a  new  wood-products  plant  is  opening  in

the Upper  Peninsula  of Michigan.

Agriculture

Bad  news  continues  to  crop  up 

in 

the  district's 

agriculture  sector.

Farm  prices  continue  to  fall: 

The  Minnesota  farm  price  index  was  down  14

percent  in  mid-May  from  its 

level  a  year  earlier.  Crop  prices  declined  even

more  precipitously than  livestock prices  did.  In Minnesota, the average price

for all milk was  the  lowest  in almost  five years.  While warm, wet  weather has

aided  crop  development  in  Minnesota  and  North  Dakota,  crop  development  in

western South Dakota and Montana has  been hurt by  a lack  of  moisture.

TENTH DISTRICT--KANSAS  CITY

Economic activity  in the Tenth District appears  to be

relatively  sluggish.  Retail  sales  are  down  slightly from a year ago,  although

auto  sales  remain comparable  to  sales  a year  earlier.  Prices remain generally

stable, at retail  and for manufacturers'  inputs.  Housing  starts are  also  off

from  a year ago,  though  sales  of  new homes are generally up.  Future mortgage

demand  is expected to  be  stronger, as  rates are expected to decline further.

Agricultural  lenders  and borrowers  in the district  are both facing  continuing

difficulties.  A good winter wheat harvest  is well  under way  in Tenth District

states.  Bank loan  demand  is  flat while deposits are generally  higher.

Retail  trade.  Most retailers report  that  sales  are  down  slightly  from

year-ago  levels.  Clothing, home  furnishings,  appliances,  and  electronic  items

are  all  selling more  slowly.  As  a result, some  retailers  are  trimming their

inventories.  Most  retailers  expect  sales  to  pick up before yearend,  however,

and plan no major  cutbacks  in  inventories.  Retail prices remained  stable

during  the past  three months and  are expected to remain  stable  in the near

future.

Automobile dealers.  Automobile dealers  report that  sales  are

comparable with year-ago levels.  Sales  are being  spurred by manufacturers'

low financing rates and,  to a less extent,  by recent  declines  in other

interest  rates.  Inventory  levels are  largely  satisfactory, and caution rules

out  inventory building  in the  near  future.  Most  dealers,  however, are

optimistic that  1985  sales will  be as  good  or  slightly  better than strong  1984

sales.

Purchasing agents.  Purchasing agents  report  that  input  prices  remained

constant  during  the past  three months.  Most expect  constant  input  prices

through the  end  of  the year.  No difficulties  in obtaining materials are

X-2

reported, and none  are anticipated.  Satisfaction with current  materials

inventories  is mixed.  Most  agents report  some  trimming of  inventories  due  to

seasonal  and firm-specific factors.

Housing activity and  finance.  Homebuilders report  that housing  starts

are  down  slightly  to  sharply from a year ago.  Starts  are expected to remain

steady  or  increase  slightly  through  the  end of  the year.  Building materials

are readily  available,  and materials  prices  are  stable or  rising  slowly.

Sales of  new homes  are  generally up,  as  are new home prices.  Savings  and

loans report  that mortgage demand  and  commitments are up  except  in Colorado

and Wyoming.  Future mortgage demand  is expected to  be  strong,  since mortgage

rates have  declined recently and  are  expected to  decline further.  Savings  and

loans  report  larger  savings  inflows than a year ago  but  expect  inflows  to  slow

in  the near future.

Agriculture.  Agricultural  lenders  throughout  the  Tenth District  are

continuing  to write  down  the value  of  farm assets, both because  examiners  are

pressing banks to keep up with declining  asset values,  and  for  closer

monitoring of  loans.  Some lenders  in Missouri and Oklahoma report  that  their

banks  have already  written farm asset values  down to market  levels.

Aggressive writing down of  asset values may cause  these  banks  to reconsider

the creditworthiness of  some borrowers.  Agencies  of  the  farm credit  system --

Production Credit Associations  (PCAs) and  Federal Land Bank Associations

(FLBAs) -- appear  to be writing down farm asset values  as well.  Bankers  in

Nebraska  and  Colorado report  that  some farm credit  system borrowers  are

looking  for new  lenders  due  in  part  to rising  interest  rates on farm  credit

loans,  and to  perceived risk associated with capital  stock in  the PCA's  and

FLBA's.

X-3

Nebraska and  Colorado  have been especially  hard hit  by  agricultural  bank

closings  this year.  In both  states,  farm borrowers at  closed banks are having

difficulty  finding alternative  sources  of  credit.  Agricultural  lenders  in

these  states  report  that  successor  banks have applied higher  credit  standards,

and other banks  generally  are not  picking up  customers of  failed banks.  As

many as half  of  these customers may be  unable to  find new sources  of  credit.

The wheat  crop  in  the  Tenth District  is  expected  to  be very  good.  Until

interrupted  by recent rains,  the harvest  in Oklahoma and southern Kansas was

running a week to  ten days  ahead  of  schedule, and  is  95  percent  complete  in

southwest Oklahoma.

Spring planting of  corn,  soybeans,  and  sorghum  in the Tenth District  is

generally on  schedule, and  in  some  cases well ahead of  the  usual  date.

Successful  spring planting has produced  optimism about  crop production

prospects for  the 1985  season, with  crop  conditions  overall reported as  good

to  excellent.

Banking.  Tenth District  banks  report  total  loan demand was  constant

during the  last month.  Commercial  and  industrial loans were  steady, but

consumer  loan demand  grew  somewhat.  Residential and  commercial  real  estate

lending were  stable,  although  the  strength  of  real  estate  loan demand varied

widely by  locality.  Several bankers note  that  the  level  of  agricultural

lending remains  low and  that  loan quality problems  persist.  All surveyed

banks  reduced their prime rate  during  the  last month, but  only  half  lowered

consumer loan rates.  Total  deposits were generally  higher with widespread

growth  in demand  deposits,  Super NOW's, and  MMDA's.  Although inflows  subsided

after  the April  15  tax deadline, IRA and Keogh accounts  still  rose  slightly

over the month.

XI-1

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

The  economic  expansion  in the  Eleventh District  remains  slow.

Manufacturing respondents,  overall,  report  little  change  in  output.  The

rate  of  decline in  drilling  activity  is  accelerating.  Auto sales  have

slipped below  last year's  spectacular  performance, but remain quite  strong.

Retail  sales  are  expanding  less  vigorously than a year  earlier.

Nonresidential construction maintains  its  pattern of strong  increases,

while residential  construction is  in decline.  Loan growth at  District

banks  continues  to  slow overall.  Agricultural  production is  expected to

equal  record  levels,  but  prices  are  sharply  lower  than last  year.

Demand growth  for  District  manufacturing firms  remains  modest,  but

respondents  have  lately  become  more optimistic  about  the prospects  for

future expansion.  The  recent  mild resurgence  in  overall  construction

activity has  boosted purchases  of  lumber  and wood products  and primary  and

fabricated metals.  Nonelectrical  machinery manufacturers,  especially those

serving  the  energy  industry,  report  slack demand.  Sales  of  electrical

machinery  are  sluggish and  inventories  in the  industry  are undesirably

high.  Paper  and  allied products  makers  complain  of weakness  in  their

markets  and  say  it  is  because of  import  competition  and  ebbing  general

economic  activity.  Apparel  firms  report that  their  customers  are buying

substantially more  than in  the  recent  past.  Refiners have been  expanding

output and  accumulating  inventories  in  expectation of  the usual  summer

increase  in demand.

The number  of  active  drilling  rigs  in  the  Eleventh District  states

continues  to  slide,  in part, because of  currently weak energy  prices  and of

XI-2

expected price  reductions.  Another reason  cited  for  falling rig  usage  is

that  some  firms  find takeover  activity  offers  a higher  rate  of  return than

does  exploration  and development.  Respondents  say that  some  firms  have

taken  funds  formerly  committed to  drilling and exploration and  redirected

them  to  takeover-related expenditures.

While  retail  sales  growth is  sluggish  overall,  spending  for  some

lines  remains  strong.  Consumer  purchases  of  apparel  are  climbing  at  a

particularly rapid rate.  Demand for  durable goods  is  low,  however.  Many

respondents  expect  further deceleration of  overall  sales  expansion.

Retailers  indicate  that  they are  monitoring inventories  with unusual

caution.  Some  stores  are  now contemplating  employment  reductions.

Auto  sales  remain  brisk, although they  are down  slightly  from  last

year's  exceptionally strong levels.  Dealers  report  that  they  are

optimistic  about  the  future,  as  a result  of  recent declines  in  interest

rates  and  of  indications  that  the  demand  for  high-priced  luxury and  sports

models will  remain unabated.  Their  optimism  is  tempered by  concerns that

overall  economic conditions  may weaken.

Nonresidential  construction  activity  in  the  District  continues to

advance very  substantially, despite  increasing vacancy rates,  rent

discounting,  and other  evidence  of  overbuilding.  Both non-residential

building and nonbuilding construction  contracts  are growing  rapidly.

Contracts  for  streets  and  roads  are  expanding at  a particularly high rate.

The value  of  residential  construction contracts  continues  to  slip

from  its  year-earlier  level,  but  the  rate of  reduction has  slowed.  The

number of  building permits also continues  to  fall.  Multifamily permits have

accounted  for  the bulk of recent  declines.

XI-3

At  District  large banks  and Texas  savings  and  loans,  growth  in

assets  and  liabilities  has  lately  decreased somewhat.  At  large District

banks,  the pace  of expansion  in  total  loans  and securities  subsided  during

the  first  quarter  and  again  in  May.  Business  loan volume has  been  falling

absolutely  since  March.  The pace of  real estate  loan  lending has  been

slipping  lately,  but  it  still  remains  very high.  At  Texas  savings  and

loans,  both mortgage  and  construction  loans  have been expanding  at  rapid

rates.  Large banks  are  funding  their  asset growth primarily with increases

in  large  time deposits  and MMDAs.  Both categories  have been  registering

strong year-over-year gains.  Borrowings at  large  banks have been  declining

since the fourth  quarter  of  last year.  Asset  expansion  at  S&Ls  has been

funded  chiefly by  large  increases  in Jumbo  CDs,  other time  deposits  and

borrowings.

Eleventh  District  agricultural  production  is  surging because of

good weather.  Winter wheat  yields  are  likely to  match record  levels.

Increased world crop  output,  however, has  led  to  significant  declines  in

crop  prices  from  its  year-earlier  level.  Livestock prices  have  also

declined over the  last  year,  although  somewhat  less  than crop  prices.

Texas  cattlemen continue  to  liquidate their  herds.  In April, placements  on

feed  were the  lowest  for  that  month since  1982  and the  number of Texas

cattle  slaughtered was the  highest  April  total  in  many years.  Overall,

Texas  farm  income  is  expected to  be  lower  this  year than  in  1984.

XII-1

TWELFTH DISTRICT - SAN FRANCISCO

The economy of  the Twelfth District,  in  general,  continues  to  be

healthy.  Activity weakened by  the continued  strength  of  the dollar appears

to  have been  partly offset  by  the  stimulus  provided by  recent  declines  in

interest  rates.  The  semiconductor  industry, for  example, has  weakened

considerably since  last  year but  home construction activity is  proceeding

at  long-term trend  levels.  Retail  sales  activity also has  been generally

vigorous, although  there  is  considerable variation  in  retail  sales  growth

reported within  the District.  The agricultural  sector, although  still

struggling  to overcome  the  problems  of  the  high value  of  the  dollar and

extensive debt obligations, does  not  appear  to be  losing  ground.  The

forest  products  industry  and the mining  industry also  continue  to  be

weakened by the strength  of  the dollar  and by  local  production cost

problems.  Fortunately, in  those  states  in which these  industries  are

important,  growth in  the  service  sector  or  in manufacturing activity has

helped to  avoid the more  serious  implications  of  continued weakness  in

these industries.

Consumer  Spending

The available data on  retail  sales  activity presents  a mixed  picture.

In  the  far west,  recent  retail  sales  activity is  up  comfortably from  last

year.  Department  stores  in  southern  California, for  example,  report  an

increase  of  10  percent  over last  year.  In  the  intermountain  states,

however,  retail  sales  activity has  been  less  healthy.  Idaho,  for  example,

reports  a sharp decline  in  retail  sales  over the  past  two months.

XII-2

Automobile sales  also  are reported  as  being up  from last  year due  in  part

to  consumer awareness  of  increased  price competition as  the  result  of

elimination of  Japanese import  restrictions.  In  California last  month,  the

import  share of  the automobile market was  above  50  percent.

Manufacturing and Construction

Manufacturing activity  in  the Twelfth District generally has

experienced  the  slowdown exhibited nationwide and employment  has  been

maintained primarily by growth  in  the  service  sector.  The most  important

development has been  in the regionally significant  high-technology

industries which are now displaying considerable weakness. 

In  California,

Idaho, and Utah,  significant  layoffs and decreases  in  earnings  have been

reported.  The "book-to-bill"  ratio,  an  important  indicator of  the

prospects  for  future  activity in  the semiconductor  industry, continues  to

be  disappointingly low.  Only the Arizona  semiconductor  industry reports

a significant recovery  in  this  leading  indicator.

Construction activity generally is  strong.  In California, housing

starts are running at  the  rate of  230,000 units  per year, up 4 percent  from

the  first  quarter  of  1984.  In  Utah, housing starts  are down  from last

year,  but non-residential  construction activity is  up nearly 40  percent.

Generally speaking, vacancy rates  in  manufacturing facilities  appear to  be

drifting upward, whereas  vacancy rates  in  commercial  structures  are

declining.  This  has  been particularly important  in the  overbuilt Wilshire

corridor  in Los  Angeles.

Despite relatively healthy construction activity,  the  forest products

industry  in the  Pacific  Northwest  continues  to be  plagued by local  labor

problems,  strong  competition for  plywood products  from Japanese  imports  and

XII-3

competition  for  other wood  products  from Canada.  Lumber  exports out  of  the

Port  of  Portland  decreased  by  58  percent  between the  first  quarters  of  1984

and 1985.

Agriculture and Mining

Although western farmers continue  to  face difficulties  because of weak

export markets and high  debt burdens,  recent  modest  increases  in  potato,

bean,  and livestock  prices  have been helpful.  In  addition, smaller cattle

and hog  inventories  in  the District  suggest  that  there may be  future

improvement  in  prices.  Wheat  farmers, however,  continue  to have  faced

serious  difficulties in world markets despite  some  recent  slight

improvements  in  price.  The  reduction in  interest  rates  that has  occurred

recently, however,  is  seen  as  providing  some  assistance to  farmers until

world product  prices  strengthen.  In  California, vegetable and  other row

crop farmers  have been facing  less  severe  difficuluties  than  their midwest

counterparts,  but have complained  recently of  sharp  increases  in

transportation costs.

Mining  and  smelting activity in  the  district continues  to  be  weak,

again largely because of  the  strength of  the  dollar and  competitiveness of

foreign supply.  In  Utah, the  recent  closure of  a major copper mining

complex was  a serious  blow to  the  industry, but  was  offset  in  the  aggregate

by growth elsewhere  in  the Utah  economy.  The unemployment  rate in  Utah

actually fell between April  and May  from 6.5  to  6.2 percent.

Financial  Sector

The  recent  decline in  interest  rates  has  spurred commercial  and

mortage loan  demand at  district  financial  institutions.  The  increase  in

XII-4

demand has  been most marked  in  the  consumer  loan  and mortgage  sector,  where

some  institutions  are now offering adjustable  rate mortgages  with  initial

rates  below  10  percent.  Commercial  loan demand  had grown extremely rapidly

in  the  latter  half of  1984  so  that  the 6 percent  increase  in  1985  over  1984

thus  far  seems  modest  in contrast.  Nevertheless, the  decline in  interest

rates  is  a sign  of  optimism for many lenders,  except  those  with

undiversified loan  portfolios  in  the agriculture and forest  products

sectors.

