SUMMARY  OF  COMMENTARY  ON  CURRENT  ECONOMIC  CONDITIONS
BY  FEDERAL  RESERVE  DISTRICTS

May  1985

TABLE OF  CONTENTS

SUMMARY  ........  ..................................................  .

i

First  District - Boston  ............................................ 

I-

Second  District - New York  ............................... ......... 

II-1

Third District - Philadelphia  ...................................... 

III-1

Fourth District - Cleveland  ......................................... 

IV-1

Fifth District - Richmond  ................................. 

....... 

V-1

Sixth  District  - Atlanta  ......................................... 

VI-1

Seventh District - Chicago  ........................................ 

VII-1

Eighth  District  - St.  Louis  ......................................... 

VIII-I

Ninth District - Minneapolis  ........................................ 

IX-1

Tenth District - Kansas  City  ...................................... 

X-1

Eleventh District  - Dallas  .......................................... 

XI-1

Twelfth District  - San Francisco  .................................... 

XII-1

SUMMARY*

The  pace  of  economic  activity  in  most  Federal  Reserve  districts  appears

to reflect  the  slower  first-quarter rate  of  national  economic  growth.  Retail

sales  generally  are showing modest  growth  through  early  spring, while  strength

in auto  sales  is continuing.  Retail  inventories  are viewed as  generally

satisfactory.  Residential construction activity  remains  strong and  the

short-term  outlook is optimistic.  Commercial  construction appears to  be

thriving in most  areas.  Indicators  of  manufacturing activity, however,  are

mixed.  Due  partly  to  international  trade  effects,  the  performance  of  many

industries  is weak, although  steel  production is increasing  as  is the demand

for machine tools.  Conditions  remain depressed  in  the  agricultural  sector

where  downward pressures  on prices,  a tight  cash flow  situation,  and

increasing  financial  stress  are pervasive.  Reports on  bank  loan demand are

mixed, both  across  the  country  and within  individual  districts.

Consumer Spending

Retail  sales  are generally  reported to be  showing modest  growth  through

early  spring.  A notable exception  is  the Dallas  district, where  sales  are

reported below  1984  levels  and are  expected  to remain  sluggish  in  the near

future.  Some  slowing  in  sales  growth  is reported by Boston, New York, and

Cleveland, while Chicago  calls recent  sales  gains  "disappointing."  Greater

strength  in  retail  sales  is  evident  in  the reports  from Philadelphia,

Richmond, and Atlanta.  Apparel  sales  are  frequently mentioned  as  an area  of

strength, and  auto  sales are  reported as  continuing  strong  in most  districts.

Retail  inventories  are reported  to  be  generally  satisfactory.  Strong  growth

*Prepared at  the Federal Reserve Bank of  Kansas  City.

in  tourism in  the  Richmond  and  Atlanta  districts  has  contributed  importantly

to  economic activity  there.

Manufacturing and Industry

Indicators  of  manufacturing activity  vary  considerably  from district  to

district.  Recent  improvement  is  reported  by New York, Cleveland,  and

Richmond.  But manufacturing activity  has  slowed  in  the Boston district,

especially  in  the  high-technology  sector which was  formerly  a rapid-growth

sector.  Furthermore, nearly  all  districts  report  significant  variations among

industries  and  among geographic areas.

Foreign trade  effects  continue  to  be very  important.  Atlanta  reports

that  import  competition  is still  adversely  affecting its  district industries.

While growth of  textile  and apparel  imports  has recently  slackened,  increased

imports  of  refined  petroleum products  are hurting Louisiana's  petrochemical

industries.  Minneapolis notes  that Ninth District pulp  producers are being

hurt  by low  foreign pulp prices.  San  Francisco reports  that,  due partly  to

vigorous foreign competition, forest products  industries and primary metals

industries  are still  the weakest  sectors  in the  district,  with a number  of

plant closings  occurring  in  each industry.  On the  other hand,  Richmond notes

that  coal  production  is  off  to a good  start  in  1985,  partly  due to  increased

exports  of  metallurgical  coal.  And  exports  of  southern pine  to  Europe are  on

the increase,  according to  the Atlanta  report.

Steel  production is rising,  but  remains below  early-1984  levels.  The

stronger  demand  is centered in  cold-rolled  and  coated  sheets,  primarily  for

motor vehicles, appliances,  and light  construction.  Cleveland notes  that  the

steel  industry remains  in  difficulty, however.  Both  Chicago and  Cleveland

report  growing demand  for machine tools,  but  orders  are  still  below past

levels.  Cleveland  also  states  that  "major producers  of  capital  goods  believe

iii

spending  on plant  and  equipment  is  not  likely  to  be  slower  in  the  second  half

than  in  the  first half of  1985,  despite  the  results of  the recent  survey  of

spending plans."

Construction

Residential construction activity  remains generally  strong and  the

short-term outlook  is  generally optimistic.  Builders  remain cautious,  how-

ever, with  speculative building  reported  only  by Atlanta.  House  sales  seem  to

be  keeping pace  with construction in most  instances.  Strength  in multifamily

unit  construction was noted particularly  by  Atlanta and  St.  Louis.  But Kansas

City  reports housing  starts  off  from a year  ago,  and  Dallas  indicates  a

continuing  slide  in  all  residential  construction.

Commercial  construction appears  to  be  thriving  in most  areas,  including

both  Philadelphia (where vacancy rates  are below  the national  average)  and

Chicago  (where the vacancy rate  is  described  as  "substantial").  Atlanta

cautions  about  potential  oversupply,  however, and  Dallas  reports  a first-

quarter decline  in nonresidential  activity  as  evidence  of  oversupply  there

becomes more apparent.

Agriculture

Conditions  in  the  agricultural  sector  continue  to  deteriorate  in most

areas.  Weak export  demand  and  large domestic  supplies  contribute  to more

downward pressure on  prices  of  farm products.  A tight  cash  flow  situation

leads  lenders  to  foresee  increasing financial  stress  for  farmers.  Kansas  City

reports  that  liquidations and  partial-liquidations  of  farm businesses  are much

higher  than  considered normal by  lenders.  Farmland values  are  still  falling,

off  in  Iowa by  40  percent  from the  previous  peak.  A decline  in  pork market-

ings  has been accompanied by weaker prices,  as  poultry  production increased

and more  pork was  imported  from Canada.  In  spite  of  large  declines  in  corn

and  soybean prices,  surveys  show farmers  intend to  increase plantings.

Minneapolis  suggests  that  overproduction of  dairy  output  is again  likely.

Atlanta reports  that,  even with a growing  imbalance  between the  demand  and

supply of  cotton, Sixth District farmers  plan  to  expand  cotton acreage.

Kansas  City  notes that  the winter wheat  crop  is in  good to  excellent  condi-

tion, with the  potential  for  harvesting a large  crop.  In  spite  of  soft  prices

and weak exports, the  condition of  the more diversified western agriculture

appears  to  have  stopped worsening,  according  to  San Francisco.  And Dallas

reports  that  cropland values  in Texas have risen, on  the  average, keeping  farm

bankruptcy rates  lower  there  than  elsewhere.

Banking and  Finance

Loan growth appears  to be  mixed across  the  country and within indi-

vidual  districts.  Large New York City banks  show relatively modest  growth  of

assets,  but  small  Second District  banks have  rapid  loan growth  in  all  cate-

gories.  Philadelphia and Richmond  report  strong  loan demand  growth, while

weakness  in  loans  is reported  by Cleveland  and Atlanta.  San  Francisco  cites

steady  loan demand  and an  improvement  in loan quality, particularly  among

agricultural  loans.  Some  districts  report  softness  in  consumer  lending  due  to

aggressive  nonbank competition for  auto  loans.  St.  Louis notes  considerable

legislative  activity on regional  interstate banking,  among the  states of  its

district.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Economic  activity has  slowed  in  the First  District  in  recent

months.  The  slowdown has occurred in  both  the manufacturing and  retail

sectors,  but  some  individual  firms  continue  to  show substantial  growth.

Retailers'  sales  fell  below plan in some  cases  but  continue  to  exceed  last

year's  levels.  In manufacturing,  the  national  slowdown in  office  equipment

and  computers  has  been well publicized,  and  New England's  high  tech  firms

have  been among  those  experiencing difficulty.  The  region's  traditional

industries  report mixed results,  but  remain optimistic  about  1985.

Retail

Retail  sales  have  slowed  recently  in  the First District.  The

weakening  is  not  universal, however, hitting  some  "upscale" department

stores,  for  example,  but  not  a discount  chain,  and  showing wide  geographic

variation.  The  downturn is  not  substantial, and merchants  remain

moderately  optimistic about  1985.

The  shift  of  Easter from  April last  year  to  March this  year

complicates  the  interpretation of  spring  sales  figures,  but  March was  not

an exceptional month for  New England retailers.  Apparel  and other  soft

goods  - traditional  Easter  items  - sold  well  during  the month, but  sales  in

other  areas,  including  home products,  pets  and  sporting  goods  were

disappointing.  Early  signs  suggest that  April  is  following  the March

trend,  and  without Easter  the measured  increases  against April  last  year

will be  very  small or  negative.  First  quarter sales  (February through

April) will end  higher  than  last year,  but  below plan in  a number  of

I-2

cases.  Thus  the  problem is  slowing  rates  of  increase  rather  than absolute

declines.  Inventory levels  are  close  to  plan.

Planned  remedial actions depend on  merchants' explanations  of

current  trends,  but  generally include  attempts  to  cut  overhead  expenses,

more  careful targeting  of  promotional activity,  and  downward  adjustments  in

sales  projections  for  the  fall.  The  sales  slowdown has  not  caused

reductions  in hiring  or  cutbacks  in  planned new store  openings.

Manufacturing

Manufacturing activity in  the First District  has  slowed.  The

slowdown  is  particularly striking  in the high  technology  sector,  which had

been growing  very rapidly.  A number  of  firms  have  reported  decreases  in

earnings  and several are  laying people  off.  Some  of  the  layoffs  are  small

but  others  involve  hundreds  of  employees.  A sluggish domestic market  and

the  strong  dollar are  blamed  for  the disappointing  performance;  in

addition, individual  high  tech  companies  have  encountered difficulties

launching  new products.

Traditional industries  have  also  seen  some  slowing  but  the  firms

contacted  do  not  expect  this  to  persist  and  look for  1985  to  be  a good year

overall.  Thus,  in metalworking,  production levels  among  respondents  are

good  but  new orders  have  tapered  off  a bit.  The  slowing  in  orders  has  not

been  pronounced enough  to  induce  reductions  in  capital  spending  plans  or

layoffs,  although some  firms  are  not  actively filling  job vacancies as  they

occur.  The  aircraft  segment  of  the metalworking  industry  is  an exception

I-3

to  the  slowing  in orders:  the military component  has  been strong  for  some

time  and  is  still  strong;  the commercial  component  has  been weak but  is  now

picking up.  One metalworking  contact also  noted  a recent  pickup  in

auto-related  orders  and  considerable  quotation activity for  large  auto

programs  that  are  expected  to  become orders  next  year.

Labor markets  in  the  region remain tight,  especially in  southern

New Hampshire.  Firms  mentioned short  supplies  of  good industrial

salespeople  and warehouse workers  as  well  as  continuing  scarcities  in

professional specialities  such as  electronic  and software  engineers.

Price  increases  seem to  be  a little more  prevalent  but  still

modest.  A couple  of  firms  contacted have recently raised  prices.  One

respondent  reported  increasing  prices  5-6  percent;  however,  the  new prices

are  intended  to  hold  for  two  years, so  that  the  annual  increase  is  only

half  that.  In a recent  survey  of  New England  purchasing  agents,  a majority

reported no  change  in  prices  from the  previous  month;  but  the  proportion

reporting  increases,  40  percent,  was  the  highest in  some  time.

Capital  spending  will be  higher in  1985  than in  1984.  In  a number

of  cases,  the  fraction of  1985  spending  for  replacement  and  upgrading  of

machines  will  be  higher and  the  fraction for  expansion  of  capacity lower

than  in  1984.  Firms  want  both lower  costs  and  increased  flexibility  to

adapt  their machines  to  shifts  in  demand.

II-1

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Introduction

Economic  activity  in  the  Second  District  has  continued  to

expand  at  an  erratic  pace.  Department  store  sales  softened  in  parts  of

the  District,  particularly  in  New York  City.  Business  activity  improved

somewhat,  as  new  development  projects  and  expansions  outnumbered  plant

closings  and  layoffs.  Homebuilders  continued  to  operate  at  full  speed,

impeded  only  by  scarce  labor  and  materials. 

The  District's  office

markets  were  mixed,  with  strength  in  midtown  Manhattan  and  Long  Island,

stability  in  Westchester  County  and  northern  New Jersey,  and  weakness  in

downtown  Manhattan  and  southwestern  Connecticut.  Large  New  York  City

banks  have  been  facing  relatively  modest  asset  growth.  In  contrast,

small  banks  reported  that  the  strength  in  the  region's economy  has  led  to

strong  demand  for  home  mortgages,  automobile  financing,  and  business

loans.

Consumer Spending

Department  stores  reported  that  the  rate  of  consumer  spending

had  slowed  appreciably  in  parts  of  the  District.  In  February,  sales

generally  met  expectations  and  were  about  10  percent  over  last  year's

levels. 

Sales  in  March,  however,  fell  significantly  below  expected

levels  for  two  department  store  chains  and  early  reports  for  April

reflected  continuing  softness.  It  appeared  that  New  York City  retailers

faced  the  weakest  sales,  while  some  suburban  and  upstate  New  York

merchants  reported  continuing  gains.  Inventories  have  been kept  in  check

by  most  stores  contacted,  but  one merchant  facing  persistently weak  sales

reported stocks  that were  above plan and  rising.

II-2

Business  Activity

Business  conditions  for  the  District's  industrial  firms  have

improved  somewhat  in  recent  weeks. 

In  Rochester,  more  firms  reported

increased  orders  than  in  earlier  months. 

For  Buffalo,  improving

conditions  have  not  become  any  more  widespread,  but  the  number  of  firms

reporting  worsening  conditions  was  down  significantly. 

In  general,

desired  inventories  have  been  rising  lately,  perhaps  reflecting  the

improved outlook for  sales  many  firms  reported.

Although  some  layoffs  and  plant  closings  continued,  there  was

a  significant  increase  in  announcements  of  new  development  projects  and

expansions. 

An  automobile  producer  will  spend  over  $100  million  to

refurbish  and  retool  a stamping  plant  in  Buffalo.  Another  auto  plant  is

recalling  its  night  shift  of  2,200  workers  in  Tarrytown.  Also  planned

are  a  large  computer  center  in  Rockland  County,  a new  chemical  facility

in  Western  New York,  a power  plant  near  Albany,  and  the  expansion  of  a

ship  terminal  on  Staten Island.

In  the  aggregate,  however,  manufacturing  remains  a weak  spot

even  with  record  high  employment  levels  in  New  York  State.  The  largest

plant  closing  announced  recently  was  a  Syracuse  chemical  plant,  which

will  eliminate  1,400  jobs beginning  early next  year.

Construction and  Real Estate

Commercial  real  estate  activity  continued  to  vary  markedly  by

location  and  type  of  user.  The  demand  for  office  space  was  strong  in

midtown  Manhattan  and  Long  Island,  steady  in  northern  New  Jersey  and

Westchester  County,  and  weak  in  downtown  Manhattan  and  southwest

Connecticut.  Brokers  in  Manhattan,  New  Jersey,  and  Connecticut  reported

strong  demand  among  small  space  users  but  surprisingly  low  activity  for

II-3

mid-sized  spaces.  Demand  for  large  spaces  in  midtown  Manhattan  remained

strong,  especially  in  the  services  sector.  Downtown,  in  contrast,  net

space  absorption  has  fallen  to  zero  in  recent  months.  In  Nassau County

(Long  Island),  conversion  of  space  to  office  and  retail  uses  has  made

space very scarce  for  industrial  firms.

The  housing  market  was  little  changed  from  activity  levels

prevailing  for  the  past  year.  Builders  remained  very  busy  in  many  parts

of  the  District  and  several  faced  scarcity  of  skilled  labor  or  lumber  and

sheetrock. 

The  outlook  for  the  next  six  months  is  for  continued

strength.  In  New  York  City,  the  first  800  apartments  to  be  built  with

funds  from  the  State's  Municipal  Assistance  Corporation  have  been

scheduled for  construction this  summer.

Financial Developments

Large  New  York  City  banks  showed  relatively  modest  growth  of

assets.  But  reports  from  small  banks  in  the  Second  District  indicated

that  the  demand  for  several  categories  of  loans  has  been  growing  rapidly

over  the  past  few  months,  more  in  line  with national  trends.  The  demand

for  home  mortgages  has  been  especially  strong,  owing  to  the  region's

robust  market  for  new  homes. 

The  increasing  demand  for  automobile

financing  was  a major  factor  in  the  rapid  expansion  of  consumer  credit.

Business  loan  activity  has  also  increased  rapidly,  spurred by  strength  of

economic  activity across  all  industrial  categories.

III-1

THIRD  DISTRICT  - PHILADELPHIA

Major  sectors  of  the  Third  District  economy  are  stable  or  growing  in  April.

Manufacturing  activity  is  holding  steady after  three  months  of accelerating  growth,  while retail

sales  remain  strong  after  a  successful  Easter  selling  season.  Loan  demand  is  up  at  area  banks.

Sales  of  new  and  existing  houses  are  rising,  and  both  residential  and  commercial  construction

are  increasing.

The  outlook  for  the  Third  District  economy  is  positive.  Manufacturers  expect  to

boost  production  and  employment  during  the  next  six  months,  and  retailers  forecast  higher  sales

for  the  second  half  of  1985  and  for  the  year  as  a  whole.  Likewise,  area  bankers  anticipate

greater  loan  demand  as  economic  growth  continues.  Real estate  sales  and  construction  activity

are  expected  to  remain  strong through  the  summer.

MANUFACTURING

After  expanding  at  increasingly  faster  rates  for 

three  consecutive  months,

manufacturing  activity  in  the  Third  District  levelled  off  in  April,  according  to  the  most  recent

Business  Outlook  Survey.  Sixty  percent  of  the  April  survey  respondents  said  there  had  been  no

change  from  March  in  the  pace  of  their  operations.  The  number  of  respondents  reporting

increases  in  new  orders  and  shipments  slightly  exceeded  the  number  reporting  decreases,  while

around  40  percent  reported  no  change.  Inventories  also  were  stable.  As for  employment,  three

out  of four  survey  respondents  reported  that  payrolls  and  working  hours  were  holding  steady.

Despite  the  lack  of  growth  in  April,  the  outlook  for  local  manufacturing  over  the

next  six  months  remains  fairly  positive.  Half  of  the  companies  participating  in  the  April  survey

expect  increases  in  production,  new  orders,  and  shipments  during  the  summer.  A  quarter  of

those  polled  plan  to  hire  more  workers,  and  almost  one-fifth  expect  to  lengthen  the  workweek.

About  30  percent  have  scheduled  larger  expenditures  on  new  plant  and  equipment  during  the

next  six months.

III-2

Prices  of  industrial  goods  remained  flat  again  in  April.  Although  some  survey

respondents  reported  higher  prices  for  their  inputs,  more  than  80  percent  of  the  survey

respondents  said  there  had  been  no  change  in  the  prices  of  the  products  they  buy  or  sell.

Looking  ahead,  two  out  of  three  of  the  respondents  anticipate  paying  more  for  raw  materials

within  the  next  six  months,  and  one  out  of  three  expect  the  prices  of  their  own  products  to  go

up  during  the  same period.

RETAIL

The  Third  District's  strong  retail  sales  of  the  first  two  months  of  this  year

continued  into  March.  The  trend  appears  to  be  extending  through  April,  although  some  store

managers  speculate  that  delays  in  income  tax refunds  may  have  interrupted  consumer  purchases

early  in  the  month.  Department  store  and  general  merchandise  sales  for the  first  fiscal  quarter

(February,  March,  April)  are  up  5 to  10  percent  above  the  comparable  period  in  1984.  Retailers

say  this  growth  was  assisted  by  favorable  weather  and  an  early  Easter  holiday.  Although  sales

growth  thus  far  in  1985  is  less  than  last  year,  retailers  are  basically  satisfied,  as  prices  have

been  steady  and  virtually  all  of  the  increase  represents  higher  unit  sales  volume.  Inventories  at

department  stores  remain  in line  with sales.

Retailers  are  cautiously  optimistic  about 

the  upcoming  spring  and  summer

seasons.  Apparel  and  seasonal  goods  are  selling  well,  and  sales  are  expected  to  continue  strong

through  the  spring.  Sales  growth  is  expected  to  moderate  in late  summer  and  fall.  For  the  year

as a  whole  compared  to  1984,  retailers  forecast  increases  ranging  from  6  to  10  percent.

FINANCE

Bank  lending  officers  in  the  Third  District  report  that  strong loan  demand  reflects

a  strong  economy,  despite  some  indications  of  a  pause  given  by  national  economic  measures  in

the  first quarter.  Compared  to  April  1984,  commercial  and  industrial  loan  volume  is  up  between

15  and  20  percent,  and  commercial  real  estate  and  construction  loans  are  up  about  15  percent.

Consumer  loans  are  approximately  35  percent  above  year-ago  levels,  partly  due  to  continuing

III-3

credit  card  promotion  by  local  banks.  Although  area  bankers  expect  growth  to  slacken

somewhat  from  its  present  pace,  they  anticipate  robust  loan  demand  through  the  rest  of  the

year.  Lending  in  all  categories  in the second  half  of  this  year  is  expected  to  be  10  to  15  percent

higher  than in  the  second  half  of  1984.

For  Third  District  bankers,  a strong  economy  and  concomitant  loan  demand  imply

that  short-term  interest  rates  are  at  or  near  their  lows  for  the  year.  Local  bank  economists

believe  a  slight  dip  is  possible  in  the  prime  and  federal  funds  rates  before  a  gradual  rise  during

the  balance  of  the  year.  The  consensus  is  that  rates  will  be  higher  by  the  fall,  with  the  prime

rate  approaching  12  percent  and  the  federal  funds  rate  hovering  around  10  percent  by  the  end  of

the year.

REAL  ESTATE  AND  CONSTRUCTION

Residential  real  estate  agents  throughout  the  Third  District  report  growing

numbers  of  people  shopping  for  homes,  after  a  brief  drop  in  March.  Sales  are  rising,  and

developers  and  agents  believe  that  current  mortgage  rates,  which  average  13  percent  for  a  30

year  conventional  loan,  are  consistent  with  sustained  sales  at  the  present  pace.  Sales  would

drop  off  at  rates  of  14  percent  or  more,  and  would  pick  up  substantially  if  rates  were  to  fall  to

12  percent  or less,  according  to  agents.

For  most  areas  of  the  Third  District,  real  estate  and  construction  activity  is  at  or

above  1984  levels.  Some  differences  in  local  growth  rates  are  noted,  with  those  that  dipped  in

1984 now  posting  the  biggest  gains.

Commercial  construction  continues  to  thrive.  Building  agents  say  the  local  office

vacancy  rate  remains  below  the  national  average  and  that the  market  should  continue  to  absorb

new  space  through  the  rest  of the  year.

IV-1

Fourth District --  Cleveland

Summary

Economic  activity  in  the  Fourth  District  continues  to  improve  slowly.

Employment  fell  in  March  but  there  are  some  indications  of  a  pickup  in  April.

Retail  sales  strengthened  in  mid-April  after  a month  of  weakness.  Car  dealers

report  a  temporary  lull  in  sales.  Manufacturing  orders  are  strengthening  but

business  is  far  from  robust.  The  housing  outlook  is  improving  but  builders

remain  very  cautious.  Business  loan  demand  is  flat.

District  Labor Market Conditions

Ohio  employment  (s.a.)  fell  slightly  in  March,  while  the  unemployment  rate

(s.a.)  rose  for  the  second  consecutive  month.  The  unemployment  rate  for  Ohio

rose  to  9.2%  (s.a.)  in  March,  but  is  still  below  its  year-ago  level  of  10.1%

and  well  above  the  national  level.  A  survey  of  manufacturing  firms  in  the

greater  Cincinnati  area  reveals  their  employment  increased  slightly  in  March.

The  local  index  of  leading  economic  indicators  for  Pittsburgh  has  been

essentially  flat  from  December  through  February,  indicating  little  prospect

for  employment  growth  in  the  near  term  for  that  city.  On  the  other  hand,

Cleveland's  index  of  leading  indicators  recorded  a  large  increase  in  January

and  a slight  increase  in  February.  A  survey  of  Cleveland  area  manufacturers

is  validating  the  early-year  growth  in  that  index  by  suggesting  that

employment  rose  solidly in  April.

Retail  Sales

IV-2

Fourth  District  retail  sales  weakened  in  March  and  early  April,  but

recovered  markedly  in  mid-April. 

Most  retailers  report  that  their  March

decline  was  not  as  severe  as  the  1.9%  drop  reported  nationally  and  that  the

Ohio  thrift  problem  has  had  no  perceptible  impact  on  their  sales.  They  blame

late  tax  refunds  and  unfavorable  weather  for  recent  slack.  Retailers  expect

sales  to  recover  strongly  in  the  second  quarter;  improved  weather  has  already

boosted  department-store  sales.  In  anticipation  of  strong  demand,  few  prices

were  cut  in  March,  and  retailers  plan  even  fewer  price  promotions  for  future

months.  Stores  are  largely  pleased  with  their  inventory  positions,  although

some  report  inventories  are  slightly  above  desired  levels  because  of  weak

March  sales.

Car  dealers  report  slightly  lower  sales,  but  expect  this  to  be  only  a

temporary  lull  in  the  strong  trend  of  auto  sales.  They  have  been  moving  cars

at  minimal  mark-ups  and  assert  that  high  sales  volume  is  a  key  factor  in

allowing  them  to  price  competitively.  Dealers  voice  concern  that  factories

cannot  keep  up  with  their  demand  for  some  popular  smaller  models  and  worry

that  this  problem will  grow  as  sales  pick  up  again.  Otherwise,  most  dealers

are  pleased  with  their  inventory  positions  and  plan  to  increase  stocks  over

the  next  few  weeks.  All  dealers  remain  confident  that  consumers  will  continue

to  assume debt  to  acquire  new cars.

Manufacturing

Local  surveys  of  manufacturers  indicate  that  new  orders  and  production

have  improved  from  early  in  the  year. 

However,  firms  are  allowing

raw-materials  and  finished-goods  inventories  to  rise  only  very  slowly.  The

chemical  industry  in  southern Ohio  continues  to  do  well.

IV-3

Machine-tool  producers  in  the  District  report  that  demand  for  machine

tools  is  growing  in  the  aerospace,  defense,  automotive,  and  power-generating

equipment  industries  but  remains  weak  in  agriculture  and  construction

machinery  industries.  A  major  producer  of  machine  tools  expects  rising  sales

in  the  second  half of  1985.  Despite  this  growth,  orders  are  weak  relative  to

the  previous  peak  and  the  firm  estimates  that  40%  to  50%  of  metal-cutting

machinery  is  now  imported.

The  steel  industry  remains  in  difficulty.  One  District  firm  has  narrowly

averted  bankruptcy  proceedings,  and  reports  losing  money  on  its  carbon  steel

operations  despite  operating  its  mills  at  90%  of  capacity.  Another  has  filed

for  protection  under  Chapter  11,  and  another  recently  laid  off  about  350

workers.

Major  producers  of  capital  goods  believe  spending  on  plant  and  equipment

is  not  likely  to  be  slower  in  the  second  half  than  the  first  half  of  1985,

despite  the  results  of  the  recent  survey  of  spending  plans.  Analysts  in  this

District  attribute  the  first  quarter  softness  in  PDE  spending  on  computers  to

be  a  result  of  IBM's  introduction  of  two  new  models,  weakness  in  sales  of

personal  computers,  and  a  reaction  to  excessive  levels  of  purchases  in  1983

and  1984.  They  expect  a  pickup  in  computer  purchases  this  quarter.

Housing

The  outlook  for  housing  in  this  District  is  more  optimistic  than  a  month

ago.  Market  participants  anticipate  a  moderate  rebound  in  housing  activity

during  the  second  and  third  quarters  but  are  not  expanding  their  business

operations,  nor  do  they  plan  to  do  so  even  if  housing  activity  sustains  its

strength  for  the  next  two  or  three  quarters.  The  consensus  mortgage  rate

outlook  is 

that 

rates 

will 

remain 

relatively 

flat 

until 

autumn.

IV-4

A  nationwide  realty  firm  reports  that  listings  and  closings  for  existing

homes  in  the  first  quarter  matched  last  year's  record-breaking  first  quarter

pace,  and  in April  exceeded  March's higher-than-expected  level.

Builders  remain  extremely  cautious,  as  orders  were  down  10%  to  15%  in  the

first  quarter.  They  have  indicated  that  for  the  most  part  they  will  build

only  those  houses  for which  they  have  firm orders.

Fixed  rate  mortages  will  remain  popular  with  borrowers  unless  fixed  rates

rise  substantially.  Because  of  high  rates  of  mortgage  delinquencies  and

foreclosures,  mortgage  insurers  recently  raised  down-payment  requirements

slightly  and  also  raised  premiums  on  insurance  renewals.  According  to  the

experience  of  one  lender,  neither  of  these  actions  has  materially  affected

customer  ability to  buy.

Commercial  Banking

District  loan  demand  has  been  mixed.  Loan  outstandings  in  all  major

categories  at  District  banks  fell  over  the  past  month.  Consumer  installment

loans  registered  the  largest  decline  and  business  loan  volume  was  down

marginally.  While  lenders  acknowledge  the  flatness  of  business  loan  demand

they  report  fairly  strong  consumer  loan  demand. 

The  general  decline  in

consumer  loans  at  banks  is  attributed  to  aggressive  nonbank  competition  for

auto  loans  rather  than  weak  loan  demand.  Captive  finance  companies  of  some

auto  manufacturers  have  been  offering  below-market  loan  rates  on  several

models. 

Contacts  expects  consumer  loan  demand  to  remain  quite  good  and

business  loan  demand  to  pick-up in  the  next  few months.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Overview

Economic  activity  in  the  Fifth  District  appears  to  have  regained

much  of  the  momentum  lost  earlier  in  the  year.  There  has  been  some  pickup

in  the  manufacturing  sector  where  most  of  the  earlier  slack  had  appeared,

and  nearly  all  other  areas  of  activity  are  holding  their  own  at  quite  high

levels  or  making  further gains.  The  only  area in which  activity  has  slowed

in  recent  weeks  is  automobile  sales.  Overall,  however,  consumer  activity

continues  very  strong,  as  do  construction,  mining,  and  tourism.  Further-

more,  the  earlier lull in  the  District is  not  generally perceived as  commen-

surate  with  the  slowing  of  growth  recently  reported  at  the  national  level.

In  many  respects  the  District  has  lagged  the  U.S.  economy  during  this

recovery, and perhaps  some  catching up  is  underway.  Loan  demand,  apart  from

auto  loans,  continues  strong.  Progress  in  the  farm  sector  is  being  impeded

by unusually  dry weather.

Manufacturing

The  earlier  deterioration  of  conditions  in  District  manufacturing

has  been  arrested,  and  even  reversed  in  some  sectors.  New  orders  have

picked  up,  as  have  shipments,  and  order  backlogs  have  stabilized.  There

seems  to  have  been  some  further  accumulation  of  inventories  at  the  man-

ufacturing level,  primarily  in materials, but  the  rate  of  accumulation

slowed  markedly  from  previous  months.  There  is  still  some  concern  that

current  levels might be  excessive.

V-2

Despite  this  generally  positive  overview,  however,  conditions

across  the  manufacturing sector are  by no  means uniform.  Much of  the  recent

improvement  may  well  be  in  a  relatively  few  sectors.  Forest  products,

building  materials,  and  furniture  all  appear  to  be  doing  quite  well,  and

machinery  and  equipment  are  at  least  holding  their  own.  Elsewhere,  con-

ditions are  less  buoyant.

Coal  production,  however,  is  off  to  another  good  start  in  1985,

despite  having  had  a  few  bad  weeks  as  a  result  of  severe  winter  weather.

Weekly production is  near year-ago  levels,  and year-to-date  is  only  slightly

below.  Exports have  improved,  especially  in  the metallurgical segment which

contributed  so much to  last  year's outstanding performance  in  the  industry.

Consumer Activity

The  consumer  remains  a major  force  propelling business  activity  in

the  District.  Despite  some  recent  softening  in  automobile  sales,  consumer

activity  is  almost  uniformly described  as  strong  to very  strong.  Apart  from

autos,  the  strength is  essentially across  the board.  Non-durables, durables

such  as  furniture,  and  services,  especially  those  related  to  tourism,  are

performing  well.  Tourism  is,  in  fact,  a  surprisingly  bright  spot  in  the

District  at  present.  Even  relatively  optimistic  forecasts  of  tourist  trade

are  being  exceeded  in  many  areas.  Also,  there  seems  to  be  a modest  move

underway  to  get  away  from  the  discounting  that  became  so  widespread  in  late

1984  and  carried over into  early  1985.

Construction

Construction  activity  also  remains  a major  positive  force  in  the

District  economy.  Activity  in  the  commercial  and  residential  sectors  is

almost  uniformly strong,  although activity  remains  slightly weaker away  from

the  metropolitan and  tourist  centers.

Housing activity  has  been very encouraging  to  most  industry partic-

ipants.  With  construction  quite  strong  and  sales  keeping  market  supplies

moderate,  the  prospects  for  continued  strength  in  residential  building  are

quite  good.  Also,  the  surprising  strength  of  tourist  activity  has  spurred

what  was  already  a  very  active  hotel  and  other  facilities  sector  in  the

tourism  centers. 

In  addition,  hotel,  office,  and  shopping  center  con-

struction remains very  strong  in  most of  the District's metropolitan  areas.

Financial  Sector

District  financial  institutions  continue  to  experience  moderate  to

strong  growth  of  loan  demand.  Once  again,  apart  from  automobile  loans,  the

gains  have  been  generally  across  the  board.  There  is  no  evidence  of  any

strains  developing  as  institutions meet  this  growing  demand  for  credit,  and

there  does  not  seem  to  be  any  expectation  that  such  strains  will  develop

over  the next  several months.

Agriculture

Problems  continue  to  confront  farmers  in  the  Fifth  District.  A

lack  of  rainfall  during  the  spring  has  delayed  the  planting  of  some  crops

and  is  causing  those  already  planted  to  develop  slowly.  Price  levels  of

crops  and  livestock  continue  to  be  under  downward  pressure  as  weak  export

demand results  in  large domestic  supplies  of  farm commodities.  Cash  flow  is

tight,  as  lower  incomes  and  limited borrowing  ability are  barely  adequate to

service  the  debt  loads  facing  farmers.

According  to  a recent  survey  of  District  agricultural  lenders,  loan

repayment  rates  from  farmers  are  becoming  more  sluggish  than  in  1984.  In

addition, bankers  foresee  financial  stress  increasing throughout  the year.

Expectations

Expectations  around  the  District  remain  neutral  to  slightly  posi-

tive,  although  there  is  evidence  of  modest  improvement  in  recent  weeks.

That  improvement,  however,  generally  reflects  the  improvement  in  local

market  conditions  and  does  not  seem  to  carry  over  into  the  outlook  for

national  business activity.

VI-1

SIXTH  DISTRICT  - ATLANTA

Through 

late  April, 

the  southeastern  economy  pushed  ahead,  although

somewhat  unevenly.  Florida  and  Georgia  labor  markets  are  generally  tight,  while  those

in  Alabama,  Mississippi,  and  Tennessee  exhibit  considerable  slack.  Foreign  competition

continues  to  pressure  employment  and  industrial  output,  particularly 

in  the  textile,

apparel,  agriculture,  and  energy  sectors.  Consumer  spending  and  installment  lending

advanced 

in  lackluster  fashion,  although  auto  sales  have  improved  since  earlier  this

year.  Southeastern  construction,  real  estate,  tourism,  and  convention  industries  all  are

having  a  good  spring. 

In  Louisiana,  a  soaring  mortgage  delinquency  rate,  slowing  new

automobile  registrations,  and  increasing  imports  of  refined  petroleum  products  join  the

list  of  difficulties  facing  that  state's  beleagured  economy.

Employment  and  Industry.  Competition  from  imports  continues  to  adversely

affect  employment  in  the  region's  industrial  sector.  Labor  market  conditions  are  tight

in 

the  service-oriented 

economies  of  Georgia 

and  Florida,  while  double-digit

unemployment  rates  continue  to  plague  Alabama,  Mississippi,  and  Tennessee.  The  growth

of  textile  and  apparel  imports  has  slackened  recently.  Carpet  producers  report  a

slowing  of  activity  from  last  year's  unusually  brisk  pace.  Rising  imports  of  refined

petroleum  products  attributed  to  the  strong  dollar  are  adversely  affecting  Louisiana's

petrochemical  industry.  However,  indications  are  developing  that  domestic  oil  prices

may  be  firming.  Bank  directors  report  that  exports  of  southern  pine  to  Germany  and

Italy  are  on  the  increase.

Consumer  Spending.  District  retailers  reported  April  sales  to  be  about  even

with  year-ago  levels.  However,  the  Easter  selling  season  came  early  this  year.  Through

April  sales  remained  healthy  and  ranged  from  6  percent  to  12  percent  above  last  year.

Seasonal  goods  such  as  clothing,  home  furnishings,  and  lawn  and  garden  materials  were

VI-2

in  strong demand.  According  to  retailers,  shoppers  have  responded  strongly  to  post-Easter

promotions.  First-half  sales  and  profits  are  expected  to  be  slightly  higher  than  last  year.

Auto  Sales.  New  motor  vehicle  sales  in  the  Southeast  remained  brisk  through

mid-April. 

Industry  contacts  attribute  healthy  spring  buying  to  dealers'  offerings  of

limited  discount  financing  and  to  continuing  strong  demand  for  minivans  and  light  trucks.

New  motor  vehicle  registrations  in  the  region  in  the  January-February  period  were

11  percent  above  the  corresponding  period  last  year,  compared  to  7  percent  for  the

nation.  Louisiana  is  the  only  regional  state  which  registered  fewer  new  cars  and  trucks

during  the  January-February  period  than  last  year.

Construction.  Contacts  report  a  generally  brisk  pace  of  single-family  home

sales  and  construction 

through 

the  fourth  week  of  April. 

Developers  expressed

satisfaction  with  current  inventory  levels.  Speculative  building  was  evident  in  all  major

cities  except  New  Orleans,  where  an  influx  of  Jefferson  Parish  bond  money  should  boost

the  market.  Mortgage  delinquencies  for  Louisiana  have  climbed  from  4.1  to  5.7  percent,

from  November  1984  to  February  1985,  which  is  nearly  double  the  rate  for  any  other

state  in  the  region.  The  multifamily  market  is  strong,  with  Nashville,  Jackson,  and

Miami  experiencing  improved  rentals.  The  office  market  remains  vigorous,  particularly

in  Atlanta  and  Tampa,  but  mentions  of  potential  oversupply  and  a  decline  in  construction

have  become  more  frequent.  Contacts  report  the  growing  use  of  perquisites  by  leasing

agents  to  close  deals.  The  only  major  market  in  which  contacts  do  not  expect  sizable

new  construction  is  New  Orleans.

Financial  Services.  Unadjusted  credit  growth  at  large  banks  in  the  Southeast

continues  to  lag  behind  December's  peak  rate.  Weak  and  volatile  consumer  lending

growth  in  February  and  March  appears  to  be  the  major  reason.  Bank  business  and  real

estate  credit  both  advanced  in  March.  Preliminary  data  for  April  suggest  some  further

weakening  of  total  loan  growth  attributable  to  softer  demand  for  business  credit.  State

VI-3

bank  commissioners  expect 

the  Federal  Reserve  Board's  recent  limited  support  for

interstate  banking  to  accelerate  bank  combinations  in  the  Southeast.

Tourism.  Tourist  activity  has  strengthened  as  the  spring  season  progresses.

Available  air  travel  indicators  showed  healthy  increases,  and  the  number  of  auto  travelers

registering  at  state  visitor  centers  was  up  in  March.  Lodging  tax  receipts  for  all  states

except  Mississippi 

showed 

increases  over  year-ago 

levels. 

Convention  business,

particularly  in  Nashville,  Miami,  and  Orlando  has  been  strong.  Contacts  report  advance

bookings  through  April  as  very  high  and  many  feel  this  could  be  their  best  spring  season

ever. 

In  Orlando,  most  hotels  report  higher  occupancy  levels  than  a  year  ago.  Hotels

have  been  running  at  near-capacity  occupancy 

in  some  Florida  resorts  and  cities.

However,  many  of  Georgia's  attractions  have  experienced  soft  attendance  in  the  early

spring,  and  overbuilding  has  adversely  affected  occupancy  in  New  Orleans'  hotels.

Agriculture.  Favorable  weather  accelerated  planting in  most  of  the  Southeast.

Reflecting  the  low  profitability  of  past  months,  the  marketing  of  pork  and  beef  in  the

District  fell  in  the  first  quarter  of  1985  as  a  result  of  smaller  farm  inventories.  Despite

the  11  percent  decline  in  marketed  pork  relative  to  a  year  ago,  pork  prices  weakened

and  fell  sharply  near  the  end  of  the  quarter  due  to  increased  poultry  production  and

pork  imports 

from  Canada.  Cotton,  an  important  southern  crop,  faces  a  growing

imbalance  between  supply  and  demand.  Competition  from  foreign  producers 

is  heavy

and  domestic  demand 

is  weak,  yet,  Sixth  District  farmers  plan  to  expand  acreage

planted  this  year.

VII-1

SEVENTH  DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.  Economic  conditions  in the Seventh District continue

to trail  the U.S.,  but there  are some bright spots.  Output  of

autos  and trucks  is  scheduled at high  levels  in the  second and

third quarters,  steel  output  is  rising, and commercial construction

is vigorous.  However, orders  for  farm, construction, mining, and

railroad equipment continue at very low levels;  demand for heavy

trucks and trailers has  slowed;  and the depressed  farm sector has

weakened further.  Residential  construction is  expected to about

equal last year.  Total  employment  is  flat, with new weakness  in

finance  and medical  care.  Except for autos, retail  sales  are

lackluster.  Permanent plant closings continue to be announced  in  a

variety of industries.  Many financially-stressed businesses are

pushing efforts  to control  costs, often with plant  or office

closings, hiring freezes and staff  reductions.  The flood of

imports  adversely affects  a broad spectrum of  industry,

agriculture, and transportation.

Motor Vehicles.  Further sizable  increases  in  domestic auto

and truck output relative to  last year are planned  for the  second

and third quarters.  Sales continue  strong helped by cut-rate

financing  on some models.  Some Japanese  imports and  favored

domestic models  are in  short supply.  Car and truck makers plan

large  increases in  capital  spending for major renovations  and new

plant construction.  Several  states have been competing for new

VII-2

plants,  domestic and foreign,  offering tax breaks and  other

benefits.  Easing of Japanese  restraints  on auto  exports will

affect investment plans and encourage foreign  sourcing.

Steel.  Production at  District  steel mills is  rising, but

remains  short of  levels reached  in the  first half of 1984.

Stronger demand  for steel  is  centered in cold rolled and coated

sheets,  especially for motor vehicles, but  also  for appliances,

office  furniture, and light  construction.  Orders  from makers of

heavy machinery are only  slightly  improved.  A Chicago  area mill  is

running two shifts  at  its  structural  steel  facilities  because of

plant closings  by competitors  in the East, South, and West.

Domestic producers hope to benefit from agreements being negotiated

with major steel  exporting countries to limit  shipments to the U.S.

Steel makers continue efforts  to lower  costs.  One of  the strongest

District firms recently announced plans to  shrink capacity and

employment substantially.

Capital Goods.  Most District  equipment producers  still  face

weak markets.  Construction, farm,  and mining equipment makers  are

still  losing money.  Rail  equipment orders remain very  low.  Orders

for hoists and  indoor cranes have  increased,  from a low level.  Few

large  outdoor cranes  are being produced.  Machine tool  orders are

better, but  still  far below good levels  of the  past.  Competition

from  foreign producers  continues fierce,  here and abroad.  More

U.S.  capital  goods producers are shifting production to  their

foreign plants or are  sourcing abroad.  Demand  for automated

VII-3

warehouse  facilities,  which offer large gains  in productivity,  is

strong.

Farm Equipment.  A  leading farm equipment maker has agreed to

sell its  agricultural  lines,  and will  close  two plants.  Another

major firm sold out  earlier this year.  Tractor plant  closings  in

District states,  apparently permanent, announced over the past 6

months cut  industry capacity by about half.  Another producer plans

a 6-month halt in  output of  four-wheel-drive tractors to reduce

inventories.

Transportation.  Reported  shipments by truck and rail have

been running below last year.  This  is believed to reflect  a shift

to owner-operator trucks and private truck fleets.  Demand  for rail

equipment  remains very  low and sales of heavy trucks and  trailers

have been slipping.  The huge trade deficit has  created an

imbalance  in ground transport, with many trailers and  freight cars

returning empty to port areas.

Construction.  Commercial  construction,  especially large

office buildings  in downtown Chicago,  is  strong.  With vacancy

rates  substantial,  it  is  believed that some  of these projects  are

being pushed ahead  to  qualify for tax incentives  which may be

altered.  Heavy  industrial and utility construction  are at very low

levels.  Residential building appears  to be rebounding from the

effects of  adverse winter weather, but is  still well below levels

of the 1970s.  Apartment  rents are  rising about  9 percent this

year.  Apartment vacancy rates  are low, but new building is  weak.

VII-4

Highway and bridge  construction is  expected to  continue very strong

into  1986  as  a result  of release  of  impounded federal  funds.

Consumer Spending.  Sales  gains have recently been

disappointing  at some major District general merchandise

retailers.  Inventories are being brought back into  line, often

through price promotions.  Orders  for standard  appliances  and

recreational  equipment have slipped below last year's  improved

levels.  Increases  in  general merchandise prices  continue small,

around 2 percent over a year earlier.  Consumer attitudes  in  the

District remain relatively optimistic.

Agriculture.  Conditions  in agriculture continue to

deteriorate, depressing local economies and  industries  dependent on

agriculture.  Prices of  corn and  soybeans, major District crops,

have  fallen 20  to  25  percent since  the downtrend began last April.

Surveys  indicate large plantings, which could bring another year of

surplus  production and low crop prices.  Livestock prices are down

12  to  15  percent  from a year ago, but are expected to rebound by

summer.  Agricultural  exports are expected to decline to a 6-year

low.  District farmland values  fell  again in the  first quarter, by

6 percent, and were off a third from the  1981 peak, led by  a

decline  of over 40  percent  in Iowa.  Payments under new government

farm programs, with high enrollments  in  the District and the

nation, will ease  financial strains  for  crop  farmers.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST.  LOUIS

Summary

Modest increases  in  March retail  sales  over 1984  levels  were

attributed  in part  to  Easter occurring  earlier  this year.  Business

activity in  two District states  also  remained  slightly  above  year-ago

levels  though  it  declined from  the  February  figures.  Loan growth at

District banks,  on  the other hand, was  slower  in  the  first  quarter of

this  year  than in  the  same  period  a year  ago,  particularly at  large

banks.  Cattle and  hog prices declined unexpectedly due  to  increases  in

fed  cattle  slaughter  and meat  imports.  Crops are  expected  to  be  large

despite heavy participation in acreage reduction programs.

Consumer Spending

District department  stores  report modest  increases  in  March

retail  sales  over March 1984  levels due  in part  to Easter  occurring two

weeks earlier this  year.  Most apparel  and accessory  areas  reportedly  did

well.  When adjusted for  the Easter period, March  sales gains  were  less

substantial.  With the bulk  of  the  Easter season falling in  March, April

sales  results are  expected to  be  lackluster when compared with  last

year.

Employment

Increases  in District  employment were  reported in  the  manufacture

of  consumer nondurables  and  automotive  parts, while  a plant  closing  in

the glass  industry  was  postponed  and  a textile plant was  reopened.  On

VIII-2

the  other hand,  job  losses  have occurred  in  the petroleum refining,

telecommunications  and  carpet  manufacturing  industries.

Business Activity

Business activity in March, as  measured  by an index  of  seven

indicators,  declined in Arkansas  and Missouri at  rates  of  3 and 2

percent,  respectively.  The March figures were  up  just  over  1 percent  in

Arkansas  and  almost 2 percent in Missouri  from  the  year-ago levels.

Building materials  inventories  have  increased  in  some  areas  of

the  District and  are considered ample  to  cover short-run demand.  Prices

for solid  wood have fallen  to  1982 levels.  As a result,  timber and

timberland  values are  declining in  the  same  manner as  cropland.

Construction

Multi-family housing  construction continues  strong  in  the

District's metropolitan areas.  The St.  Louis area  reports multi-family

housing permits issued  in  the first  quarter  of  1985  were up  50  percent

from  the  year-ago level.  There was  a decline  of  9 percent in

single-family housing permits  issued  over  the same  period.

Banking  and Finance

Total  loans  outstanding  at  large  weekly reporting banks  in  the

District grew at  a 20  percent annual  rate  over the  first  three months  of

1985,  substantially  slower  than  the  42  percent rate  established  over  the

same  period a year  earlier (all bank  data are not  seasonally  adjusted).

At  small weekly reporting  banks,  total  loans  grew at  an 8.3  percent  rate

in  the  first  three  months  of  this year  compared to  the  10.6  percent rate

for  the  same period  a year ago.  Consumer lending has  shown the  greatest

VIII-3

strength  in March, the most  recent  month for which data are  available,

while  real  estate  lending has  been  the  weakest  loan category  at  both

large and small  banks.  Deposit growth at  large  banks  in March, although

modest at  a 6 percent  rate,  exceeded  deposit growth  of  March  1984.  Large

denomination CDs,  which grew sharply  in February  and March of  this  year,

were responsible  for much  of  the  increase  in  total  deposits.

Legislative activity on regional  interstate  banking  continues  in

the District.  Indiana  recently  adopted legislation authorizing

reciprocal  interstate  banking with neighboring  states;  two  drafts  of  a

similar proposal  have been passed  in  the Tennessee  state  Senate and House

and await  reconciliation before final  approval  from  the Governor.

Illinois  and  Missouri  legislators  also  will be  reconsidering regional

banking laws  in  the coming  months.

Agriculture

Missouri  farmers received higher prices  for  vegetables, eggs,

cotton and sorghum in  March.  Sharp  declines  in prices  received  for  hogs,

cattle and  milk, however,  led  to  an overall decline  in  the  index  of

prices  received.  The declines  in  cattle  and hog  prices  were

unanticipated as  most  market  observers had  expected  lower production to

raise prices.  Instead,  sharp  (4 percent)  increases  in  fed cattle

slaughter and  strong  meat  imports led  to  price  reductions.  Similarly,

imports  from Canada have  increased  total hog  supply  and  reduced hog

prices.

Despite widespread participation in  the acreage  reduction

programs,  intensive  planting on  the  best  land combined with average

yields will produce crops  equal  to or  larger  than last  year's.

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT  - MINNEAPOLIS

While  overall  employment  and  consumer  spending  have  recently  in-

creased  in  the  Ninth  District,  agricultural  and  resource-related  weaknesses

have continued.  Some  signs  of  slower manufacturing  growth are  also  evident.

Employment

District  labor  market  conditions  have  continued  to  improve,  partic-

ularly in the  service sectors.  Spurred  by larger-than-usual quarterly  employ-

ment  growth,  the  district's  seasonally  adjusted  unemployment  rate  fell  a  few

tenths  to  6.3  percent  in 

the  first 

quarter. 

Indicative  of  this  improvement,

Minnesota's  seasonally  adjusted  unemployment  rate  fell  to  5.6  percent  in

March,  its  lowest  since  August  1981. 

Also  in  March,  nonfarm  employment

reached  a  record  high  in  Minnesota. 

Employment  growth  has  been  particularly

evident  in  the Minneapolis-St.  Paul  metro  area,  which at  the  end  of  last  year

ranked  fifth  fastest  in  employment  growth  among  large  metro  areas. 

Strong

labor  demand  is  present  in  Minneapolis,  where  the  help-wanted  advertising

index  was  recently  11  percent  above  its  year-earlier  level.  The  seasonally

adjusted  unemployment  rate  also  appears  to  have  fallen  in  Montana,  dropping

from 7.6  percent  in  January to  a probable  7  percent  in March.

Recent  labor  developments have been  mixed.  Layoffs  at  a conglomerate

with plants  in the  Twin  Cities  and Sioux  Falls,  South  Dakota,  continued.  As  a

result,  the  latter  area's unemployment  rate  rose  measurably.  The  end of  large

construction  projects  decreased  employment 

in  parts  of  North  Dakota. 

But  a

large  copper  mining  operation  in  the  hard-pressed Upper  Peninsula of  Michigan

is  very  likely to  reopen.  By employing  around  1,000 workers,  it  would provide

a huge  stimulus  to this  small  area.

IX-2

Consumer  Spending

Large  retailers  of  general merchandise  in the  Twin  Cities  report that

business  has  been  good.  Two  large  district  chain  operations  had better-than-

expected  performance  in  the  first  quarter,  which  appears  to  have  continued

into  April. 

Major  retailers  in  bustling  Sioux  Falls,  South  Dakota,  also

report  brisk business,  attributed primarily to price  reductions  and aggressive

advertising.  But  Bank  directors  note  that  business  has  slowed  in  southern

Minnesota  and  has  continued  to  lag  throughout  the  agriculturally  dependent

parts of  this  district.

A similar  story  is told  for  auto  sales,  which  have  continued  strong

in  diversified  metro  areas  but  have  been  generally weak in  rural  areas.  Two

domestic  manufacturers  report  that  their  sales,  when  compared  to  1984,

increased  9 percent  through  April.  Slack  demand  in  nonmetro  areas  has  bogged

down  truck  sales  somewhat, though.

Housing  activity  is  also  still  slack  in  rural  areas,  but  sales  of

homes  in  the  Twin  Cities  have  improved. 

Sales  in  both  Minneapolis  and  St.

Paul have  been well  above  1984  levels--by  more than  12  percent  this  February,

for  example.  A Minnesota  mortgage  revenue  bond  program is expected  to  buoy

sales  further.  Several  Bank  directors  note,  however,  that  large  inventories

of unsold homes  are still  standing in  other areas  of the district.

Agriculture

As usual  of  late,  there  is little  good  news  to  report about  agricul-

ture. 

The  Minnesota  farm  price  index's  steady  decline  continued  through

March.  The  spectre  of  overproduction  looms  over  dairy  operations  again,  due

to  the  end  of  the  dairy  diversion  program.  Moisture  is  still  lower  than

IX-3

normal 

in  northern  Montana,  and  both  crop  and  ranch  land  values  are  still

falling  in 

that  state. 

There  has  been 

little 

participation  in  Minnesota's

subsidized  interest  program  to  facilitate  spring  planting.  But  the  weather

has  permitted earlier-than-normal plantings  in  Minnesota and South  Dakota.

Resource-Related  Industries

District  Bank  directors  report  that  recent  developments 

in 

the  dis-

trict's 

resource-related  sectors  haven't  been  favorable.

One  large  firm  in  Minnesota's  paper  industry 

is  experiencing 

labor

contract  problems. 

Low  foreign  pulp  prices  are  hurting  district  pulp  pro-

ducers.  While  waferboard  plants  are  running  at  full  speed,  prices  are  de-

pressed.

Due  to  soft  prices  and  some  business  climate  problems,  oil  and  gas

activities  have  slowed.  In  Montana, both the oil  rig count  and leased  acreage

renewals  have  dropped--the  latter,  dramatically.  Oil  drilling is  off  in  North

Dakota, 

too. 

Low  prices  there  are  also  depressing  the  outlook  for  a  big  coal

gasification  operation.

Manufacturing

District  manufacturing  growth  was  particularly  strong  coming  out  of

the  last  national  recession,  but  signs  of  slower  growth  have  emerged. 

Even

the  economically  healthy  Twin  Cities  metro  area  has  seen  an  increase 

in  the

number  of  unemployment  insurance  claims  from  the  durable  goods  manufacturing

sector.  High  electricity  costs  have  helped  threaten 

the  operation  of  an

aluminum  plant  in  Montana. 

Furthermore, 

farm  implement  production  continues

to  lag, with  a North  Dakota producer laying off between  40  and  50  employees.

TENTH  DISTRICT--KANSAS  CITY

Overview.  Modest  growth  continues  to  be  evident  in  the  Tenth District

economy.  Retail  sales  are up  slightly  and  prices  remain generally  stable.

Inventories  are  generally viewed as  satisfactory, both at  retail  and  for

production materials.  Housing  starts  continue  to be  off  slightly  from  a year

ago.  Mortgage rates  are  constant  to  slightly  lower, and  are  expected  to

remain  stable  or  decline slightly.  The winter wheat  crop  is  reported  in good

to  excellent  condition.  Liquidations of  farm businesses  continue  to  be

greater  than normal  in number.  Bank loan demand  is mixed while deposits are

growing  slightly.

Retail  trade.  Most  retailers  report  that  sales  are up  slightly  over

year-ago  levels.  Sportswear  and women's apparel  are  selling well,  but  sales

of  home  furnishings,  appliances, and  electronics  items are relatively  weak.

Retail  prices have  remained stable  during  the past  three months.  Retailers

are  generally satisfied with current  inventory  levels  and  expect  little

adjustment  in  the months  ahead.  Prices  are expected to  remain  stable  over  the

remainder  of  the year, while  sales  are expected  to  increase  slightly.

Automobile  dealers.  Automobile dealers report  that  sales  are  unchanged

to  slightly  improved  from a year  ago.  Recent  declines  in  interest  rates  have

had  some positive  impact  on sales.  Inventories  of  foreign cars  are  in  short

supply,  while overall  inventories  of  domestic  cars  are at  satisfactory  levels.

Most  dealers  are moderately optimistic  that  1985  sales  will  be  slightly

improved  over the  strong  1984 performance.

Purchasing agents.  Purchasing agents  report  that  input  prices have

remained fairly  constant  during the  past  three months.  The changes  in  input

prices  for the  past  12  months have varied  in  the  range of  plus-or-minus 5

percent.  Input  prices are  expected to remain  stable for  the rest  of  the  year.

No  difficulties  in  obtaining materials have been  experienced and none are

X-2

expected.  Inventory  levels  are  generally  satisfactory  although  some modest

trimming  is  occurring, partly  in response  to  seasonal  factors.

Housing activity  and  finance.  Homebuilders report  that housing  starts

are  off  slightly  to  off  sharply from a year  ago.  Housing  starts  are  tracking

the  sale  of  new homes  as  the amount  of  speculative building has  declined.

Prices  of  new homes  remain about  constant,  reflecting the ready  availability

and  relatively  stable prices of  building materials.  Savings  and  loan  insti-

tutions  report  that mortgage  demand  and commitments  are  generally  down, with

Colorado  and  New Mexico notable  exceptions.  Expectations  for  future mortgage

demand  vary widely.  Mortgage rates  remain constant  to  slightly  lower, with a

slight  decline  or no  change  expected in  the months ahead.  The  inflow  of  new

savings  is  as  good  as,  or  slightly  better  than, a year ago.  Lower minimum

deposit  requirements  on MMDA's  and  Super NOW's have  proved  effective  in

attracting  funds  for institutions  aggressively  seeking  them.

Agriculture.  The condition of  the  winter wheat  crop  is  reported mostly

good in Kansas,  Missouri, Nebraska, and Wyoming, although  suffering  somewhat

from  lack  of  moisture.  In  Oklahoma and  eastern  Colorado,  the  condition of  the

winter wheat  crop  is described as  excellent,  with potentially  the  best  crop  in

years  in prospect.  Participation by  farmers  in  government  acreage  set-aside

programs for wheat, corn, and  sorghum varies widely among  Tenth District

states.  Little participation is  reported  in Wyoming, New Mexico,  and parts  of

Colorado,  partly  because producers  are anticipating  strong  grain prices

locally.  But  agricultural  lenders  in  Kansas, Missouri,  and Nebraska report

that  individual farmers  are  signing up  75  to  100  percent  of wheat  acres,  and

60  to  85  percent  of  corn acres,  for  set-aside.

Spring  calving results  are reported as  good  to excellent  in  Missouri,

Nebraska,  Colorado,  and Wyoming, but  only  average  in Kansas  and Oklahoma.  In

Nebraska and  parts  of  Wyoming,  stocker  cattle  have moved  into  feedlots.  How-

ever,  in  other Tenth District  states  stocker  cattle  are still  being held  in

anticipation of  higher  prices.

Rates  of  farm  liquidation vary among  Tenth District  states,  but  are

generally  lower  than recent  publicity might  indicate.  Liquidations  of  farm

businesses  are three  to  five times  as  high  as bankers  consider normal,  howev-

er, with partial  liquidations  five to  six  times as  high.  District agricultur-

al  lenders  expect  these  liquidation rates to  remain high  for  at  least  several

months.  Despite  current  farm financial  difficulties,  few farm borrowers  did

not  receive credit  for  spring  planting.  Banks  in New Mexico  and  Wyoming

report  less  than 2 percent  of  their  borrowers  did not  receive  credit.  Per-

centages  are somewhat  higher in other district  states,  ranging from 3 percent

in Kansas  and  parts  of Nebraska to 12  percent  in Missouri.

Banking.  Loan demand at  Tenth District  banks  is mixed, with about  equal

numbers  of  banks  reporting  slightly increased,  unchanged, and  slightly  de-

creased  loan demand.  Consumer  and residential  real  estate  loans  are tending

to rise, while agricultural  loans  are tending to  decline.  Deposits  are rising

slightly,  although they,  too,  display mixed behavior.  Super NOW  accounts,

MMDA's,  IRA and Keough accounts,  and  small  time  deposits  are  rising more

rapidly  than large  CD's  and  passbook savings  accounts;  demand  deposits and

conventional  NOW accounts are  declining.  None  of  the respondents  changed

their prime rate  in  the  last  month, but  about  half  expect  the prime  to  de-

crease  slightly  in  the near  future.  Over  three-quarters  of  the  respondents

have not  changed consumer  lending rates  in the  last month  and  do  not  expect

changes  in  the near  term.  Most  of  the  surveyed banks have reduced  the minimum

deposit  on MMDA's  and  Super NOW's  to  $1,000,  generally  with  no effect  on

deposits.

XI-1

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

Economic  growth  in  the Eleventh District  remains  slow.

Respondents  in  manufacturing  report modest  gains  in  demand.  Drilling

activity  is  dropping  farther  below  year-earlier  levels.  Auto  sales

continue  to  grow briskly,  but  only modest  gains  are  expected  as  the year

progresses.  Retail  sales  are below  levels  of  a year  ago.  Loan growth  at

District  banks  is  slowing.  District  farmers  face  declining crop  and

livestock  prices.

Eleventh District  manufacturing  is expanding, but  very  sluggishly.

Respondents  in  most  sectors  report  modest  gains  in  demand,  but  few  foresee

rapid growth  in  the near  future.  There  is wide  geographic divergence  in

the  performance of  some building-related  manufacturing  industries  such  as

stone,  clay  and  glass  and  lumber  and wood  products.  Only  firms  in  areas

where construction  is  least  depressed have  managed to  increase  sales.

Fabricated  metal  producers,  however,  report  somewhat  greater  demand  from

building contractors  engaged  in  public works  construction.  The  depressed

energy sector  has  dampened  growth  in  nonelectrical machinery  manufacturing.

Makers  of electrical  machinery and  equipment  continue  to  report  sluggish

demand, but  their prospects  are  brighter  because  firms  in  a broad  spectrum

of  industries  report  plans  to  invest  in  productivity-enhancing,

automation-oriented  equipment this  year.  Chemical  makers  report  flat

sales,  while  paper  and  allied product  manufacturers  note  some  renewed

strength  in  demand.  Primary metal  manufacturers  still  observe that  import

competition  is hindering  sales.

The number  of  active  drilling  rigs  in  the  Eleventh District  states

is  responding more  acutely  to  declining oil  prices.  Year-over-year

declines  in  the  seasonally  adjusted  rig  count  accelerated  to  almost  10

XI-2

percent  in  March.  The weakness  in  drilling  reflects  the  pessimistic

attitude  about  prices  and  uncertainty about  tax  changes  on  the part  of many

energy companies.  The  number of well  permit  applications  and  the  seismic

crew  count,  both of which are  leading  indicators  of  drilling,  evidence  this

pessimism.  Both  measures  declined sharply  in  March  from  one  year  earlier.

Auto  sales  have  maintained  their  record pace  in  March,  but  some

slowing  is  expected  for  the  next  couple  of  months.  Modest  shortages  of

large  domestic  cars  are  developing, but  overall  inventory  levels  remain

steady.  The removal  of  import  quotas  on  Japanese  cars  will  intensify  price

competition.  Its  full  effect  is  not  expected  to  be  felt  until  late  in  the

third quarter,  however.

Retail  sales  remain below  1984  levels  and  are  expected  to  remain

sluggish  in the  near  future.  Consumers  seem  to  be  holding  back

expenditures  because  of  slower  income  gains  and subdued  consumer

confidence.  Fashion  lines  are selling well,  but  big-ticket  items  are  doing

poorly.  Profit margins  remain below  last  year's  level,  but  prices  are  not

expected  to  increase.  Reductions  in  employment  levels  are  a prevalent

cost-cutting measure  among  respondents.

After  a strong gain  in  the  fourth  quarter of  1984,  nonresidential

construction has  fallen  off  in  the  first  quarter of  1985.  The  seasonally

adjusted  average monthly  value  of  nonresidential  construction  contracts  for

the  first  quarter of  1985  was  15.6  percent  below  the  level  for  the  previous

quarter for  the  Eleventh  District  states  and  13.0  percent below  for  Texas.

Evidence  of  the  oversupply of  commercial  office  space  has  become more

apparent  in  recent  months,  contributing  to  the  decline.  Nevertheless,

nonresidential  contract  value  in  the  first  quarter  was  significantly above

its  level  one  year  earlier.

XI-3

The value  of  residential  construction contracts  has  declined  at

increasing year-over-year  rates  for  the  last  four  quarters  in  the  District

states.  In  Texas,  first  quarter residential  contract  value was  more  than

30  percent below  its  level  one year  earlier.  Housing permits  also  continue

to  slide,  falling  in  March  36.8  percent  from  their  level  one  year  before.

The number  of  multifamily permits  continues  to  decline at  a greater  rate

than  single  family permits.  March multifamily  permits  for  Texas were  43.6

percent  below their  quarterly average  one  year  earlier,  compared  to  a 28.3

decline  in  the  single  family  level.

Growth  in  total deposits  at  District member  banks  increased

slightly  in  March  after  a substantial  gain  in  the  rate  of  increase  for

February.  The March  growth rate  of  16.0  percent  matched the  increase  in

deposits  at  large  banks.  Although  total  loans  at  District  large  banks  are

expanding,  the  rates  of increase  are  declining, and  business  loans  at  these

institutions  have  actually  fallen  in  the  last  two  months.  Both  real  estate

loan  growth  at  large  banks  and  construction  lending  increases  at  Texas

savings  and  loan  associations,  though  still  strong,  have  slowed  in  recent

months.

Eleventh  District  agriculture  is  having a weak  spring.  Crop  and

livestock  prices  are  significantly below  last  year  and  continue  to  decline.

Despite  lower  product prices,  cropland  values  have  risen,  on  average,  in

Texas,  instead  of  falling as  they have  in  midwestern states  such  as  Iowa.

As  a result,  farm bankruptcy  rates  in  Texas  are  much  lower  than  in  the

Midwest.  The  income of  state  ranchers  in  1985  is  likely  to  drop  from  last

year's  levels  because  any price  increases  are  likely  to  be  only temporary.

XII-1

TWELFTH DISTRICT -

SAN FRANCISCO

Introduction

The  economy of  the Twelfth District  remains  healthy, but  there  are

fewer signs  of continuing  improvement  and  some  signs  of weakness.  Although

retail  sales  and  service sector employment  are  satisfactory, the  share  of

manufacturing employment  has  fallen  since  last year.  Home  construction and

sales  activity are at  satisfactory levels,  but  are  sensitive  to  ambient

interest  rates.  The  problems  with western agriculture do  not appear  as

severe  as  elsewhere  in  the  country and do  not  appear  to  have generated

excessive  loan  loss  exposures  for lenders.  The  forest  products  industry  in

the Pacific Northwest and the  primary metals  industries  are  the weakest

sectors  in  the  District  economy.  The  financial  sector appears  sound,  with

satisfactory deposit  inflows  and increasing  earnings.

Consumer Spending

Retail  sales  activity in  the  District  has  been  satisfactory, but  the

growth  in  sales  over  the  same  period  in  1984  has  been modest.  Reports  from

several  large  department  store  chains,  for  example,  suggest  year-over-year

growth as  of  February of  about  9 percent.  Service  sector  employment

continues  to  be a major  source  of  strength  in  the  District.  In  the  State

of  Washington, this  sector has  been  particularly important  in  offsetting

the  continued weakness  in  other major employment  sectors.  Sales  of  new and

used automobiles  appear to  be  satisfactory, increasing  by  about  5 percent

in  March  over  February  in  the San Francisco Bay  Area,  for  example.  The

sales  increases  are attributed partly to  promotional  financing  offered  by

several manufacturers.

XII-2

Real  Estate and  Construction

New construction and home  sales  activity  appear  to  be at  healthy

levels  and builders are  optimistic  about  prospects  for  1985  in  general.

Prices  reportedly have  stabilized  or  softened  in  many parts  of  the

District,  including  the normally  fast-paced Southern  California market.

Housing  activity appears  to  be  very  sensitive  to  changes  in  the  level  of

interest  rates  at  current  interest  rate  levels.  There were  several  reports

of  sharp  downturns  in  home  sales  activity during  the  recent modest  uptick

in  mortgage  loan  rates.  Commercial  real  estate development  appears  to  be

healthy, particularly in office  and retail  park construction, consistent

with  the  growth in  the  service sector.

Business  Activity

Business  activity generally in  the  District  shows  little  evidence  of

either  significant  growth or decline.  This  is  reflected in  unemployment

rates  which have  either stabilized  or  declined only  slightly  in  recent

months.  The  share  of  total  wage and  salary employment  represented  by  the

manufacturing sector  has  fallen  slightly  since  last  year,  continuing  its

slide  from 1982.  For  the  District  as  a whole,  the  manufacturing employment

share  stands  at  about  18  percent.

The  forest  products  industry  in  the  Pacific  Northwest  and the  primary

metals  industries  elsewhere  in  the  District  continue  to  be  the  weakest

sectors.  There continue  to  be mill  closures  in  the  Pacific  Northwest  and

the  industry  is  undergoing a major restructuring.  This  restructuring may

ultimately involve  wage cuts  of  as  much  as  20  to  25  percent  in  this  highly

unionized industry.  In  the  mining  industry,  there  have been  several  major

mine  and smelter  closures  in  recent  days.  The  impact  of  these events  on

XII-3

Utah's  copper  industry alone  is  estimated  to  represent  6 to  7 thousand  lost

jobs.  In  both  industries,  the  strong  dollar and  vigorous  foreign

competition have contributed to  continued deterioration.

Agriculture, although  still  weakened by  soft  product  prices  and poor

export  opportunities,  does  not  appear to  be  weakening  further.  The western

agricultural economy appears to  be more  diversified and  resilient  than

elsewhere.  In  California's  Central Valley, for  example,  the  unemployment

rate  in  February  fell  to  12.7  percent,  down  from  14.6  percent  in  the  same

month  in  1984.  Retails  sales  activity in  the  Central  Valley  -

dependent

upon the health of  the  primary agricultural  sector -

also  have been

recovering  in  recent  months.

The  Financial  Sector

Commercial  loan demand has  been  steady at  District  banks  and loan

quality reportedly has  improved,  particularly  in  the  formerly weak agri-

cultural  lending business.  There are  several  reports  of  improvements  -

and

even  major turnarounds  -

in  bank earnings  for  the  first  quarter  of  1985.

This  development  is  at  least  partly ascribed  to  recent  declines  in  the cost

of  funds.  Deposit  inflows  at  District  financial  institutions  also  are

reported  to  be healthy, particularly  in  the  money market  deposit  accounts

(MMDA).  These  accounts  have  benefited  from  recent  narrowing  in  the  spread

between the  yields  in  money market  mutual  funds  and  the  rates  offered by

banks  and  thrifts.  The bank closures  that  have  occurred  in  the  District

have been confined largely  to  small  institutions with  undiversified

portfolios  and weak local  economies.

