FEDERAL  RESERVE  press  release 

.... .  

For Use  at  4:30 p.m. 

August  23,  1985 

The  Federal Reserve  Board  and  the  Federal  Open  Market 

Committee today released  the attached  record  of  policy actions 

taken by  the  Federal Open Market  Committee  at  its meeting on 

July  9-10, 1985.  

Such records  for each meeting  of  the Committee are  made 

available  a few days after  the  next  regularly scheduled meeting 

and  are  published  in  the  Federal Reserve Bulletin  and  the Board's 

Annual  Report.  The  summary descriptions  of  economic and  financial 

conditions they  contain are  based  solely on  the  information that 

was  available  to  the Committee  at  the time  of  the meeting.

Attachment

RECORD OF  POLICY ACTIONS  OF  THE 
FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 

Meeting Held on July 9-10,  1985 

Domestic policy directive 

The  information reviewed at  this meeting  indicated  that  expansion 

of  economic  activity had  picked up  in  recent  months,  following virtually no 

growth in the  first  quarter of  the  year.  Rates  of  increase  in  prices  and 

wages  had  slowed  a bit  recently  after indications  of  some  acceleration 

early  in  the year,  and  for  the  year  to date  inflation  appeared  to  be  running 

at  about  the  same  pace  as  in  1984.  

The  nominal value of  retail  sales  fell in  May after an extra

ordinary  rise in  April, but  the  average  level  of  sales  for  the April-May 

period was  about  2-1/4  percent above  the  average  for  the  first  quarter.  

Over the  two-month period,  sales  of  durable goods were especially  strong, 

fostered  by a surge  in  sales  at  automotive outlets  in April  and a sharp 

rebound in  sales  at  furniture and appliance  stores  in  May.  In  the  auto

motive  sector, financing  incentives  on many domestic models  and  increased 

availability of  imported  cars  boosted  total  automobile  sales  to an  annual 

rate of  11.3 million units  in May, the  highest monthly  pace  in  six  years.  

Many of  the  special  financing  programs were phased  out  by  the end  of  May, 

however,  and  sales of  domestic  cars  slowed  substantially in June.  

Activity  in  the  housing sector appeared  to  be holding earlier 

gains.  Total private housing  starts  averaged  1.8 million units  at  an 

annual  rate  in  the April-May period,  the same  as  the  advanced  first-quarter

7/9-10/85

pace, and  newly issued  permits for  residential  building rose  in May  to  their 

highest level  in  nearly a year.  Combined  sales  of  new and  existing homes 

remained  strong,  as  the  general  decline in mortgage credit  costs  apparently 

continued  to  bolster demand.  

Information  on business  capital  spending suggested  further growth 

in  that  sector, though at  a much less  rapid pace  than earlier in the  economic 

expansion.  Most  of  the  recent  strength  in  business  fixed  investment  has  been 

concentrated  in  expenditures  for  nonresidential  construction.  Imports  apparently 

have  continued  to  account  for  a sizable  share  of  outlays  for  equipment;  new 

orders for nondefense  capital  goods  and  shipments  by domestic  producers  have 

changed little  on  balance  since  last  fall.  The  Commerce Department's  survey 

of  business  spending plans,  conducted  in late  April and  May,  suggested  that 

nominal  outlays  for plant  and  equipment would be  roughly  9 percent above  their 

1984  average.  

The  index of  industrial production edged  down  in April  and May, 

after  rising  little over  the  first  quarter.  Production of  defense and 

space  equipment continued  to  advance and  output  of  construction supplies 

also  increased.  Production  of  other products  and materials  generally 

remained  sluggish:  output  of  consumer  goods had  changed little  from  the 

level  prevailing  a year  earlier, and  production of  business  equipment -- a 

source of  strength throughout  1984 -- had declined  thus  far  in  1985.  The 

rate  of  capacity utilization  for  total  industry fell  0.4  percentage  point 

further in  May to  80.3  percent, a cumulative  drop  of  nearly  2-1/2  percentage 

points  since  July 1984.

7/9-10/85

Nonfarm payroll employment  rose  80,000  in June,  after an advance 

in  May that  equaled  the average monthly increase of  260,000  recorded  in 

the  first  four months of  the year.  Manufacturing  employment continued 

to  fall  in both May and June, however,  bringing  the cumulative  loss  in 

factory jobs  to  220,000  so  far  this  year.  The  civilian unemployment  rate 

remained at  7.3  percent in  June, unchanged  since  February.  

The producer  price  index  for  finished  goods  and  the  consumer 

price index  rose 0.2  percent  in  May.  Over  the  first  five months  of  the 

year,  producer and  consumer prices  have  risen at  annual  rates  of about 

1-3/4  percent  and 4 percent  respectively,  the  same  as  in  1984.  The  index 

of average  hourly earnings  also  has  continued  to  increase  at  its  1984  pace, 

rising  at  an annual  rate of  about  3 percent  for  the  year  through May.  

Over  the  period since  the  Committee's meeting  in May, the  trade

weighted value  of  the  dollar had generally moved within a relatively narrow 

range.  But  in  the days  immediately  preceding  this meeting  the value  of 

the  dollar declined  about  2 percent,  to  a level  below its  recent  low in 

April, bringing  its  decline over  the  intermeeting  interval  to  around  3-1/2 

percent.  The U. S. merchandise  trade  deficit widened in the  April-May 

period  from the rate  in  the  first  quarter, as  both agricultural and  non

agricultural  exports  fell while  imports  remained close  to  their high 

first-quarter  rate.  

At  its meeting on May  21,  1985,  the  Committee had  adopted a 

directive  that,  against  the  background of  the  reduction  in  the discount 

rate  announced  a few days before  the meeting,  called  for maintaining the

7/9-10/85

existing degree  of  pressure  on reserve positions.  The members  expected 

that  action to  be  consistent with growth in  M1  at  an  annual  rate of  around 

6 percent  or  a little higher  during the  period  from March  to  June.  Given 

the weakness  in M2  and  M3  in April, growth in  these  broader aggregates  over 

the three-month period was  expected to  be  slower  than the  respective annual 

rates  of  7 and 8 percent  anticipated  at  the  time  of  the previous meeting in 

late  March.  The members  agreed  that  somewhat  lesser  restraint would  be  accept

able  in  the event  of substantially slower  growth in  the monetary aggregates 

while  somewhat  greater restraint  might  be  acceptable in  the  event  of  substan

tially  faster growth.  It  was understood  that  the  need  for  lesser or greater 

restraint  would be  considered in  the  context of  appraisals of  the  strength 

of  the business  expansion, progress  against  inflation, and  conditions in 

domestic credit  and  foreign exchange  markets.  The  intermeeting  range for 

the  federal funds  rate was retained  at  6 to  10  percent.  

In  May and June, M1  expanded  very rapidly, and  its  growth over the 

March-to-June  interval was  at  an annual  rate of  about 13-1/4  percent, well 

above  the  rate  expected at  the  time  of  the May meeting.  The  strength in 

M1 was evident  in  all  its major  components, particularly in  demand  deposits.  

That  strength,  coupled with an  acceleration in  the nontransaction component 

of  M2  in  June, brought  growth in  the broader aggregates  to  rates  somewhat 

higher  than expected  in  May for  the  three-month period.  Nevertheless,  for 

the period  from the  fourth quarter of  1984  through the  second  quarter of  1985, 

M2 and M3  expanded  at  rates  within their  long-term ranges, while M1  grew 

at  a rate well  above  its  range.  Expansion in total  domestic nonfinancial

7/9-10/85

debt  slowed  a little  in  the  second quarter,  but  remained high relative  to 

the Committee's  monitoring  range  for  the year.  

Total  reserves grew rapidly in  May and  June,  reflecting increases 

in  required  reserves  associated with  the growth  in  transaction  accounts.  

The  level  of  adjustment  plus  seasonal  borrowing  averaged  around  $550 million 

in  the three  complete maintenance periods  between meetings  and was  running 

over  $1.2  billion in  the week before  this meeting,  as  seasonal  strains 

associated with the midyear  statement  date  and  the  holiday period,  together 

with massive swings  in Treasury balances,  complicated  reserve management 

at  depository institutions  and  the Federal Reserve.  Throughout  the  inter

meeting interval, borrowing was boosted  by occasional  surges  for a day 

or  two  near the  end  of  a reserve maintenance  period, apparently  reflecting 

higher-than-expected demands  for  excess  reserves, particularly around 

the midyear  statement date.  

The  federal funds  rate  centered  on a trading  range  of  7-1/2  to 

7-3/4  percent during  much of  the  intermeeting  interval.  The  rate  fell be

low 7 percent briefly in mid-June and  rose  above  8 percent  for a time 

around  the  quarter-end  statement  date and July 4 holiday, when  seasonal 

influences and  sharply rising  Treasury  balances temporarily  increased 

pressures  on reserves.  Other market  rates  fluctuated over relatively 

wide ranges  in  response  to  incoming  economic  data,  changing expectations 

about  the  likelihood of  a further  cut  in  the discount  rate, and  at  times, 

unanticipated money supply developments.  On  balance, rates  on most 

Treasury securities  fell  about  35  to  60 basis  points,  while  rates  on 

commercial paper and certificates  of  deposits  declined  about  15  to  25 

basis  points,  apparently  reflecting  emergence of  slightly higher  risk

7/9-10/85

-6-

premiums  in  response  to some  concerns  about  the health of  some  financial 

institutions.  Most  commercial banks  reduced  their  "prime"  rate 1/2  per

centage  point  to  9-1/2  percent.  Corporate  bond yields  fell  about  60  to  70 

basis  points and  most broad  stock  price  indexes  reached record  levels.  The 

average  rate on new commitments  for  fixed-rate  conventional  home mortgage 

loans  declined  about  80  basis  points  over  the  intermeeting  period.  

The staff  projections  presented at  this  meeting suggested  that 

growth in  real  GNP would pick  up  somewhat  in  the  second  half  of  the year 

from the  sluggish pace  in  the  first  half,  and  would continue  at  a modest 

pace through 1986.  The unemployment  rate was  expected  to  fall  only  slightly 

over  the  projection period  and  the  rate of  increase in  prices was projected 

to  remain close  to  that  experienced  in  recent  years.  

In  the Committee's  discussion  of  current  and  prospective economic 

developments, the members  agreed  that  some pickup  in  the  rate  of economic 

expansion  from  the  slow growth of  the  first  half  of  the  year was a reasonable 

expectation for  the  second  half.  The outlook for  1986 was more  uncertain, 

but  the  members  generally  saw continuing expansion, though possibly  at  a 

moderating pace,  as  the most  likely  prospect  for  the year.  As  they  had at 

previous meetings,  the members  expressed concern  about  the uneven participation 

of various  industries  in the  economic  expansion, including  the continuing and 

serious  problems  in  the agricultural  sector.  They  also  remained  concerned 

about  the  underlying  imbalances in  the  economy, notably the massive  deficits 

in the  federal  budget  and  in  the  balance of  trade,  that  along with  persisting 

strains  in domestic and  international  financial markets  threatened the  sus

tainability of  the  expansion.  In  these  circumstances the members  recognized

7/9-10/85

-7-

that  their  forecasts were  subject  to  a great  deal of  uncertainty and  several 

commented that  the  risks  of  any deviation appeared  to  be  on the downside.  

Other  members were  more optimistic, at  least  with respect  to  the  next  few 

quarters,  and  in  one view the  rapid growth of  M1  since  the  latter  part of 

1984  could  presage  significantly  faster expansion  than  generally was 

anticipated  currently.  

In keeping with  the usual  practice  for meetings  when the Committee 

considers  its  longer-run objectives  for monetary growth, the members  of  the 

Committee and  the  Federal  Reserve Bank  presidents not  currently  serving as 

members  had  prepared  specific  projections  of  economic  activity, the  rate 

of  unemployment, and  average prices.  With regard  to  growth in  real GNP, 

the projections  had  a central  tendency  of 2-3/4  to  3 percent  for  1985 as 

a whole and 2-1/2  to  3-1/4  percent  for  1986.  The  central  tendency  for  the 

rate  of  unemployment was  an average  rate of  7 to  7-1/4  percent  for the 

fourth quarter of  1985  and  about  the  same  or  a bit  lower  for  the  fourth 

quarter of  1986.  The  projections  for  the implicit  GNP deflator  centered 

on  a rise of  3-3/4  to  4 percent  for  the year  1985  and  3-3/4  to  4-3/4  for 

the  year  1986.  These  projections  were  considered to  be  consistent with 

the  Committee's  objectives  for growth  in money and  credit  established 

at  this meeting.  The  projections  also  assumed  that  Congress  and  the 

Administration would  achieve deficit  reductions  in  the  range of  those 

contained  in recent  House  and  Senate  budget  actions.  The projections 

were  based on  an  assumption that  the exchange  value  of  the  dollar would 

not deviate  substantially  from its  recent  trading  range.

7/9-10/85

In  support  of  their  expectation that  the  rate  of  economic  ex

pansion would  improve from the  very sluggish  pace experienced  in  the  first 

half  of  the year,  members  referred  to  the  favorable  impact  of  reduced 

interest  rates  on  interest-sensitive  sectors  of  the economy,  such as  the 

construction and  automobile  industries,  and  they also  noted  the  build up 

of  liquidity  in  the economy.  Some members  commented  that  consumer 

spending was  likely  to  remain  relatively  robust,  at  least over  the  quar

ters  immediately  ahead, given  generally  favorable  consumer attitudes  and 

the  sizable gains  expected  in  employment  and  earnings.  A number  of  mem

bers  also  referred  to  favorable  prospects  for  continuing growth in  busi

ness  capital  spending against  the  background of  reduced  borrowing  costs 

and  strong  competitive  pressures  -- both domestic and  foreign -- on busi

ness  firms  to  enhance  their  productivity.  In  the  latter  connection one 

member  reported on  the expectation  of  some businessmen  that  the  lull  in 

demands  for  high-technology equipment might prove  to  be  temporary.  

On  the  negative  side,  apart  from the underlying  imbalances  that 

constituted  an  ongoing  threat  to  the  economy, the members  cited  a number 

of  factors  that  would  tend  to  limit,  if  not  arrest,  the  expansion.  The 

growth of  private  debt  and  rising  delinquency rates  could  have  an  increas

ingly negative effect  on consumer  spending and  perhaps  on  housing demand.  

In  the  investment area,  the  demand  for high-technology equipment might 

not  revive as  some  businessmen  expected, and  the  high vacancy  rates  in 

many  parts  of  the  country for multi-family housing and  office space  sug

gested  a marked slowdown  in  that  type  of  construction.  More  generally, 

relatively low rates  of  capacity  utilization would  limit  the need  for

7/9-10/85

investments  in many industries.  Several members  referred  to  the  continuing 

drag  on domestic production stemming  from the high value of  the dollar  and 

the  associated  intense  foreign competition  in both domestic and  export markets.  

With regard  to  the  outlook for  inflation,  the  members  noted  that 

wage and  price  pressures were  relatively subdued  in domestic labor 

and product markets.  Inflationary  pressures were greater  in some  of 

the  service  industries,  but  against  the  background of  generally  low 

capacity  utilization rates  and  relatively high unemployment  the members 

did not  expect  much change  in the overall  rate of  inflation during  the 

year  ahead,  at  least  in the  absence of  any  sizable decline  in the 

foreign  exchange value  of  the dollar.  Indeed,  one member observed  that 

the  performance  of  prices might well prove  to  be better  than was generally 

expected unless  the exchange value of  the  dollar were  to  fall substanti

ally.  A number  of  members  commented  that  a limited  decline  in  the 

dollar might have  little,  if any, effect  on domestic prices  or  in the 

extent of  import  penetration.  Many foreign suppliers who enjoyed 

sizable profit  margins would probably tend  to  absorb  such a decline  by 

maintaining current dollar  prices  in order  to  preserve  their market 

shares.  On  the other  hand, a substantial  decline in  the value of  the 

dollar, if  it were  to  occur,  would pose  a considerable  risk of  being 

reflected  in higher domestic prices.  

At  this meeting  the Committee reviewed  its ranges  for  growth 

of  the monetary and  credit  aggregates  in 1985  and  established  tentative 

ranges  for 1986 within the  framework of  the  Full Employment and  Balanced

7/9-10/85

-10-

Growth Act  of  1978  (the  Humphrey-Hawkins  Act).l /   At  its  meeting on 

February  12-13,  1985,  the  Committee had  adopted monetary growth ranges 

of  4 to  7 percent  for Ml,  6 to  9 percent  for  M2,  and  6 to  9-1/2  percent 

for M3  for  the  period  from the  fourth quarter of  1984  to  the  fourth 

quarter of  1985.  The  associated range  for  total  domestic  nonfinancial 

debt  was  set  at  9 to  12  percent.  The  Committee had  agreed  that  growth 

in  the  monetary aggregates  in  the  upper  part of  their  ranges might be 

appropriate  for  the  year, depending  on developments  with respect  to 

velocity and  provided  that  inflationary  pressures  remained  subdued.  

The  Committee's  review of  its  ranges  for  1985  focused  on the 

rapid  growth of  M1 during  the  first  half  of  the year,  the  factors  that 

may have  influenced  the  demand  for  money, and  the  implications  of  Ml 

growth for  the  future  course  of  economic  activity and  the  rate  of 

inflation.  In  their  discussion  the members  took  account  of  an  analysis 

which  suggested  that  the  strength of  Ml  relative  to  the  Committee's 

target  range  appeared  to  reflect  in  part  a one-time  response  on  a 

lagged  basis  to  the  sizable  declines  in interest  rates  that  had  occurred 

over  the  past  year.  The  available evidence  suggested, not  only on  the 

basis  of  the  recent  experience but  also  that  of  earlier  periods  such 

as  in  1982-1983,  that  in periods  characterized  by  large  interest  rate 

declines  individuals  and  businesses  tended  to  shift  into  transaction-type 

1/  The Midyear Monetary Policy Report  pursuant  to  this  legislation was 

transmitted  to  the Congress  on July  16,  1985.

7/9-10/85

-11-

balances  from other assets  because  they sacrificed  less  interest  income 

in doing so.  Moreover,  it  was  possible that  the  availability of  interest 

on  certain types  of  checking  accounts  in  recent  years,  together with  the 

fact  that the  rates  of  interest  on such accounts  have  tended  to  change 

more sluggishly  than competing market-oriented rates,  has  increased  the 

interest  sensitivity  of  Ml,  particularly in  the  short  run.  It  was  also 

noted, however,  that  a part  of  the  rapid  growth of  Ml, notably  in  the 

past  two months, did not  appear to  be  related to  interest  rate adjustments 

or  to  ongoing transaction  demands,  raising questions  about whether  there 

were  special  factors,  such as  changes in  corporate  cash management  practices 

or  transitory responses  to  sharp declines  in  Treasury balances,  that  also 

may have been  influencing  the demand  for money.  

While  acknowledging that  both  the  explanation and  the impli

cations of  the  bulge  in Ml  growth were subject  to  a great deal  of  uncer

tainty, the members  generally concluded that  faster  than  targeted  expan

sion  in Ml  could  be  accepted for  the  first  half  of  the year  in light  of 

the  sluggish growth  in economic activity,  relatively well  contained 

price  pressures, and  a high value of  the dollar  on  foreign exchange 

markets.  Moreover, growth  in  the broader  aggregates for  the  year  to 

date had  been  consistent with the Committee's  earlier expectations.  

Looking ahead  to the  balance  of  the  year,  the members differed 

to  some extent on  an appropriate Ml target,  but  they generally concluded 

that  it  would  not be  desirable in  the  current  economic  and  financial

7/9-10/85

-12-

environment  to  offset  the  recent  spurt  in M1  by  a slowing  in  the  second 

half  sufficient to  bring Ml  into  the existing  4 to  7 percent  long-run 

range.  That  would  imply almost  no growth month-by-month on  average over 

the  balance of  the year.  While  the  prospective  behavior  of Ml would 

remain subject  to  continuing uncertainties, the members  believed  that 

M1  velocity would  probably move  gradually toward  a more usual  or  predict

able  pattern and  that maintenance of  the  current  degree of  reserve 

pressure would be  associated with a reduction  in M1  growth during  the 

second  half  of  the year  to  a moderate pace.  Such growth was likely  to 

be consistent with a pickup  in  the  rate  of  economic expansion and  con

tinued  containment  of  inflationary  pressures.  Accordingly, most  of 

the members favored  either  raising  the M1  range  that  had  been established 

in  February  for the  year  or  rebasing the  range  from  the  fourth quarter 

of  1984  to  the  second  quarter  of  1985,  with a smaller  increase  or no 

change in the  actual numerical  range.  

Members who  expressed a preference for  a higher  range  over rebas

ing  emphasized that  the degree of  uncertainty surrounding  the  future 

behavior  of  Ml  remained  considerable  and  a higher range would not  carry 

an implication  that  the velocity adjustment in  M1 was concluded.  More

over, to  the  extent  that  changes  in  the  composition of Ml  toward  interest

bearing  accounts,  shifts  in  cash management  practices, and generally 

lower interest  rates  implied  a more  slowly  rising  trend  in  Ml velocity, 

Ml  growth relative  to  GNP would  be  higher  over  time than  the  Committee 

had anticipated  earlier and,  in  one view, should begin to  be  reflected

7/9-10/85

-13-

in  the Committee's  Ml  ranges.  However,  a majority of  the  members pre

ferred  to  rebase  M1  on  the  second  quarter.  While  they  did  not  disagree 

that  there were  considerable  uncertainties  about  the  prospective  relation

ship between Ml  and  economic  performance, these members felt  that  a 

rebased  range  would better  reflect  the  current  thrust  of  the  Committee's 

policy and would  be more  consistent with a movement  toward  lower  growth 

ranges  over  time,  as needed  to  attain  the  long-run objective  of  sustained, 

noninflationary economic growth.  

Because  of  the  uncertainties surrounding  the  behavior  of Ml, 

one  member proposed  placing much less  weight  than usual  on movements 

in  that  aggregate,  possibly by relegating  it  to  a monitoring  status  for 

some period  of  time.  Other  members  opposed such  a course  because they 

felt  that Ml,  together with the  other monetary aggregates, would  continue  to 

provide  a useful  focus  for  the conduct  of  monetary policy even as  their 

behavior  had  to be  evaluated  in  the  context  of  ongoing  economic, financial, 

and  exchange  market developments.  

With regard  to  the members'  preferences  for  a specific  Ml range, 

a majority supported  a proposal  to  establish a range  of  3 to  8 percent, 

rebased  on the  second  quarter.  Such a range  implied  a substantial  slow

ing  in  growth  from the  pace  in  the  first  half.  Other  members indicated 

a preference for  a rebased  range  of  4 to  7 percent which  they believed 

was  likely to  prove more  consistent with the  Committee's  longer-run 

objectives.  Given the  uncertainties  surrounding  the  behavior of  Ml, 

most  of  the  members supported  a relatively wide  range  for  the  second 

half,  even though the  prospects  for expansion  at  the  low end  of  the

7/9-10/85

-14-

range were viewed  as  somewhat remote.  It  was  recognized  that because 

M1  growth had  been strong  during  the  latter part  of  the  second  quarter, 

its  level was  currently high in  relation  to  the  rebased  range and it 

was  not  likely  to  fall within that  range  until  some  time  had elapsed.  

Relatively  low growth within the  range, should  it  occur, would be 

acceptable  if  the  recent  decline in M1  velocity were  substantially  re

versed and  economic  performance  proved  to  be  satisfactory.  In  summary, 

the  rebased  range  was based  on  expectations  of  a return  of velocity 

growth over  time  toward  more usual  patterns,  but because  of  the many 

uncertainties  that  were involved the  members  agreed  on  the desirability 

of  continuing to  judge M1  developments  against  the background  of  the 

other aggregates  and  evidence on  the  behavior of  the economy, prices, 

and  financial markets,  both domestic  and  international.  

With regard  to  M2,  M3,  and  debt  all of  the members  supported 

a proposal  to  reaffirm the  current  ranges  for  1985,  subject  to  the 

understanding that  actual  growth, as  had been  contemplated  previously 

at  the  February meeting, might  appropriately be  high within  the  ranges 

depending on developments  with respect  to  velocity  and provided  that 

inflationary pressures  remained  subdued.  

At  the conclusion  of  its  review of  the  ranges  for 1985,  the 

Committee voted  as  follows  to  establish  a rebased  range for  M1  and  to 

reaffirm  the  ranges  that were set  at  the February meeting for  the broader 

aggregates  and  for  total  domestic nonfinancial debt:

7/9-10/85

-15-

The Committee at  this meeting  reaffirmed  ranges 
for  the  year  of  6 to  9 percent  for M2  and  6 to  9-1/2 
percent for  M3.  The  associated  range  for  total domestic 
nonfinancial debt was  reaffirmed  at  9 to  12 percent.  
With respect  to  Ml,  the  base was moved  forward  to  the 
second  quarter of  1985  and  a range  was  established at 
an annual  growth rate  of  3 to  8 percent.  The  range 
takes  account  of  expectations  of  a return of  velocity 
growth  toward more  usual patterns,  following  the 
sharp decline  in velocity during  the  first  half  of 
the year,  while  also recognizing  a higher  degree of 
uncertainty regarding  that  behavior.  The appropriate
ness of  the new range will  continue  to  be  reexamined 
in  the  light of  evidence  with respect  to  economic 
and  financial  developments  including  developments 
in  foreign exchange markets.  More  generally,  the 
Committee agreed  that growth in the  aggregates 
may  be  in  the upper  parts  of  their  ranges,  depending 
on continuing  developments with respect  to  velocity 
and provided  that  inflationary pressures  remain 
subdued.  

Votes  for  this  action:  Messrs. Volcker, 

Corrigan, Balles, Forrestal, Keehn, Partee, 
Martin, Rice, Ms.  Seger,  and Mr. Wallich.  
Vote  against  this  action:  Mr.  Black.  (Absent 
and  not voting:  Mr.  Gramley.) 

Mr.  Black dissented  because he  preferred a rebased range  of  4 

to  7 percent  for M1, which he  thought was more likely to  be  consistent 

with both sustained economic  expansion and  progress  towards price  stabil

ity.  In particular, he was  concerned  that  the  higher 8 percent  top  of 

the rebased  range  adopted  by  the  Committee might  tend  to  prolong  the 

process of  reducing M1 growth  to  a noninflationary rate.  

Turning  to  the establishment  of  tentative  ranges  for  1986, 

several members  emphasized  the desirability  of  taking  further action, 

in  line  with previously  stated Committee  intentions,  to  reduce growth 

in money and  credit over  time  to  rates  that  would be  consistent with

7/9-10/85

-16-

sustainable  economic expansion and  reasonable  price  stability.  In that 

context,  a majority of  the  members  favored  an M1  range of  4 to  7 percent 

for  1986.  However,  with varying degrees of  emphasis, a number  of mem

bers  questioned whether  such  a range would prove  adequate  to  sustain 

the  economic  expansion, particularly in  light  of  the  possibility  that 

the  trend  in M1  velocity might be  shifting  lower.  Reference was also 

made  to  the uncertainties  associated with the  lifting of  remaining 

Regulation Q interest  rate  ceilings  early in  1986,  as provided for  in 

current legislation.  One member commented  that  the elimination of  rate 

ceilings  on savings  accounts  could  result  in  rate adjustments  that 

favored  such  accounts  over  M1-type  deposits,  thereby tending  to  restrain 

M1  growth in  relation to  that  of  M2.  However,  the removal  of ceilings 

on regular  NOW accounts  would work in the  other direction.  

With regard  to  the  broader  aggregates,  the members  favored  no 

change in the  tentative  range  for M2  and  a 1/2  percentage  point  reduction 

in  the  upper  limit  of  the  M3  range  compared with  the  1985  ranges  for those 

aggregates.  There was  general agreement  on  the  desirability of  reducing 

the monitoring  range for  total  domestic nonfinancial  debt  by one  percent

age  point,  partly reflecting  an expectation that  its  expansion would be 

tempered  by a drop-off in  the  net  redemption of  equity  shares  that  had 

boosted  corporate debt  substantially over the  past  several quarters.  

Moreover,  credit needs to  finance  the  expansion would  tend  to  grow less 

than  in  1985 if,  as  a number of  members  anticipated,  the  current  account 

deficit did  not  worsen further  and the  gap between  the growth  in domestic 

spending  and  domestic production narrowed or  disappeared.  All of  these

7/9-10/85

-17-

ranges  were believed  to be  consistent with sustained  growth in  the 

economy so  long  as  inflationary pressures  remained  subdued.  However, 

the Committee  recognized  that uncertainties  about  interest  rates  and 

other  factors  that  could  affect  the  velocity of  the various aggregates 

would require  careful  reappraisal  of  the  ranges  at  the  beginning  of 

1986.  In addition, actual  experience  with institutional  and  depositor 

behavior after  the  completion of  deposit  rate deregulation  would need 

to  be  taken into  account  in judging  the  ongoing  appropriateness of  the 

ranges.  

At  the  conclusion  of  its discussion,  the Committee  took  the 

following action to  establish the tentative  ranges  for  1986: 

For 1986  the  Committee  agreed  on  tentative 

ranges  of monetary growth, measured  from the 
fourth  quarter  of  1985  to  the  fourth  quarter of 
1986,  of  4 to  7 percent for  Ml,  6 to 9 percent 
for M2,  and  6 to  9 percent  for M3.  The associated 
range  for  growth in  total  domestic nonfinancial 
debt  was  provisionally set  at  8 to  11 percent  for 
1986.  With respect to  Ml  particularly, the  Committee 
recognized  that  uncertainties  surrounding  recent 
behavior  of velocity would  require  careful  re
appraisal  of  the  target  range  at  the  beginning  of 
1986.  Moreover,  in establishing ranges  for  next  year, 
the  Committee also  recognized that  account would 
need  to be  taken of  experience with institutional 
and  depositor  behavior in  response  to  the  completion 
of  deposit rate  deregulation early in  the year.  

Votes  for  this  action:  Messrs. Volcker, 

Corrigan, Balles,  Black,  Forrestal, Keehn, 
Partee, Rice, and Wallich.  Votes  against 
this action:  Mr.  Martin and Ms.  Seger.  
(Absent and not  voting:  Mr.  Gramley.)

7/9-10/85

-18-

Mr. Martin dissented  because  he  preferred  a somewhat  higher growth 

range  for M1  to  provide for  greater flexibility  if  needed  to  accommodate 

sustained economic  expansion, should  velocity  continue  to  decline  or 

increase  very sluggishly.  Ms.  Seger  dissented  because  she believed  that 

higher growth ranges  were desirable  to  foster  an  acceptable  rate  of 

economic  expansion and  help reduce  financial  strains  in  the  economy.  Both 

Mr.  Martin and Ms.  Seger  saw little  risk under  current  conditions  that 

inflation would  intensify.  

In  the  Committee's  discussion  of  policy  implementation, some 

divergence  of views  was  expressed with  regard  to  the  appropriate opera

tional  approach  for  the weeks immediately ahead.  A majority of  the 

members were  in  favor of  directing  operations,  at  least  initially,  to

ward maintaining the  existing  degree  of  pressure  on  reserve  positions, 

but  others  indicated preferences  for  somewhat  firmer  or  somewhat  easier 

reserve conditions.  The members  agreed  that  current reserve  conditions 

were  likely  to  be associated  with a marked  slowing in  the  growth of  Ml 

during  the  third  quarter, partly  because  the  recent  unusual  surge  in 

demand  deposits would  appear  to  have  satisfied transaction  needs  for 

some  period  ahead.  Growth in  the  broader  aggregates would  also  be 

expected  to  slow from the  pace  in May and  June, partly  because of  the 

prospect  of  some moderation in  the  inflow of  funds to  money market 

mutual  funds  and  to money market  deposit accounts  as  the  interest  paid 

on  such accounts  was  brought into  better alignment with short-term 

market  rates.

7/9-10/85

-19-

Despite  the  outlook for more moderate growth in  the monetary 

aggregates,  notably Ml,  compared with  the  second  quarter,  some members 

were concerned  that  such growth might not slow  sufficiently, and  they 

proposed  some modest  firming  of  reserve conditions  to  help assure  that 

the expansion  of  Ml would moderate  to  within the  Committee's  range  for 

the  second half  of  the year.  A differing  view, which  placed  less 

emphasis  on the  behavior  of  Ml  because of  the  uncertainties  that were 

involved,  stressed the  desirability of  some  easing  of  reserve  conditions 

against  the background  of  ongoing financial  strains  in  some sectors 

and  the  sluggish performance  of  the economy.  

In  keeping with  the  Committee's  usual  practice,  the members 

considered the  question of  possible  intermeeting  adjustments  in the 

degree of  reserve  restraint.  They agreed  as  they had  previously  that 

such adjustments  should  not  be made automatically in response  to  the 

behavior of  the monetary aggregates  alone, but  should  take  account of 

the strength of  economic activity  and  inflationary pressures, domestic 

credit  conditions,  and  the  foreign  exchange  value  of  the dollar.  In 

particular,  the members agreed  that  some  shortfall in  the growth of  Ml 

from expectations, should  it  occur  for  a month or  two,  should not  be 

resisted  and might  indeed  be  desirable  in  the context of  acceptable 

economic  performance.  Conversely,  a tendency  for Ml  growth to  exceed 

expectations  should  be  countered more  promptly, at  least  in  the view of 

some members,  in  light  of  the  rapid  earlier growth  in  transaction 

balances.  The members  also  felt  that  the behavior  of  the dollar  in

7/9-10/85

-20-

foreign exchange markets might well  impose a significant  constraint -

potentially  in  either direction -- with regard  to  possible  adjustments 

in  the  degree of  reserve restraint  over  the  weeks  ahead.  

With regard  to  the  intermeeting  range  for  the  federal  funds 

rate,  which calls  for Committee  consultation when its  boundaries  are 

exceeded  for  a period, it  was suggested  in  the  course  of discussion 

that  a rise  in  the average  rate  to  around  the  upper  end of  the existing 

6 to  10  percent monitoring range  would  imply  reserve  conditions  that 

were  inconsistent  with the  Committee's  objectives  for monetary growth, 

and  that  accordingly the  upper  end might  be  lowered  to  9 percent.  On 

the  other  hand,  some members were  concerned  that  a further decline in 

the  average level  of  the  federal  funds  rate  to  near  the lower end  of 

the  present range  might  also  prove inconsistent  with monetary growth 

objectives  and would therefore  provide  a misleading signal  of  policy 

easing.  On balance, most  of  the members  preferred to  retain the  current 

range  which bracketed  fairly evenly  the  existing  federal  funds  rate.  

At  the  conclusion of  the Committee's  discussion, a majority 

of  the  members indicated  that  they  favored or  could accept  a directive 

that  called for  maintaining  the current degree  of  pressure on  reserve 

positions,  keeping in mind  the possibility of  some  increases  in  those 

pressures  if  growth of  the monetary  aggregates  exceeded  intentions.  

The members expected  such an approach  to  policy implementation to  be 

consistent with growth of  both M2  and M3  at  an annual rate  of  around 

7-1/2  percent  for  the period  from June  to  September.  Over the  same

7/9-10/85

-21-

period  they expected  the expansion  of  Ml  to  slow substantially to  an 

annual  rate of  5 to  6 percent.  The  members  agreed  that  somewhat  lesser 

restraint  on reserve positions  might be  acceptable  in the  event of  sub

stantially slower-than-expected growth in  the monetary aggregates,  while 

somewhat  greater restraint  would be  acceptable  if monetary  growth were 

substantially faster.  It  was  understood that  the need  for  lesser  or 

greater  restraint would be  considered against  the background  of develop

ments relating  to  the  strength of  the business  expansion, inflationary 

pressures,  and  conditions in  domestic  credit  and  foreign  exchange markets.  

The members  agreed  that  the  intermeeting  range  for  the  federal  funds 

rate should be  left at  6 to  10  percent.  

At  the  conclusion of  the meeting,  the following  domestic policy 

directive was  issued  to  the  Federal Reserve  Bank  of  New York: 

The  information reviewed  at  this meeting  suggests 

some  pickup  in  the  expansion  of  economic  activity  in 
recent months  following virtually no growth in  the 
first  quarter.  Total  retail  sales  rose on  balance  in 
April  and May  to  a level  appreciably  above  the average 
for  the  first  quarter, and  housing  starts  held  earlier 
gains  after  rising substantially in the  first  quarter.  
Information  on  business  capital  spending  suggests  further 
growth, though  at  a much less  rapid  pace  than earlier 
in  the economic expansion.  Industrial  production 
declined  slightly in April and May after rising  little 
over  the  first  quarter.  Total nonfarm payroll  employ
ment  increased  at  a somewhat  reduced  pace  in May and 
June with employment  in manufacturing registering 
further declines.  The  civilian  unemployment  rate 
remained at  7.3  percent  in  June, unchanged  since 
February.  Broad measures  of  prices  and wages  appear 
to be  rising at  rates  close  to  those recorded  in  1984.

7/9-10/85

-22-

Since  the  Committee's meeting in May, the  trade

weighted  value of  the  dollar against major foreign 
currencies  has  generally moved within  a relatively 
narrow range but  recently has  declined  to  a level 
below its  April  low.  The merchandise trade deficit  in 
April-May widened  from the first-quarter  rate  as  both 
agricultural  and nonagricultural  exports  fell, while 
imports  remained  close  to  their high first-quarter 
level.  

Ml  expanded very rapidly in May and  June after 
growing  at a moderate pace  in  the  preceding  two months.  
The broader  aggregates also  grew more rapidly in May 
and  June after  slowing appreciably earlier.  From  the 
fourth quarter  of  1984  through June, Ml grew at  a rate 
well  above  the  Committee's  range  for 1985;  M2  increased 
at  a rate  around  the  upper  end  of  its  longer-run range; 
while M3  expanded  at  a rate  in  the upper  half  of  its 
range.  Expansion in total  domestic nonfinancial  debt 
slowed a little  in  the  second  quarter but  remained 
high relative  to  the Committee's  monitoring range 
for  the year.  Interest  rates  have declined  somewhat 
further  since  the May meeting of  the Committee.  

The  Federal Open  Market  Committee seeks  to  foster 

monetary and  financial  conditions that will  help  to 
reduce inflation  further,  promote growth in  output  on 
a sustainable basis,  and  contribute  to  an  improved 
pattern of  international transactions.  In  furtherance 
of  these  objectives  the  Committee at  this  meeting 
reaffirmed  ranges  for  the year  of  6 to  9 percent for 
M2  and 6 to  9-1/2  percent  for M3.  The  associated  range 
for  total  domestic  nonfinancial debt  was  reaffirmed 
at  9 to  12  percent.  With respect  to Ml,  the  base  was 
moved forward  to  the  second  quarter of  1985  and  a range 
was  established  at  an  annual  growth rate  of  3 to  8 
percent.  The  range  takes  account  of  expectations  of 
a return of  velocity growth  toward more  usual  patterns, 
following the  sharp decline  in velocity  during  the 
first half  of  the  year, while also  recognizing  a 
higher  degree of  uncertainty regarding  that  behavior.  
The appropriateness  of  the new range  will continue  to 
be  reexamined  in  the light  of  evidence with respect to 
economic and  financial  developments  including  develop
ments  in foreign exchange  markets.  More generally, the

7/9-10/85

-23-

Committee  agreed  that growth  in  the aggregates may  be 
in  the upper  parts of  their  ranges, depending  on 
continuing developments with  respect to  velocity and 
provided  that  inflationary  pressures remain  subdued.  

For  1986  the  Committee agreed  on tentative  ranges 

of monetary growth, measured  from the fourth  quarter 
of  1985  to  the  fourth  quarter of  1986,  of  4 to  7 percent 
for Ml,  6 to  9 percent for M2,  and  6 to  9 percent  for M3.  
The  associated  range  for growth in  total  domestic  non
financial  debt was  provisionally set  at  8 to  11  percent 
for  1986.  With  respect  to Ml  particularly, the  Committee 
recognized that  uncertainties  surrounding  recent  behavior 
of  velocity would  require careful reappraisal  of  the 
target  range  at  the  beginning of  1986.  Moreover,  in 
establishing  ranges  for next  year,  the  Committee  also 
recognized that  account would need  to  be  taken  of 
experience with  institutional and  depositor  behavior 
in  response  to  the  completion of  deposit  rate  deregulation 
early in  the  year.  

In the  implementation of  policy for  the  immediate 

future, the  Committee  seeks  to  maintain the  existing 
degree of  pressure  on reserve positions.  This  action 
is  expected  to  be  consistent with growth in M2  and M3 
at  an annual  rate  of  around  7-1/2  percent  during  the 
period  from June to  September, and  with a substantial 
slowing of Ml  growth to  an annual rate  of  5 to  6 percent.  
Somewhat  lesser  reserve  restraint might  be  acceptable 
in the event  of  substantially  slower growth of  the 
monetary aggregates while  somewhat  greater  restraint 
would be  acceptable  in  the  event  of  substantially 
higher growth.  In  either case  such  a change would 
be  considered in  the  context of  appraisals  of  the 
strength of  the business  expansion,  progress  against 
inflation, and  conditions in  domestic  credit  and 
foreign exchange markets.  The  Chairman  may call for 
Committee  consultation  if  it  appears  to  the Manager 
for  Domestic  Operations that  pursuit  of  the monetary 
objectives and  related reserve  paths during  the period 
before  the  next meeting is  likely  to  be associated 
with a federal funds  rate  persistently outside a range 
of  6 to  10 percent.

7/9-10/85

-24-

Votes  for  the  short-run operational 
paragraph:  Messrs.  Volcker,  Corrigan,  Balles, 
Forrestal,  Keehn, Partee, Martin, Rice, and 
Wallich.  Votes  against  this  action:  Mr.  Black 
and Ms.  Seger.  (Absent  and  not voting: 
Mr.  Gramley.) 

Mr. Black dissented  because he  believed  some  increase  in  the 

degree of  reserve  pressure was needed  to help assure  an adequate slowing 

of  Ml  growth over  the months  ahead.  Ms.  Seger dissented  because  she 

favored  some  easing  of  reserve  conditions  to help reduce  current financial 

strains,  moderate the  strength  of  the  dollar  in  foreign exchange markets, 

and  promote faster  economic  expansion.

