SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICTS

December  1985

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY  . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . i

First District  - Boston  . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I-

Second District  - New York.  . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .II-1

Third  District  - Philadelphia  .

. . . . . . . . . . . .

. .

III-

Fourth District  - Cleveland  .

.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IV-1

Fifth District  - Richmond  . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. V-l

Sixth District  - Atlanta  . . . .

. . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . VI-1

Seventh District  - Chicago  . . .

.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . VII-I

Eighth District  - St.  Louis.  . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. VIII-1

Ninth District - Minneapolis  .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. XI-1

Tenth District - Kansas  City  .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .X-l

Eleventh  District - Dallas  . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. XI-1

Twelfth District  - San  Francisco  . .

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.XII-1

SUMMARY*

Overview.

The  economy  appears  to  be  growing  slowly  at  best. 

Only  Richmond

describes  its District  economy as  strong,  although  there  is  some  optimism  in

the  reports  from  Philadelphia  and  New  York.  Retail  sales  gains  are  uneven,

and  less-than-robust  Christmas  sales  are  expected.  Auto  sales  are  low  now

that  special  interest  rate  incentives  have  largely  ended. 

Industrial

activity  continues  quite  sluggish  with  few  gains  yet 

from  dollar

depreciation. 

Residential  construction  is  improving  but  non-residential

construction  is  uneven.  Agricultural  prices  remain weak  despite  some  rises

in  meat  prices;  agricultural  land  prices  continue  to  fall  and  farm finances

remain  weak.  Commercial  bank  consumer  and  real  estate  lending  is  rising

further but business  lending  is  declining  in most Districts.

Retail  Sales.

October  retail  sales  other  than  autos  are  mixed,  with  most  Districts

reporting  moderate  year-over-year  gains.  Sales  are  frequently  described  as

strong  for  apparel  and  weak  for  various  hardgoods. 

Inventories  are

generally  at  desired  levels  and  are  being built  cautiously  as  most  retailers

expect  Christmas  sales  to  show  only  moderate  increases  from  1984.  New  car

sales  continue  to  run  well  below  year-ago  levels  in  most  Districts  in

reaction  to  the  end of  most  special  financing.  However,  Richmond  and  Dallas

report  sales were  stronger  than usual  in October.

*Prepared  at  the  Federal Reserve  Bank  of  Cleveland

Manufacturing and Mining.

Industrial  activity  continues  to  be  quite  sluggish.  There  is  little

indication  in  the  District  reports  that  dollar  depreciation  has  resulted  in

higher  prices  or  stronger  demand  for  domestic  producers,  although  Chicago

reports  "limited  evidence  of  increased  orders  for  mechanical  capital

goods."  Defense  goods  producers  report  order  gains  and  rising  production.

Domestic  auto  manufacturers  are  said  to  plan  to  continue  high  production

levels  into  early  1986. 

Production  and  sales  of  heavy  trucks  have

declined. 

Prices  and  sales  of  primary  metals  remain  weak.  Cleveland

reports  continued  weakness  in  machine  tool  orders  and  prices. 

Atlanta

reports  textile  employment  has  stabilized  in  recent  months  after  a  sharp

decline,  and  Richmond  reports  "some  pickup  in  textile  and  apparel  exports"

and  that  a  recent  small  gain  in  textile  employment  is  being  sustained.

Manufacturing  firms  generally  report  prices  of  materials  and  components  are

stable.  Boston  reports  many  firms  are  unable  to  raise  their  own prices  and

large  firms  "are  refusing  to  accept  increases  from  suppliers." 

Inventory

levels  are  generally  considered  satisfactory,  although  Dallas  reports

semiconductor  industry  inventories  are  excessive  and  Cleveland  reports  raw

materials  inventories  falling  sharply. 

San  Francisco  reports  that  the

lumber  industry  in  the  Northwest  continues  to  be  hurt  by  competition  from

the  South  and  British  Columbia,  and  by  low  prices,  even  though  the  price

decline  has  been  smaller  this  year  than  last. 

Coal  production  continues

lower  than  in  1984.  Drilling  activity  in  the  Dallas  District  "continues  to

decline  at  accelerating  rates."

Construction and Real  Estate.

Residential  real  estate  markets  are  doing  well  generally  but  not  in  all

areas. 

Listings  and  sales  of  used  homes  are  rising  and  plans  for

construction and starts  of  new homes  are  increasing.  Mortgage  rate  declines

are  a  source  of  strength,  but  credit  standards  are  being  tightened  by

lenders  and mortgage  insurers,  leading  to  some  concern  that  effective  demand

may  be  crimped.  District  reports  generally  are  moderately  optimistic  about

1986.

Non-residential  property  construction  and  vacancy  rates  are  uneven.

Construction  is  reported  as  still  strong  in  some  parts  of  the  Atlanta,

Chicago,  St.  Louis,  and  Dallas  Districts. 

San  Francisco  reports  high

commercial  vacancy  rates  in  many  areas  are  causing  construction  permits  to

slow.  New  York  reports  that  overall  demand  for  commercial  real  estate

generally  remains  satisfactory  and  that  work  has  recently  begun  on  a  "$10

billion  community  planned  for  the  New  Jersey  waterfront  across  from

Manhattan." 

Chicago  and  Dallas  report  strong  road  building  and  repaving

activity.

Agriculture.

Most  harvests  are  bountiful,  most  agricultural  prices  are  low,  and  farm

financial  difficulties  continue.  Although  wet  weather  has  delayed  the  corn

and  soybean harvest  in  some  parts of  the midwest,  yields  are high  and prices

remain  weak.  Grain  sorghum  yields  are  high.  Cattle  and  hog  prices  are  low

but  have  risen  recently,  and  meat  production  is  lower. 

Atlanta  and

Minneapolis  report  favorable  conditions  for  poultry  producers. 

Cotton

yields  are  expected  to  be  normal  in  Oklahoma  but  high  in  the  Atlanta

District,  and  the  cotton  price  remains  low.  The  Louisiana  sugarcane  crop

has  been  damaged  by  hurricanes. 

Kansas  City  reports  that  continuing

liquidations  and  foreclosures  have  "saturated  the  farm  real  estate  market,"

causing  farmland  prices  to  continue  to  fall  although  very  little  land  is

changing hands.

Commercial  Banking.

Most  Districts  report  increases  in  commercial  bank  consumer  lending,

with  some  noting  it has  been  boosted by  the ending  of  most  special  financing

rates  on  autos  by  automobile  finance  companies. 

Real  estate  lending

continues  to  grow,  partly  because  of  mortgage  rate  reductions.  Business

loan  volume  is  falling  in  most  Districts.  However,  Philadelphia  reports

substantial  growth  in  business  loan  demand,  particularly  "from middle-market

companies  that  do  not  have  convenient  access  to  the  commercial  paper

market."  Kansas  City  reports  agricultural  lending  is flat  or slightly down,

and  Kansas  City  and  Minneapolis  report  continued  banker  concern  about  the

quality of  agricultural credit.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

The  First District economy appears to  be in a holding pattern.  While

retail  sales  continue to  exceed year ago levels, increases have been below

plan in some  cases.  Retailers are  anxious about the  critical Christmas

period.  Manufacturing respondents report  that  sales are  flat, continuing  the

experience of  the past  five  or six months.  One  significant  change has  been a

falling off  in the  demand  for products associated with non-residential

construction.  Price increases  are said  to be negligible.  Manufacturers

expect  1986  to be very similar to  1985.  The First District real estate market

is  healthy, but entering a seasonal slowdown.  Listings fall  short  of demand

for most realtors contacted.  However, the market  for condominiums  is  said  to

be  saturated.

Retail

Retailers in the First District  report  that sales  in October exceeded

those  in October  1984 by 4 to 17  percent;  but for several  contacts increases

were  smaller  than expected.  Merchants attribute their somewhat disappointing

performance to a lack  of  consumer enthusiasm, which they fear will also affect

November and December  results.  However, very early and incomplete November

figures  show sales for  some merchants exceeding plan.

Areas  of  strength in October included video computers,  other home

electronics,  toys,  records and  tapes, high quality ladies'  sportswear, and

womens' accessories.  Furniture was weak.  The atmosphere is highly

competitive, although the prices  of high quality items  are said  to be holding

up  fairly well.  Substantial markdowns have affected margins for  some

respondents.

Inventories are reported to  be at or  below planned levels, except for

one  retailer  that "over-reacted" to  short  supplies in the  last  Christmas

season.  In spite of  favorable current positions,  several chains  said sizable

inventory  reduction  sales were likely in January, given the  current outlook

for Christmas.

Retailers are  increasing staff as usual for the Christmas  season.

Some  reported that low unemployment rates have forced them to offer recruiting

incentives  to current employees,  raise wages,  or reduce  the  quality of  their

new hires  in order  to  staff up.  None of  these adjustments is  said  to pose

serious problems.

Uncertainty about the  volume of  Christmas season sales is pervasive,

although everyone expects sales  to  grow.  According to  one contact,  "we're

holding our  breath and hoping for the best."

Manufacturing

Manufacturing activity in the  First District  is  flat  to down.  Most

respondents  report  that  sales  are about the same  as a year ago or  slightly

lower;  this  situation has  persisted for  some months.  One  contact reports

that  the auto  industry's  demand for materials and  components is  quite strong

but attributes  this  strength to Detroit's ambitious production plans for  the

fourth quarter and questions whether  the  strength will persist.  Another

contact, a manufacturer of  electrical  equipment, reports a softening in  sales

to  the auto industry.  Demand  for housing  related products is said  to be

strong  but  flat.  Demand for products related to nonresidential construction,

I-3

which had been strong, has  recently weakened.  Sales of  a variety of capital

goods are  disappointing for this  stage in an expansion.  Several firms report

that  overseas  subsidiaries are  experiencing stronger sales  than domestic

operations.

Small layoffs  have  recently occurred at  some high technology firms.

However, most of  the firms contacted have adjusted  to current activity levels

and can continue without further cutbacks in personnel.  Although one

respondent will be increasing capital  spending substantially in 1986, most  are

reducing expenditures.  Most  contacts face heavy price competition and have

been unable to raise  their prices;  large firms, in turn, are refusing to

accept  increases  from suppliers.

First  District manufacturers expect  1986  to  be a difficult  year.

While most think their own  firms' performance will be about  the  same as  in

1985,  they seem to  have revised downward their expectations  for  the economy as

a whole.

Real Estate

The New England residential real estate market  remains healthy despite

the start  of  a seasonal slowdown.  Price movements  are mixed.  While  Boston

agents  claim that  prices  are stabilizing,  agents in other parts of  the region

report  that  prices  are still climbing.  Listings, as reported by most, are

short  of  demand.  Multi-family buildings,  in which a family lives in one unit

and rents  out  the  others, are especially popular.  More  people are buying lots

with intentions  of later building, as  they see  appreciation rates out-running

building costs.  Condominiums have  become less  popular.  The  condominium

market  is  said to  be saturated;  as  prices approach those of free  standing

I-4

homes, buyers  are opting for the  latter.  Tighter mortgage qualification

standards may be  hurting some potential  buyers,  particularly first  timers.

New England Economic Project Outlook

The New England Economic Project  (NEEP), a non-profit  corporation

comprised of New England business firms,  government agencies and educational

institutions has  just  released its semi-annual forecast  for  the New England

economy.  The  forecast  is  based on state models  developed by a local-area

consulting  firm and managed by NEEP  representatives.

According to  the NEEP forecast, New England's employment growth will

be  considerably slower in 1986  than in the  past  two  years.  Even so,  growth is

expected to be  sufficient  to maintain the  region's  unemployment rate  at  its

current level of  roughly 4 1/2  percent.  New England's growth will also

continue  to  surpass the  nation's.

All of  New England's employment growth  in  1986 will  come from  the

nonmanufacturing  sector.  Services,  trade and finance will continue to  expand

at  healthy  rates.  Construction employment,  on the other hand, is  forecast  to

level off.  Manufacturing employment will be  flat, with little change expected

for most  individual manufacturing industries.

II-1

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

The  Second  District  economy has  maintained  its  improved  tone  in

recent  weeks.  A higher  percentage of  purchasing managers  reports  better

business  conditions,  and  consumer  spending  has  recovered  from  its

September  slowdown.  Residential  building  remains  strong  while  demand  in

the  commercial  real  estate  market  is  satisfactory.  Small  banks  in  the

District  note  an  increasing  use  of  fixed  fees  rather  than  compensating

balances  in  the pricing  of business  loan commitments.

Consumer Spending

Consumer  spending  regained  momentum  in  October  following  a

September  slowdown  attributed  to  Hurricane  Gloria  and  unseasonably  warm

weather.  The  average  over-the-year  rise  of  8  percent  in  October  was

slightly  below  expectations,  however,  and  gains  varied  considerably

across  the  District. 

Although  department  stores  catering  to  more

affluent  consumers  indicated  that  sales  met  or  exceeded  expectations,

some  discount  and  suburban  chains  posted  disappointing  gains. 

In

general,  apparel  and  other  soft  goods  sold  well  but  electronics and home

furnishings  remained weak.  Early November  sales  show  little  change.  One

retailer  is  concerned  that  he  will  lose  business  if  consumers  are

diverted  toward  car  purchases  by  low-cost  financing.  Another  merchant,

stuck with slow-selling hard goods  since mid-summer, plans  to  intensify  a

television advertising campaign he began in August.

Inventories  that  were  trimmed  to  desired  levels  last  summer

began  to climb  during  the  September  slowdown.  Although  several merchants

managed  to  reduce  stocks  to  planned  levels  by  the end  of October, others

report  an  excess.  Inventories  are  currently being  increased  to  meet  the

II-2

Christmas  demand,  but  stores  that  have  had  abrupt  sales  shortfalls  are

adopting a conservative posture.  Since  the 1985  Christmas  season  will  be

a  week  shorter  than  1984,  some  retailers  will  push  Christmas  items

earlier than usual.

Business  Activity

Second  District  economic  activity  improved  somewhat  in  recent

weeks.  A  substantial  percentage  of  purchasing  managers  reported  more

favorable  business  conditions  in  September.  Most  firms  also  experienced

stable  or  improved  production  and  new  orders  in  October.  Inventories

generally  remain  satisfactory  despite  some  increase  in  the  share  of

managers  reporting higher levels.

The  outlook  for  the  District's  manufacturing  sector  is  unclear.

On the  negative  side,  several  firms have  recently announced  plans  to move

from  or  reduce  their  operations  in  the  region.  One  of  the  largest  such

reductions  could  occur  over  the  next  two  years  at  an  auto  parts

manufacturer.  While  apparently  still  open  to  discussion,  this  move  to  a

lower-cost  area  could  affect  some  1100  District  workers. 

More

positively,  General  Motors  plans  a  $340  million  expansion  program  at  a

car  engine  factory. 

Elsewhere  in  the  District,  ground  was  recently

broken  for  a  $125  million  state-of-the-art  chemical  plant.  And  an  Air

Force  contract  recently  awarded  to  a  District  aerospace  firm  should

provide additional  employment.

By  far  the  biggest  new project  announced  for  the  District  is  a

$10  billion  community  planned  for  the  New Jersey  waterfront  across  from

Manhattan.  Work  was  recently  begun  on  the  first phase  of  this  project:

four  high-rise  apartment  buildings  and  a  shopping  center.  By  1995  this

new  community  is  expected  to  include  hotels,  office  buildings,  parks,

cultural  facilities,  a  large  marina,  waterfront  stores  and  restaurants,

and up  to  9000 residential units.

Construction and Real Estate

II-3

Residential  construction  remains  in  excellent  condition  and  a

boom continues  in  several parts  of  the District.  Because  of  the  cyclical

nature  of  the  industry,  however,  some  homebuilders  are  concerned  that

this  prolonged period  of  strong  residential  building  activity  is  due  for

a reversal.  As yet  there  are no  indications  of  an  imminent  slowdown, and

applications  for  additional  residential  development  are  still  being

presented  to  local  planning  boards.  Except  for  the  usual  slackening  due

to  winter  weather  conditions,  most  observers  anticipate  no  decline  in

activity for at  least six months.

The  District's  commercial  real  estate market  appeared  stable  in

recent  weeks  with  only  minor  changes  reported  in  rents  and  vacancy

rates.  While  few  large-scale  transactions  are  taking  place,  overall

demand  generally  remains  satisfactory  except  in  some  parts  of  northern

New Jersey.  There  is still  concern, however,  about  the  outlook  in  lower

Manhattan  and  Fairfield County  where  older  office  space  is being vacated

by tenants moving to newly-constructed buildings.

Financial Developments

Small  banks  report  that  business  borrowers  now pay  for  at  most

ten  percent  of  unused  loan  commitments  through  compensating  balances.

This  is a much  lower percentage  than  five years  ago,  and  it  is  expected

to  decline  further.  Several  banks  suggest  that  many  corporations  prefer

to  pay  an  explicit,  fixed  commitment  fee  rather  than  incur  the

fluctuating  opportunity cost  of  compensating balances.  However, one bank

notes  that  it  has  few  formal  compensating  balance  arrangements,  yet  it

still encourages  many of  its  customers  to maintain demand deposit balances.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT  - PHILADELPHIA

Economic conditions  in the Third District  in  late October and early

November appear to  be  improving.  Manufacturing activity  is turning up  after

several flat months and retailers  report sales  in  line with optimistic

expectations.  Consumer and commercial  lending is growing at a slightly faster

pace now than earlier  in the fall.

Expectations about Third District conditions are mixed,  although generally

optimistic.  Manufacturers  look  for  business to  improve and plan to step up

capital spending over the next  six months.  Retailers are somewhat uncertain

about the strength of upcoming holiday sales  at this  point; nevertheless, they

predict healthy sales  for 1985  as  a whole.  Bankers expect commercial loan

demand  to remain strong  for the fourth quarter and they say that current

consumer  loan demand  levels  can be maintained or increased with possible

interest rate reductions.

MANUFACTURING

Industrial  activity in  the Third District  is  picking up, according  to the

latest Business Outlook  Survey.  Thirty-six percent  of  the companies

participating in  the November  survey report increasing  business while only  11

percent  say that their business is  slowing down.  More nondurable goods

producers  indicate  improvement  than do durable  goods producers, who report

fairly steady  activity.

Manufacturers note  improvement  in  the levels  of new orders and  shipments,

but report little  change  in employment.  Industrial  prices  in  the Third District

III-2

are stable;  over three-fourths  of  the manufacturers polled  say neither  input

costs nor  output prices have  changed this month.

Third District manufacturers  are generally optimistic about the near

future.  A third of the November  survey respondents expect the current  level of

activity to  continue over the next  six months,  and about half anticipate  further

growth.  Manufacturers  expect increases  in new orders and  shipments, and are

planning to  step up  capital spending.  Durable goods makers, however, foresee

some weakening in  employment.

RETAIL

Third District  retailers  report that October sales  fell  slightly below

expectations, but  indications  are that  a rebound had taken hold  by mid-November.

As  of the third weekend of the month, sales for 1985  year-to-date generally

conformed to earlier  forecasts of an  8-12  percent increase over  1984.

Philadelphia area retailers  attribute the October dip  in  sales to a strike that

kept  the city's two major newspapers out of  circulation for more than a month,

disrupting advertising  and the distribution of promotional inserts.  Another

factor cited  for weak October and early November  sales  is abnormally mild

weather which has held down demand for  seasonal apparel.

As  the Christmas  selling season approaches,  Third District  retailers are

stepping up promotional efforts  that, they say, are necessary to maintain store

traffic.  Department store and general merchandise executives  are still

uncertain about prospects  for holiday sales,  and are reluctant to make forecasts

until  they see  post-Thanksgiving results.  Some merchants have expressed

concern that consumers may have reached their  limit of  comfort on  installment

debt, and that this may dampen end-of-year  sales.  One major chain, however,

reports that  credit purchases are growing as  a percentage of sales.

III-3

FINANCE

Total  loan volume at  large Third District banks  rose just over  1 percent

from September to  October, reaching a level  15  percent above that of October

1984.  Commercial and  industrial loan volume also rose at a similar rate, and

now stands  17  percent above its  year-ago level.  Third District banks say that

loan demand continues  to be strong  from middle market companies  that  do not  have

convenient access  to  the commercial  paper market.  Demand is  also high for

receivables financing  and other types of secured  loans.  Bankers  expect

commercial loan  demand to remain strong through the fourth quarter but do not

expect loan growth to match the third quarter's pace.

Consumer loan volume  increased approximately 1.5  percent in October to

about  18  percent above  its year-ago  level.  Some Third District  banks report

that demand  for consumer  installment  loans has  been very  responsive to  lower

interest rates and promotional efforts  and that further reductions  in  rates may

be made  in  the near  future.

Local  bank economists have scaled back their predictions of growth for the

next two  quarters.  Consequently, they have  lowered their interest rate

forecasts  for the next  six months.  Their  predictions now range from a general

increase of up to 50  basis points to drops of  50  basis points or more  in  yields

on Treasury securities  of  all maturities.  They also expect  a comparable drop  in

the federal funds  rate.

IV-1

FOURTH  DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary.

The  Fourth  District  economy  remains  lackluster.  The  unemployment  rate

remains  high  and  employment  shows  little  growth.  Retail  sales  growth  is

positive  but not  robust.  Manufacturing activity  remains  flat  with  the  steel

and  machine  tool  industries  continuing  in  difficulty.  House  sales  are

strengthening  and  builders  plan  to  step  up  construction.  Commercial  bank

loan demand  remains  moderate.

Labor Market Conditions.

Labor  market  conditions  in 

the 

Fourth  District  remain  mixed.

Unemployment  rates  range  widely  around  Ohio's  current  rate  of  9.2%  (s.a.),

from  as  low  as  about  4.5%  in  Lexington,  Ky.  to  around  20%  in  some  coal

mining  regions  of  southeastern  Ohio  and  eastern  Kentucky.  Manufacturing

employment  shows  little  net  change  in  recent  months. 

A  survey  of

manufacturing  firms  in  the  Cincinnati  area  indicates  that,  on  balance,  they

expect  a slight  decline  in  their  employment  in  1986.

Retail  Sales.

Retail  sales  in  the  Fourth  District  improved  in  October  for  most

non-auto  retailers,  but  sales  growth  was  quite  mixed  within  the  District.

Year-to-year  growth  rates  of  7%  to  9%  were  commmon  in  the  southern

IV-2

half  of  Ohio  (Cincinnati),  but  nearer  0%  to  4% in  the  northern  portions  of

the  state  (Akron,  Cleveland,  Toledo,  and  Youngstown). 

Sales  of  apparel,

particularly  women's  apparel,  showed  relatively  strong  gains  between

September  and  October,  while  most  hardgoods  sales  are  still  moderate  or

declining.  One  department  store  analyst  anticipates  "near-double  digit

rates  of  increase  for  the  Christmas  selling  period",  although  in  general,

retailers  are  only guardedly optimistic  over  holiday selling prospects.

Similar  to  the  national  market,  new-car  sales  in  this  District  are down

so  far  in  the  fourth  quarter  because  of  exceptionally  high  third-quarter

sales.  Sales  of  larger  models  are  especially  soft.  Import  car  sales  are

reported  strong  and  getting  stronger.  Truck  sales  are  moderate,  which  is

not  unusual  for  this  area.  Large  inventories  of  used  cars  accumulated  from

third  quarter  trade-ins are  beginning to  thin out.

Manufacturing and Mining.

Manufacturing  activity  in  the  District  is  flat while  coal  mining  remains

depressed.  On  balance,  contacts  indicate  industrial  production  is  flat  or

up  slightly,  new  orders  are  down,  and  backlogs  are  falling.  Manufacturers

are  holding  employment  steady,  although  one  contact  reported  increasing

overtime  being  worked  in  his  area.  Raw  materials  inventories  are  falling

sharply  while  finished  goods  inventories  are  flat. 

Prices  paid  by

manufacturers  for  materials are unchanged.

In  the  steel  industry,  import  competition  continues  to  hold  down

domestic  sales  and  prices.  One  senior  executive asserts  that  it  will  take  a

very  large  depreciation of  the  dollar  to  get  a  significant  price  increase  in

basic  steel. 

A  major  steelmaker  in  Chapter  11  bankruptcy  recently

negotiated  a  16%  compensation  cut  with  its  union,  ending  a  98-day  strike.

IV-3

An  aluminum  industry  executive  reports  that  turmoil  in  the  tin  market  has

spilled  over  into  additional  downward  pressure  on  already  low  aluminum

prices.

Producers  of  machine  tools  continue  to  report  weak  orders  and  low

prices.  Employment  at  many  firms  remains well  below its  pre-recession peak,

and  one  firm  expects  to  cut  employment  further  next  year  unless  orders

improve  quickly. 

Competition  from  imported  machine  tools  remains  very

strong.  Machine  tool  orders  are  weak  also  because  an  increasing  share  of

capital  spending  is  for computers  and other  information processing  equipment.

A  producer  of  components  for  heavy  trucks  reports  North  American

production  of  heavy  trucks  and  buses  is  down  about  9.5%  in  1985;  the  firm

expects  it  to  fall  another  6% or  7% in  1986.  A major  diversified  producer

of  components  for  capital  goods  reports  all  lines  of  business  are  "on  hold"

except  for  strength  in defense  goods.

Coal  production  remains  low  and  the  outlook  for  the  District  coal

industry weak.

Housing.

The  optimism  evident  in  District  housing  markets  last  month  continues

unabated.  Builders,  who  had  been  cautious  and  waiting  for  lower  mortgage

rates,  are  now  stepping  up  construction  plans.  District  builders  expect

housing demand  to  rise  steadily  in  coming  months  if  mortgage  rates  continue

to  ease.  The  confluence  of  lower  mortgage  rates,  further  income  advances,

the  availability  of  state  of  Ohio-subsidized  mortgage  funds,  and  retention

of  housing's  favored  status  in  pending  tax  reform  legislation has  led  to  a

consensus  among  builders,  mortgage  lenders,  and  realtors  that  favorable

housing conditions  should  prevail  through at  least  mid-1986.

IV-4

Realtors  in  the  District  report  a  resurgence  in  both  listings  and

closings  in  recent  months. 

Particularly  strong  sales  are  reported  for

Columbus,  Dayton,  and  Cincinnati.  However,  realtors  are  uncertain  how  much

the  recent  tightening  of  private  mortgage  insurance  standards  by  lenders

will  reduce  the  number  of  prospective  house  buyers.

According  to  a major  mortgage  lender, mortgage  loan  volume remains  lower

than  expected at  the  current  level  of  mortgage  rates,  because  many  potential

borrowers  are  waiting  for  even  lower  rates.  This  lender  continues  to  sell

all  of  its  fixed  rate  mortgages  in  the  secondary  mortgage  market.  Like  a

growing  number  of  midwestern  lenders,  this  lender  may  begin  to  retain

shorter-term  fixed  rate  mortgages  in  its  loan  portfolio  if  it  decides  that

prepayments  of  shorter-term  mortgages  will  be  substantially  less  than  on

30-year mortgages.

Commercial  Banking.

Overall  loan  demand  at  District  banks  remains  moderate.  Declines  in

commercial  and  industrial  loans  are  being  more  than  offset  by  gains  in  real

estate  and  consumer  installment  loans.  Lower  interest  rates  are  helping  to

improve  the  demand  for  real  estate  loans.  Consumer  installment  lending  at

banks  has  received  a  boost  from  the  end  of  the  cut-rate  financing  through

auto  dealers,  even  though car  sales  have  declined  significantly.

Contacts  anticipate  a  small  pickup  in business  lending  primarily because

of  seasonal  factors.  While  consumer  loan  demand  is  expected  to  remain  good,

the  rate  of  growth is  expected  to  decline  in  the  months  ahead.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Overview

Most  reports  from  around  the  Fifth  District  suggest  that  economic

and  business  activity  remains  quite  strong.  Seasonal  factors  are  causing

some  churning of  employment  activity, and  special  factors such  as  the  end  of

the  automobile  financing  opportunities  of  late  summer  and  early  fall  are

also  causing  some  confusion.  Nonetheless,  employment,  retail  sales,  con-

struction,  and  housing  sales  are  all  reported,  on  balance,  to  be holding  at

quite  high  levels.  Retail  sales  seem  to  be  running well  ahead  of  national

trends,  with  experience  varying  significantly  across  product  lines  and

regions.  District  employment  has  drawn  recent  support  from  construction,

government,  and  to  a lesser  extent  from manufacturing,  sufficient  to  offset

seasonal  losses  in  agriculture related  areas and  tourism services.

Manufacturing

Manufacturing  activity  in  the  District,  after  leveling  out  in  the

past  few months,  is  showing  some  signs  of  trying  to  bounce  off  of  the  bottom

reached  last  summer.  Several District  states have  experienced  manufacturing

employment  gains  lately, and  even where employment  shows continued weakness,

average  weekly  hours  of  production  workers  has  turned  up  sharply.  The

modest  gains  achieved  in  the  textile,  apparel,  and  furniture  industries  a

month ago  are  being held,  and  in  some  cases  even built  upon.  Some  pickup  in

textile and  apparel exports  has  developed of  late providing  some  support  for

those  industries,  while  in  the  furniture  group,  strong  retail  sales  are

beginning  to  feed  back  into  production  gains.  Another  encouraging  note  is

V-2

found  in  the attitude  of District manufacturers concerning  current  inventory

levels.  Although  there does  not  seem to  have been any significant  change  in

current  stocks,  present  levels  appear  to  be  viewed  as  about  right.  For

quite  some  time,  most  District  manufacturers  had  found  existing  inventory

levels excessive.

Coal  production continues  to  run behind  last  year's  levels  despite

high  rates  of  consumption and  improved export  demand.  In  the  Fifth District,

production  for  the  year  is  running  more  than  5 percent  behind  1984  levels

(compared  to  about  3  percent  nationwide),  despite  improved  production  in

Virginia.

Consumer Spending

Consumer  spending  is  reported  to  be  making  major  gains  around  the

District.  An  important  factor  seems  to  be  that  automobile  sales  continue

strong,  despite  the  end  of  the  manufacturers'  attractive  financing  pro-

motions.  Car  sales  are  down,  to  be  sure,  but  remain at  what would  normally

be  considered  quite  healthy  levels.  Spending  patterns  in  other  product

lines  are  being  affected  by  seasonal  and  weather  factors.  Warm weather  in

much of  the District  has put  a damper  on  sales  of  fall clothing,  for  instance.

Most  general merchandise lines  continue  to move well, however,  as  do building

materials,  food,  furniture,  and appliances.

Housing and  Construction

The  construction  industry  continues  to  lend  considerable  strength

to  the  level  of  District  business  activity.  Although  recent  changes  in  the

level  of  activity  vary  around  the  District,  our  impression  is  that  on

balance  construction  has  at  least  held  its  own  over  the  past  several weeks,

and  may have even strengthened  somewhat.  In  addition, sales  of  houses,  both

new  and  existing,  continue  to  be  very  strong  in  most  areas.  In  Virginia,

for  instance,  single  family  dwellings  under  contract  in  October  were  nearly

3  percent  ahead  of  September,  and  more  than  21  percent  ahead  of  October

1984.  Year  to  date  the  gain  has  been more  than  13  percent.

The  Financial Sector

Financial  institutions  report  some  pickup  in  consumer  installment

loan  demand  since  the  end  of  the  financing  incentives  offered  by  the  auto

manufacturers  earlier  in  the  year.  That  pickup,  however,  is  generally

described  as  slight.  More  generally  consumer  loan  demand  is  moderate,  and

relatively  stable.

VI-1

SIXTH  DISTRICT  - ATLANTA

The  weather  has  combined  with  some  other  factors  to  cloud  the  economic

picture  of the  Southeast  economy  in  the  fall  As  summarized  by  the  broad unemployment

rate  yardstick,  the  regional  economy  weakened  somewhat  in  September.  With  the  ending

of  cheap  auto  financing  deals,  car-buying  plummeted  in  October,  pulling  down  consumer

spending.  Total  consumer  borrowing  has  slowed  as  buyers'  appetites  apparently  have

been  temporarily  satiated.  Construction  activity  indicators  show  that  sector  rebounding

in  response  to  easing  credit  conditions.  The  pace  of  tourism  has  been  uneven  and  below

last  year's  Fair-boosted  levels  in  some  states,  and  wet  weather  has  further  depressed

farm  revenue  estimates,  particularly  in  Louisiana.

Employment  and  Industry.  Labor  markets  continued  to  weaken  in  September,

with  the  District  unemployment  rate  edging  upward  to  8.1  percent.  Total  employment

dropped,  moderately, 

for 

the  first  time  since  June.  However, 

trends  in  factory

employment  are  little  changed  since  the  last  reporting  period.  Textile  employment,

while  down  sharply  from  a  year  ago,  has  stabilized  in  recent  months.  Textile  industry

contacts  are  encouraged  by  the  recent  weakening  of  the  dollar  but  they  look  to  the

protectionist  measures  now  in  Congress  for  fundamental  relief  from  import  pressure.

Employment  growth 

in  the  region's  auto  assembly  and  parts  plants  has  plateaued

temporarily,  but  industry  spokesmen  are  encouraged  by  the  planned  renovation  of  an  auto

assembly  plant  in  Atlanta  that  will  add  900  jobs  and  the  selection  of  a Tennessee  site  for

a  major  new  assembly  plant.  Estimates  indicate  the  latter  facility  will provide  6,000  jobs

directly  and  an  additional  14,000  support jobs  at  parts suppliers'  plants.  At  11  percent  in

September,  Louisiana  continues  to  have  the  highest  unemployment  rate  in  the  region.

The  petrochemical  and  oil  field  machinery  industries  continue  to suffer,  with  the  latter

losing  an  additional  2,400  jobs  in  the  year  ending in  September.  Southeastern  timbermen

VI-2

expect  lumber  and  wood  prices  to  remain  depressed 

in  the  year  ahead  despite  the

encouraging  building  outlook  suggested  by  falling  mortgage  interest  rates.  Canadian

import  pressure  is  likely  to  continue  keeping  prices  below  break-even  levels  for  many

domestic  producers.

Consumer  Spending.  Most  merchants  posted  moderate  gains 

in  October

although  some  stores,  including  a  large  national  chain,  fell  short  of  October  1984  sales

levels.  On  a year-to-date  basis,  sales  activity  remains  above  last year's  levels throughout

the  region,  with  women's  and  children's  apparel,  electronics,  appliances,  and  jewelry  the

best  selling  items.  Retailers  generally  are  projecting  only  moderate  gains  in  year-end

holiday  sales  and  are  consequently  holding  leaner  inventories  relative  to  1984,  when

holiday  sales  were  not  as  strong  as  expected.  October  car  sales  in  most  areas  of  the

region  were  off  sharply  from  October  1984  and  September  1985 

levels.  During

September,  more  cars  were  registered  than  in  any  other  month  in  the  1980s.

Construction.  Residential  housing  markets  are  slowing  as  usual  as  winter

approaches,  but  sales  levels  are  above  those  at  this  time  last  year,  probably  because  of

lower  mortgage  rates.  The  strong  economic  performances  of  Atlanta  and  Nashville  are

reflected  in  their  healthy,  migration-induced  single-family  home  sales,  and  projections

are  for  a  continuation  of  high  sales  levels.  Meanwhile,  the  Miami  market  is  also showing

notable  growth  over  last  year  and  the  outlook  is  favorable,  while  the  performance  and

outlook  for  Louisiana  and  Mississippi  are  poor.  Office  construction  activity  also  has

maintained  its  mixed  growth  course.  Completion  of  new  space  has  led  to  what  are

thought  to  be  temporary  increases  in  vacancy  rates  in  Tampa  and  Orlando  and  to  a  more

lasting  increase  in  Miami.  An  unusually  low  vacancy  rate  makes  Birmingham  a  good

market  for  new  construction,  and  the  Nashville  retail  market  is  expected  to  boom  in  the

next year.  The  Atlanta  market  keeps  zooming  along.

VI-3

Financial  Services. 

The  growth  rate  in 

loan  demand  continues  to  trend

downward  for  a  sample  of  large  commercial  banks  in  the  Southeast.  October's  growth  in

total  loans,  although  still  strong,  represents  the  continuation  of  an  unbroken  pattern  of

softening  growth  since  January.  Both  consumer  and  real  estate  lending  account  for

recent  weaknesses  which  follow  unprecedented  high  growth  in  such lending  earlier  in  this

economic  expansion.

Tourism.  Consumer  purchases  of  travel  services  in  the  Southeast  do  not  seem

to  have  accelerated  appreciably  in  the  fall,  although  the  reports  available  indicate  that

air  travel  increased  in  September  at  most  regional  airports.  Auto  travel  fell  in  both

September  and  October  in  most  District  states,  although  sharp  declines  in  Louisiana,

Alabama,  and  Mississippi  no  doubt  reflect  the  unusually  high  levels  of  auto  travel  last

year  in  conjunction  with  the  World'  Fair.  Attraction  attendance  showed  little  growth.

State  parks,  for  example,  had  fewer  visitors  in  October,  and  most  private  attractions

surveyed  had  only  modest  gains. 

In  the  lodgings  sector,  activity  was  mixed,  and  hotel

occupancies  in  several  markets,  including  Orlando,  remain  extremely  depressed.

Agriculture.  Low  market  prices  continue  to  dim  revenue  prospects  for  District

crop  farmers.  Louisiana  farmers  have  had  to  cope  additionally  with  multiple  hurricane

damage.  Apparently,  the  sugarcane  crop  suffered  most,  with  its  projected  yield  falling

by  one-twelfth  from  earlier  estimates.  Prospective  regional  production  of  grain  sorghum

and  cotton  is  the  highest  in  this  decade;  yields  of  other  major  crops  are  also  generally

favorable  throughout  the  region.  The  cattle,  pork,  and  egg  industries  are  experiencing

low  prices  and poor  returns  but the  poultry  meat producers  enjoy  profitable  conditions.

VII-1

SEVENTH  DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.  Recent  developments  suggest  a  relatively  stable  near-term  outlook  for  business

activity  in  the  District--no  new  vigor  and  no  significant  setbacks.  Growth  of  total  employment

in  the  District  continues  to  trail  the  U.S.  Auto  and  light  truck  output  are  expected  to  remain

strong  into  1986.  Steel  production  and  orders  continue  at  disappointing  levels,  with  strength

mainly  in  motor  vehicles,  appliances,  and  construction,  and  at  service  centers.  Demand  for

most  types  of  capital  goods  remains  weak--not  getting  worse,  but  not  improving  either.

Residential,  commercial,  and  highway  construction  are  strong,  but  generally  far  short  of  past

peaks.  Sales  of  suburban  industrial  buildings  have  picked  up.  Inventories  are  judged  to  be

fairly  lean.  General  merchandise  sales  recently  have  been  sluggish.  Modest  recoveries  in

grain  and  livestock  prices  in  recent  weeks  have  been  encouraging,  but  far  from  sufficient  to

alter  the  distressed  conditions  facing  the  District  agricultural  sector.

St.  Lawrence  Seaway.  Round-the-clock  repair  work  on  the  53-year  old  Welland  Canal  allowed

vessels  to  resume  passage  of  this  section  of  the  St.  Lawrence  Seaway  on  November  7.  A  line  of

waiting  vessels  had  grown  since  October  14  when  a  150-foot  concrete  section  of  a  lock  wall

collapsed.  The  24-day  cutoff  caused  consternation  among  ship  operators,  shippers,  sailors,  and

terminal  employees  directly  affected,  but  no  significant  wider  impact  on  output  and  employment

in  the  District.  Attractiveness  of  the  Seaway  for  shippers  is  limited  by  the  winter  closing,

bottlenecks  at  locks  in  peak  periods,  availability  of  improved  and  often  cheaper  and  faster

alternative  means  of  transport,  limits  on  size  of  vessels  which  increase  costs,  and

vulnerability  to  delays  caused  by  accidents  or  breakdowns.  The  Seaway  has  never  played  the

major  role  envisaged  for  it  when  it  opened  in  1959.

Motor  Vehicles.  Auto  sales  fell  sharply  as  expected  in  October,  after  being  boosted  to

record  levels  in  September  by  auto  makers'  buyer  incentive  programs.  Inventories,  very  low  at

the  end  of  September,  have  been  increased  to  more  normal  levels.  Domestic  auto  makers  plan

high  production  levels  into  next  year.  Truck  sales  continue  to  set  records,  but  the  strength

VII-2

is  in  light-duty  models,  especially  imports.  Sales  of  heavy-duty  trucks  have  declined,  and

growth  of  demand  for  medium  trucks  has  slowed.

Steel.  Total  demand  for  steel  continues  slow.  Buying  by  heavy  capital  goods  producers

remains  soft.  Strength  is  concentrated  in  motor  vehicles,  appliances,  and  construction.

Shipments  to  steel  service  centers  also  continue  strong,  as  steel  users  try  to  hold  lower

inventories.  Major  steel  producers,  whose  steel  operations  have  been  at  unprofitable  levels,

are  attempting  to push  through  price  increases.

Capital  Goods.  Orders  for  most  types  of  mechanical  business  equipment  are  still  slow.

Oil  development  gear  and  food  processing  equipment  are  off  substantially  from  last  year.  Farm

equipment  remains  severely  depressed.  An  airline  recently  announced  a  "record" order  for

aircraft,  but  the  only  firm  order  was  for  20  aircraft  to  be  delivered  starting  in  the  fall  of

1986.  As  a  result  of  the  decline  in  the  foreign  exchange  value  of  the  dollar  since  February,

some  District  equipment  manufacturers  are  receiving  inquiries  from  abroad  again  after  a  long

lapse.  Although  there  is  only  limited  evidence  yet  of  increased  orders  for  mechanical  capital

goods  as  a  result  of  the  lower  dollar,  one  District  company  reported  that  some  orders  are  being

placed  with  domestic  suppliers  for  types  of  machinery  which  had  previously  been  ordered  abroad,

in  response  to  the  shift  in  relative  prices.

Nonresidential  Construction.  Over  the  past  year,  and  since  the  end  of  recession  in  1982,

nonresidential  building  has  risen  more  vigorously  in  the  District  than  in  the  nation,  despite

weakness  in  Iowa,  but remains  far  below  the  good  levels  of  the  1970s.  The  rise  in  Michigan  has

been  strongest.  Commercial  construction,  mainly  stores  and  office  buildings,  has  accounted  for

much  of  the  increase  in  activity.  Office  vacancies  are  large  and  growing  as  new  buildings  are

completed.  However,  new  starts  on  major  office  buildings  in  downtown  Chicago  are  expected.

Commercial  mortgage  rates  have  eased  about  1/4  percentage  point  since  September,  to  11  percent

on  10-year  loans  and  11-1/2  percent  on  15-years  loans.  The  resale  market  for  smaller

industrial  and  warehouse  properties  in  suburban  areas  of  Chicago  has  strengthened  significantly

in  recent  months.  Overbuilding  in  industrial  parks  is  being  absorbed  rapidly.  But

VII-3

construction  of  large  manufacturing  buildings  is  at  a  low  level,  except  for  motor  vehicle

assembly  plants  and  parts  plants  of  domestic  and  Japanese  companies.  Highway  construction,

mostly  repaving,  continues  strong.

Residential  Building.  Construction  of  housing  has  continued  to  recover  in  the  District,

but  is  still  only  about  half  of  the  pace  of  1978.  Recovery  has  been  uneven,  with  Michigan  up

most  strongly,  and  Iowa  weakest.  Used  home  sales,  which  did  not  fall  off  as  sharply  as  new

homes  in  the  recession,  are  highest  ever  (number  of  units  as  well  as  dollars)  at some  large

realtors.  Residential  mortgage  rates  have  eased  slightly.  Lenders  and  mortgage  insurers  are

applying  tighter  standards,  but credit  is  readily  available  for  qualified  buyers.  Last  year's

market  was  dominated  by  first-time  buyers.  This  year  more  sales  have  reflected  people  "trading

up".  In  the  Chicago  area,  there  has  been  a strong  rise  in  apartment  construction,  but  from  a

low  base  and  not  enough  to  approach  past  peaks.

Consumer  Spending.  Major  District  retailers  report  continued  sluggish  sales  of  general

merchandise.  Inventories  are  mostly  within  a  normal  range.  Appliance  sales  have  been  good.

Airline  traffic  has  flattened,  and  excess  capacity  has  led  to  severe  and  widespread  price

cutting.  Increases  in  prices  paid  by  consumers  generally  remain  low,  but  rates  for  auto  and

home  owners'  insurance  are  rising  at  least  5-6  percent  this  year  in  most  areas,  and  much  more

in  some  localities.

Agriculture.  Lower  meat  production  and  an  unusually  heavy  movement  of  grain  under  price

support  loan  with  the  Commodity  Credit  Corporation  account  for  most  of  the  recent  upturn  in

farm  commodity  prices.  Corn  and  soybean  production  estimates  for  District  states  were  revised

upward  again  in  November.  Corn  production  is  projected  up  16  percent  from  last  year  and

soybean  production  up  24  percent.  However,  wet  weather  continues  to  delay  completion  of  the

fall  harvest.  Hardest  hit  areas  include  Iowa,  Michigan,  and  Wisconsin.  Some  yield  losses  will

likely  result,  inflicting  more  adversity  on  the  financially-stressed  farmers  affected  by  the

delays.  But  any  weather-related  yield  losses  will  not  materially  alter  the  fundamental

situation  of  excess  grain  supplies.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary.

Little  change  in  business  conditions  is  expected  through  next  April.  In

the  third  quarter,  District  nonfarm  employment  grew  faster  than  in  the

nation  despite  a  regional  decline  in  manufacturing  employment.  Residential

construction  activity  increased  in  the  third  quarter,  while  nonresidential

construction  declined. 

After  heavy  consumer  spending  in  August  and

September,  District  retail  sales  declined  in  October. 

District  lending

activity  in  August  through  October  was  characterized  by  strong  consumer  and

slugglish  commercial  lending.  Record  yields  for  most  District  crops  were

recorded,  despite  heavy  November  rains  that  delayed  the  completion  of  the

harvest  in  some  areas.

Outlook.

Slightly  more  than  half  of  the  240  District small businesses  surveyed  in

October expect  business  conditions  to  be  about  the  same  through  April  1986.

Although  42.5  percent  expected  an  increase  in  real  volume  through  next

January,  only  17  percent  thought  the  period  was  a  good  time  to  expand  and

most planned no  change  in employment  levels,  average  compensation, or  prices.

Business  Activity.

Business  activity  in  District  states,  as  measured  by  an  index  of  seven

indicators,  exhibited  widespread  weakness  in  recent  months.  After  only

VIII-2

moderate  gains  in  all  four  states  in  July  and  August,  the  indices  declined

in  September  in  Arkansas,  Kentucky,  and  Tennessee  and  rose  only  slightly  in

Missouri.

Employment.

Eighth  District  nonfarm  employment  grew  in  the  third  quarter  by  2.9

percent  (annual  rate)  exceeding  the  national  rate  of  2.5  percent.  Third

quarter  strength  in  the  District  nonmanufacturing  sector  offset  a  2.3

percent decline  in manufacturing  employment.  The  District  unemployment  rate

remained unchanged in  September from  the August  rate of  8.3  percent.

Construction.

District  residential  building  contracts  increased  2.0  percent  (simple

rate)  in  the  third  quarter  but were only 0.2  percent higher  than  in  the  same

period  last year.  Although  nonresidential  construction  declined  2.8  percent

in  the  third  quarter,  the  level  was  20.3  percent higher  than year-ago  levels.

Consumer  Spending.

Despite  an  August  increase,  District  retail  sales  declined  1.1  percent

last  summer  (June-August)  from  the  previous  three-month  period.  Recent

reports  suggest  the  August  expansion  continued  into  September,  resulting  in

a  strong  third  quarter.  Vigorous  auto  sales  in  response  to  low  financing

rates  on  domestic  models  and  greater  availability  of  imported  cars

contributed  to  the  expansion.  Reports  from  Mississippi,  Tennessee,  and

Arkansas  indicate  retail  sales,  particularly  car  sales,  declined  sharply  in

October  from September  levels.

Banking and Finance.

VIII-3

For the  three-month period ending October,  total  loans  at  large  District

banks  grew  at  a 6.6  annual  rate.  This activity represented a slower rate  of

growth  than  that  recorded  for  the  same  period  in  1984  and  was  characterized

by  sluggish  commercial  lending  and  strong  consumer  loan  volume.  Commercial

loans  declined  at  a 9.0  percent  rate  compared  with  a  5.0  percent  increase

last  year.  Consistent  with  recent  experience,  consumer  lending  has  grown

more  rapidly  over  the  past  three  months  (26.9  percent)  than  for  the  same

period  last  year  (11.2  percent).  Real  estate  lending  slackened,  growing  at

a 4.5  percent  rate  during  the  three  months  ending  October  compared  with  a

13.0  percent  rate  over  the  same  period  last  year.  Total  deposits  grew

slightly over  the  three  most  recent  months,  with  increased  activity  in  MMDA

and NOW accounts.

Agriculture.

Harvests  of most  District crops  have  been  completed  with  record-breaking

yields  in  many  instances.  Heavy  rains  in  November, however,  have  slowed  the

corn  harvest  in  northern  sections  of  the  District.  Soybean  harvests  also

have  been  delayed  in  southern  sections  of  the  District  where  soybeans  are

harvested  later  due  to  double  cropping.  Efforts  to  unify  and  consolidate

lending  operations  at  the  farm  credit  banks  of  Louisville  and  St.  Louis  are

making  some  progress. 

Stockholders  of  32  out  of  35  production  credit

associations  (PCA's)  in  the  St.  Louis  farm  credit  district  have  approved  a

proposal  to  merge  their  associations  into  a  single  PCA  for  the  purpose  of

more  effective  pooling  of  resources.  A  similar  proposal  is  pending  for

federal  land  bank  associations.  The  Louisville  District  will  offer  a

similar  plan to  stockholders  in  the  coming  month.

IX - 1

NINTH  DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

While  employment  growth  has  slowed  in  the  Ninth  District  this  fall,

several  positive  developments  have  occurred  in  the  labor  market. 

Consumer

spending  generally  fell  in  October,  but 

it  may  be  rebounding 

in  November.

Sharp  increases  in  cattle  and  hog  prices  are  the  main  bright  spots  in  the

agricultural  sector, where  future  farm  finance remains  a major concern.

Employment

The  most  recent  available  data  indicate  slow  job  growth  throughout

the  Ninth  District. 

Minnesota's  seasonally  adjusted  unemployment  rate  in-

creased  to  6.2  percent  in September,  marking  the  fourth  consecutive  month  it

has  risen.  In  Montana,  the  seasonally  adjusted  unemployment  rate  also  rose

this  fall  and 

is 

now  hovering  around  8  percent.  Despite  a  3.5  percent  in-

crease 

in  nonfarm  employment,  South  Dakota's  unemployment 

rate  rose  a  bit

during the  second  quarter.

Major  labor  market  developments 

in 

the  district  included  the  long-

awaited  reopening  of  the  old White  Pine  mine  in  the  Upper Peninsula of Michi-

gan.  Also,  a Bank director  notes  that  a preliminary  agreement  was  signed  to

build  and  operate  a big  paper  mill  in  the  hard-pressed  area  around  Duluth,

Minnesota.  In  Sioux Falls,  South  Dakota, a large,  divisive strike  at  a meat-

packing  plant  was  settled.  But  in  Livingston, Montana, a railroad  closed its

repair operation,  causing that  area to  lose  350  jobs.

Consumer Spending

Spending  for  general  merchandise  in  the  district  slowed  some  in

October,  but  it may  be  accelerating  in  November.  One  diversified  retailer

IX  -2

notes  that  menswear  and  accessories  sales  had  particularly  lagged  in

October.  Another  large  retail  chain  notes  that  sales  so  far  in  November

exceeded  their  generally  lackluster  level  in  October.  Due  to  the  large  in-

crease  in  consumer  indebtedness,  retailers  are  closely  watching  customer

credit  lines  to  detect  any  deterioration  in  creditworthiness.  Careful  plan-

ning  of  inventories  have  helped  the  two  retailers  maintain  good  profit  mar-

gins. 

Retailers  around  the  district  generally  aren't  expecting  land-rush

holiday business and are  fearful  of accumulating excessive  inventories.

Motor  vehicle  sales  have  slowed,  following  an  avalanche  of  September

orders.  Regional  offices  of  domestic  manufacturers  report  that, car  and truck

sales  were  lower  during  this  October  than  during  last  October.  Inventories,

which were  very  low earlier this  fall,  have  now increased  to more comfortable

levels.  The  Bank's  directors  from  North and  South Dakota  report  that  vehicle

sales  in their  vicinities were  still  slow  in  November.

Housing  activity  continued  to  pick  up  in  the  Minneapolis-St.  Paul

area,  but  activity was  spotty  elsewhere  in the  district.  In  the Twin  Cities,

home  sales  were  12  percent  higher  during  this  September  and October than  they

were  during  these  months  last  year.  Residential  construction  contracts  in

Minnesota were  substantially higher  this  September  than  last.  But  while Bank

directors  find  that  housing  starts  were  up  in  the  area  around  Great  Falls,

Montana,  they  also  note  that  activity  was  down  around  Bismarck, North  Dakota,

and  in  western North Dakota.

In  general,  tourist  expenditures  in  both  summer  and  fall  appeared to

have  increased  from  1984  levels. 

In  the  Upper  Peninsula  of  Michigan,  the

increase appeared  to be  about  5 percent.  Good tourism activity  in both  north-

western  Wisconsin  and  western  Montana  was  also  noted  by  the  Bank's  Advisory

Council.

IX  -3

Agriculture

Because  of  a  sharp  rise  in  cattle  and  hog  prices,  Minnesota's  farm

price  index  rose  in  October  for  the  first 

time  since  last  December.  However,

major  crop  prices  continued  to  fall,  with  both  corn  and  soybean  prices  drop-

ping--the  latter  to  their  lowest  level  since  April  1976.  In  Minnesota  and

South  Dakota,  the  corn  and  soybean  harvest  looks  bountiful,  promising  large

government  crop  payments.  Also,  a  drop 

in 

the  cattle  supply  bodes  well  for

future  cattle  prices  and  could  help  ranchers  recover  their  summer  losses.

Turkey  prices  are  also  higher  than  they  were  a  year  ago,  which  will  brighten

Thanksgiving  for  growers  in  Minnesota,  one  of  the  largest  turkey-producing

states.

Farm Finance

Farm  finance  issues  were  once  again  in  the  forefront  of  district

concerns.  About  one-third  of  the  bankers  responding  to  our  late-September

survey  of  rural  bankers  in 

the  district  said  they  referred  an  abnormally  high

number  of poor  farm-credit  risks  to  nonbank  lenders,  such  as  the Farmers  Home

Administration.  A Bank  director  thinks  that  from  5  to  10  percent of  his  farm

borrowers won't  obtain  refinancing  for next  year.

TENTH  DISTRICT - KANSAS  CITY

Overview.  Economic activity in the  Tenth District appears to be

generally  sluggish, with little  improvement  anticipated in the near future.

Retailers report  flat  sales  and stable  prices,  conditions  that  are expected to

continue into  next year.  Automobile dealers  are pessimistic for  sales  through

yearend and  into  1986.  Inventories  of  retail  goods and materials  inputs  are

both considered  satisfactory.  Homebuilders are  cautiously  optimistic  for

1986,  though  current  conditions  are mixed.  Savings and loan institutions also

expect mortgage  demand and mortgage commitments  to improve  slightly  in 1986.

Tenth District banks report relatively  constant  loan demands,  deposits,  and

loan  rates  over  the  last  month.  Fall  crop  yields are well above normal.

Further, but  slower, declines  in farm land values are expected.

Retail  trade.  Retailers  report  flat  sales  in the  last  three months, and

no  significant  change in  sales  this year over  last year.  Women's wear and

home furnishings  sales  have been strong while  sporting goods  and housewares

sales  have been weak.  Retailers have been expanding inventories in

anticipation of  sales  increases  during the  coming holidays.  Most  report  that

they  are  planning  on  having  special  sales  and  promotions  for  Christmas  this

year.  For  1986  retailers expect  sales  to remain fairly  constant and  inventory

levels to fluctuate only  seasonally.  Prices  are  stable and  are expected to

remain so the rest  of  this year and  through next year.

Automobile Sales.  Automobile  dealers report  sales have  declined

recently, due  largely to the  elimination of  financing incentives.  Sales

currently  are  about  the  same  to  down  slightly  compared  with  a  year  ago.  Most

dealers expect  sales  to be  flat  to  down slightly  through yearend  and down in

1986.  Sluggish sales  and large  shipments of  1986 models have resulted in

expanding inventories.

X-2

Purchasing agents.  Most  purchasing agents  report  that  input  prices have

remained  nearly  unchanged  over  the  past  three  months  as  well  as  from  a  year

earlier.  They  generally  expect  input prices  to remain constant  for  the rest

of  the year and foresee no major price  increases  in 1986.  Very  few

difficulties  in  obtaining materials are reported  and few  problems are expected

to  arise.  All  firms  report  that  materials  inventories  are  satisfactory  and  no

major  changes are  expected for  the rest  of  the year or  in 1986.

Housing  activity  and  finance.  Homebuilders  give  mixed  reports  about

current  housing  conditions,  but  are  cautiously  optimistic  for  1986.  Housing

starts range  from slightly  up  to  significantly  down  for  both  single-family  and

multi-family  structures,  relative  to  a  year  ago.  But  most  area  builders

expect  starts  in 1986  to  be  as  good as  or better  than 1985.  Sales  of new

homes,  prices  of  new  homes,  and  the  inventory  of  unsold  homes  vary  widely

across reporting areas.  Prices of materials are  generally  steady  and

materials  availability  is  good,  with  no  changes  expected.

Savings and  loan institutions  also  give mixed reports about  current and

future mortgage  behavior.  Respondents report  a moderate  increase  in savings

inflows relative to last  year, along with  slightly  lower to  constant mortgage

demand  and  commitments.  Generally,  stable  inflows  are  expected  for  1986,

along  with  slightly  higher  to  constant  mortgage  demand  and  commitments.  Most

savings and  loans report  declining mortgage rates  recently,  but  expectations

for  1986  rates are mixed.

Banking.  Total  loan  demand,  total  deposits,  and  loan  rates  have  been

relatively  constant  at  Tenth District  banks  over  the last month.  Most bankers

report  unchanged  demand  for  commercial  and  industrial  loans.  Half  of  the

respondents  experienced a stronger  demand for  consumer  credit, while  the  other

half  report  no  change.  Several  bankers  note  that  their  automobile  loans  have

not  been  competitive lately,  but  credit  card  lending has  increased.

Agricultural  lending  was  flat  to  slightly  down,  and  bankers  continue  to

express  concern about  the  quality  of  agricultural  credit.  The  prime rate  is

constant  at  Tenth  District  banks.  Most  respondents  also  report  no  change  in

consumer  loan  rates.  Total  deposits  have  been  stable.  Half  of  the

respondents  had  lower  levels  of  demand  deposits,  but  modest  increases  were

registered  for  NOW  accounts,  Super  NOW  accounts,  and  MMDA's. 

IRA  and  Keogh

contributions  were  steady  to  slightly  higher.  Most  banks  had  no  change  in

passbook savings  accounts,  although a few report  decreases.  Large

certificates  of  deposit  and small  time deposits generally  were unchanged.

Agriculture.  Fall  crop  yields  are  above  normal  and  paydowns  on

livestock loans  are improving, but  liquidations  and  foreclosures  continue with

farm land values  still  falling.  Fall harvest  in  the Tenth District  is

generally  on  schedule,  although  wet  weather  has  delayed  fieldwork  in  some

states.  Corn,  soybean,  and  sorghum  yields  are  reported  well  above  normal  in

several  district  states.  In  Oklahoma, normal  cotton yields are expected.

Paydowns  on  livestock  loans  in  Nebraska,  Kansas,  Wyoming,  and  New  Mexico  are

much  better  than  a  year  ago.  Much  of  this  improvement  is  attributed  to  the

recent  rebound  in cattle  prices.  Farm liquidations and foreclosures have

saturated  the  farm  real  estate market, and very  little  land is  changing hands.

Some  financial  institutions  that  have  acquired  farmland  through  foreclosure  or

liquidation are not  selling  at current  low  prices.  Lenders  expect  further

declines in farm real  estate values in the  coming months, but  the  rate  of

decline  may  not  be  as  sharp  as  it  was  a  year  ago.  Agricultural  lenders  in

most  district  states  are  encouraging  their  farm  borrowers  to  apply  for

Farmers'  Home  Administration  (FmHA)  guarantees.  Lenders  in  Colorado  and

Wyoming,  however,  report  that  they  no  longer  send  borrowers  to  the  FmHA,  as

many  sent  in  the  past  have  failed  to  qualify.

XI-1

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

Evidence of  overall  expansion  in  the  District  economy is  scant.

The  energy  industry  continues  to weaken.  Manufacturers  report  little

change  in  conditions.  Retail  sales  are  rising very sluggishly.  The value

of construction  contracts has  been increasing,  but  some  signs of  a downturn

in office  building construction are  emerging.  The rate of  asset  expansion

has  slowed  at  District banks.  Agricultural  prices  have  recently edged up,

but  they  remain well below a year earlier.

District manufacturers  report  little change  in  conditions.  With

the  exception of  lumber  and wood products,  respondents  find  that  declines

in the value of  the  dollar have not yet  resulted  in  increased orders.

Despite some  recent  improvement  in  sales,  lumber  and wood producers  expect

the  usual  seasonal  declines  in demand  to  result  in  temporary plant

shutdowns.  Primary  and  fabricated metals  manufacturers  report  reductions

in  orders, which they  attribute to  slowing current  activity  in commercial

construction.  These  same manufacturing industries,  together with producers

of  nonelectrical machinery,  also  face  declining demand  from the  troubled

oil  and gas  drilling industry.  Continued  sparse sales  and  excessive

inventories have  recently  led  a number  of  firms  in  the  District's

semiconductor  industry to  announce  layoffs.  Growing defense spending  is

pushing up  production and  employment  in the District's  aircraft  and parts

industry.  Output  is  rising  in  the  food processing and  chemical  industries,

while petroleum refinery  activity  is  slipping and  apparel  industry  demand

remains weak.

XI-2

Drilling activity  in  the Eleventh District  continues  to decline  at

accelerating rates.  The number  of  active  drilling rigs  in Texas  is  falling

at  slightly  faster  rates  than  in  the U.S.  Leading  indicators  of  drilling,

including  the  seismic crew  count  and  the number  of well permit

applications,  are  also  slipping.

Retail  sales  respondents  report  weak growth and  say they  expect  a

poor  fourth quarter, overall.  They also note that  fashion  lines  are

selling well while demand  for  big ticket  items,  such  as  home furniture and

electronics,  is  low.  Retailers  say  they are managing their  inventories

more closely than  last year.

The seasonal  reduction  in  auto  sales  was  much smaller  in October

of  this  year  than is  normal  for  the period.  Dealers  attribute this  strong

performance to  interest  rate promotions  offered by domestic manufacturers.

More recently,  respondents  have  begun to  report  further  reductions  in

sales,  which  they attribute to  consumer  expectations  of new  financing

incentives.  Price  increases  for  the  1986 models  are  said  to be  modest  and

dealers  expect  increased price competition in  the  coming  year.

The value of  nonresidential  construction contracts  increased

strongly  in  the  third  quarter despite  a slight  dip  in  September.

Non-building construction, particularly of  streets  and highways,  continues

to  register  the  largest yearly gains  of  any major  category.  Construction

contract  values  for  retail  stores  and office buildings  remain above  a year

earlier.  The October permit  totals  for the  Dallas/Forth Worth metropolitan

area  show  a large  decline  in  office building construction,  although other

types  of  construction buoyed nonresidential construction.

XI-3

The  rebound in  residential  construction that  has  been  evident

since mid-1985  has  abated.  The value of  residential  construction  contracts

fell  in  August  and September, after  strong  growth  earlier this  year.  The

number  of housing permits  issued  in  the District  fell  in  September,

reversing the upturn in permit  issuance  that began  early  in the year.  Much

of  the  downturn  is  due to  renewed declines  in multifamily  building.  Single

family permits  continue  to  rise  gradually  in  response to  lower  interest

rates.

In  October, both total  loans  and  securities  at  the District's

large banks  declined  absolutely  from a year  earlier.  The rate of  growth  in

loans  and  securities  also declined  in both August  and September,  although

it  remained positive  in  those months.  The  pace of  decline  in October for

loans  was  substantially  larger than  for  securities,  and was  concentrated in

consumer  loans,  business  loans,  and other  loans.  Much of  the weakness  in

consumer  loans  is  said  to  reflect  past  special  financing programs  offered

by  U.S.  auto manufacturers.  Real  estate  loans  continued to  increase, but

the  rate  of  expansion has  lately been ebbing.  Deposits  at  large banks  fell

absolutely  from a year  earlier  and  from a month  earlier,  but MMDA growth

accelerated  substantially.

District  agricultural  prices  increased slightly  in  October  from

September, but  remained 9 percent below a year  earlier.  The  increase  in

overall  prices masked declines  in  some  crops.  Cattle prices  are  higher

than expected  and cattle  futures  prices  for near-term  deliveries suggest

continued upward pressure.  The  impetus  for higher prices  comes  from

reduced supplies,  however,  so that  total  revenue may not  increase.

XII-1

TWELFTH DISTRICT  -

SAN FRANCISCO

Summary

Overall,  the  Twelfth  District  economy  continues  on  its  slow  growth

path,  with  substantial  variations  among  sectors  and  areas  within  the

District.  Consumer  spending  appears  to  be  slowing  down  in  many  parts  of

the  District. 

Forest  products 

and  semiconductor 

firms  continue

retrenching,  although  some  early  signs  suggest  that  the  pace  of

deterioration  in  lumber  activity  is  slowing. 

Agricultural  producers,

however,  continue  to  suffer  from  low  prices  in  key  crops.  While  a glut  of

commercial  space  in  many  parts  of  the  West  has  caused  a  slowdown  in

nonresidential  building,  residential  construction  activity  continues  to

vary with location.

Consumer  Spending

The  growth  in  consumer  spending  appears  to  be  slowing  down  in  many

parts  of  the  Twelfth  District. 

Although  this  could  be  related  to  the

recent  surge  of  auto  purchases,  recent  substantial  declines  in  shipments  by

a  large  freight  carrier  suggest  that  retailers  expect  sales  to  slow

further.  Oregon, Utah,  Alaska,  and  Idaho  all  report  flat  or  even  falling

retail  sales. 

In  contrast,  in  relatively  healthy  Southern  California  and

Washington, where  sales  growth  was  relatively  soft  during  the  first  half  of

the  year,  growth  has  strengthened  in  recent  months. 

Throughout  the

District,  more  sales  are  being  made  by  volume  discounters  rather  than

traditional  stores.  Moreover, most  areas  report  a recent  shift  in  consumer

spending  -- 

even  excluding  autos  --toward  soft  goods  such  as  apparel  and

away from  durable  items  such as  consumer  electronics  and  furniture.

XII-2

Manufacturing and Mining

In  general,  manufacturing  and  mining  sectors  continue  weak. 

Some

isolated  exceptions  including  strong  drilling  activity  in  Nevada  and  Utah,

and  the  opening  of  some  small  specialty mines  in Utah.  For  the  most  part.

however,  Twelfth  District  activity  in  these  sectors  is  down. 

In

particular,  the  electronics  industries  continue  to  suffer. 

Layoffs  and

losses  continue  to be reported  from California, Utah, Oregon, and Arizona.

Some  signs  suggest  that  the  forest  products  industries  may  be

stabilizing  after  the  troubles  of  the  past  few  years,  although  problems

remain.  Some report  increased  lumber  shipments  to  Asia  as  the  value  of  the

dollar  falls,  but  attribute  this  movement  to  short-term  inventory

adjustments  in  Japan  and  China.  They  also  point  out  that  the  declining

value  of  the  dollar  does  not  improve  producers'  position  relative  to  their

principal 

competitors 

in  Canada  and  the 

southern  United  States.

Nevertheless,  the  continuing  shakeout  among  lumber  producers  is  yielding  a

leaner,  lower  cost,  more  efficient  industry,  which  is  better  able  to

respond  to  these  threats.  One  positive  sign  for  the  industry  is  that

softwood  lumber  prices  in  October  were  less  than  1 percent  below  the  level

of  October  1984,  compared  to  a  6  percent  drop  the  previous  year.  Thus,

while  the  downslide  may  be  slowing,  the  industry  remains  troubled,  as

low-priced  competition from British Columbia and  the  South  continue  to  cause

consternation in the  Pacific Northwest.

Agriculture

Producers  of  agricultural  products  continue  to  suffer  from  low  prices

induced  by  growing  worldwide  production  and  relatively  weak  demand.

XII-3

Spurred  by  a continuing  downward  price  slide,  cotton  acreage  has  fallen  by

300-400  thousand  acres  in  recent  years.  Prices  for wheat  and  cattle remain

well  below  their  year-ago  levels,  although  they  have  inched  upward  in

recent  weeks. 

On  the  bright  side,  the  prospects  for  potatoes  are

improving,  as  crop  quality  is  good  and  prices  are  reviving  from  a  short

slide  late  in  the  summer.

Construction and Real Estate

In  many  parts  of  the  Twelfth  District,  high  commercial  vacancy  rates

are  starting  to  be  reflected 

in  slower  nonresidential 

permit

authorizations.  Exceptions  are  primarily  in  smaller  metropolitan  areas  in

Idaho  and  California's  San Joaquin Valley, where  vacancy  rates  remain  below

10  percent  and  nonresidential  activity  is,  in  the  words  of  one  respondent,

"on  a  roll".

Residential  construction  activity  varies  substantially  within  the

District. 

Despite  Oregon's  economic  problems,  some  report  an  upswing  in

residential  construction  activity  there,  particularly  of  multifamily units.

Multifamily  construction  is  also  strong  in  Idaho,  but  gluts  in  Utah  and

Arizona  have  curtailed  apartment  and  condominium  developments  in  those

areas.

Finance

Trends 

in 

consumer 

loan  volume 

likewise  vary  by  location.

Interestingly,  some  of  the  areas  whose  economies  are  struggling  more,

including  Oregon  and  Alaska  report  steady  --  although  relatively  modest  --

growth  in  volume,  while  California  and  Washington,  whose  economies  are

XII-4

among  the  strongest  in  the  District,  report  a  slowdown  from  their  earlier

borrowing binges.  Banks  report  that  delinquency rates  are  either  stable  or

rising,  and  range  from  less  than  1 percent  to  almost  3 percent.  Those  who

reported  delinquencies  for  bank  cards  and  installment  credit  separately

invariably  showed  higher  --  and  frequently  rising  --  delinquency  rates  for

credit  cards.

Reported  mortgage  interest  rates  for  30-year  fixed  rate  instruments

hover  at  or  below  12  percent.  Several  banks  reported  slightly  lower  rates

than  in  the previous month,  but  one  bank  reduced  its  mortgage  rate  by  50  to

75  basis  points  during  the  past  month.  Mortgage  volume  appears  strong

overall,  although  there  are  exceptions. 

One  Oregon  bank,  for  example,

reported  that  through  August  its  volume  had  fallen  16.3  percent  from  the

same  period  a year earlier.

The  few  reports  on  commercial  loan activity  suggest  that  it  is  weak.  No

respondents  reported strong  commercial  loans.

