FEDERAL  RESERVE  press  release 

For  Use  at  4:30 p.m. 

February  13,  1987 

The Federal Reserve Board  and  the Federal Open Market 

Committee today released  the  attached  record of  policy actions 

taken by the Federal Open Market  Committee at  its meeting on 

December 15-16,  1986.  

Such records for each meeting of  the  Committee are  made 

available a few days after  the next  regularly scheduled meeting 

and  are  published in  the  Federal Reserve Bulletin and  the  Board's 

Annual Report.  The  summary descriptions of  economic and  financial 

conditions they  contain are  based  solely on  the information that 

was available to  the  Committee at  the  time of  the meeting.

Attachment

RECORD  OF  POLICY ACTIONS OF  THE 
FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 

Meeting Held on December  15-16,  1986 

Domestic policy directive 

The  information reviewed  at  this meeting suggested  that  economic 

activity was continuing  to expand at  a moderate pace  in  the  current  quarter.  

Payroll employment  increased  considerably in October and  November;  hiring 

in  manufacturing rose somewhat  in both months  after declining  on  balance 

since  the  beginning of  the year.  Apart  from sales of  motor vehicles, 

which dropped  off with the  end of  financing  incentive  programs,  consumer 

spending  has  posted  sizable gains  in  recent months.  Business  investment 

spending,  however, has remained  sluggish, while housing  starts  have 

weakened.  At  the  same  time,  the  trade balance has  shown only limited 

indications  of  improvement.  Increases  in  labor  costs  still  were moderate, 

but  price increases  have  been somewhat  higher  than  earlier in  the  year 

because of developments  in  food and  energy markets.  

Total nonfarm payroll employment  rose  about  1/4  million in  both 

October and November.  Much of  the  gain was  in  the  private service-producing 

sector, but  factory employment  also  rose moderately, and  the workweek 

lengthened.  Aggregate hours  for  production and nonsupervisory workers 

in  November were a full percentage  point  above  the  third-quarter  average.  

The  civilian unemployment  rate  stayed  at  7 percent  in November for  the 

third  consecutive month.

12/15-16/86

Gains  in  employment  and hours worked were  associated with a 

sizable pickup  in  industrial production in November.  The  industrial 

production index rose  0.6 percent  last month, after essentially no 

change  over the  previous three  months.  Increases in  output  were  evident 

in most major marketing groups,  with only energy materials  showing a 

marked decline, although auto  assemblies  were about  unchanged from October.  

Capacity utilization in manufacturing, mining, and  utilities rose  0.3 per

centage point  in November  to  79.3  percent.  Nonetheless,  utilization has 

changed  little on  balance since  March and  is  2-1/2  points below its  most 

recent  peak in  the  summer  of  1984.  

Sales  of  domestic  cars  fell  sharply after  the  expiration of 

cut-rate financing incentive  programs  in  early October.  These  sales 

averaged  less  than  7 million units  at  an annual  rate over  the October

November  period, compared with the  strong 9-1/2 million unit pace  for 

the third  quarter  as  a whole.  Excluding autos,  gasoline,  and nonconsumer 

items,  retail  sales  in  November rose  0.9 percent paced  by  continued  strength 

in purchases  of  furniture  and appliances  and in other  nonauto durables.  

In  addition, data for  earlier months were  revised upward  slightly.  

Business  investment appears to  have remained  sluggish.  Shipments 

of  nondefense  capital goods  increased  in October,  and construction spending 

has  firmed  in  recent months  but  prospects  for  such spending  have  continued 

to  be  affected  adversely by  high vacancy rates  and  reactions  to  tax reform.  

In  contrast,  sales  of heavy-weight  trucks  fell markedly  in October, and 

business  purchases of  cars  and light  trucks  also probably declined  sharply 

after  the  sales  incentive programs  ended.  At  the  same  time, new orders

12/15-16/86

for nondefense capital goods  fell  5 percent.  Initial surveys  of  capital 

spending  plans  for 1987  suggested  that  overall nominal  spending  on plant 

and equipment  is  likely  to  change  little  from  the  1986  level.  

Housing  starts  continued  to  decline  in November.  During  the 

month  total  private housing  starts,  at  1.6 million units,  were  a bit  below 

the reduced  pace  of  September  and  October.  Single-family  starts  were 

virtually unchanged  from their  rate  during  the preceding two  months, but 

were below  their  level  earlier in  the  year;  new home sales  also have  remained 

below their  previous  pace  in recent  months.  Multifamily  starts  declined 

further  in November in  response  to  high vacancy  rates  and  adverse  changes 

in  tax  laws.  

Price increases,  although  still  moderate, have  been  somewhat 

higher  than earlier in  the year partly because of  developments  in food 

and  energy markets.  The consumer  price  index rose  0.2 percent  in October 

and  the producer  price  index was  up  0.2 percent  in  November.  In  the  food 

sector,  some  upward  price pressure  continued  to  be  evident,  although 

increases  in food  prices  slowed  from  the  rapid  pace  during  the  summer.  

In  addition, energy prices  turned  down a bit  at  both  the  retail  and 

refinery  levels,  despite the  firming  of  crude  oil prices  in  spot markets 

since mid-summer.  Excluding food and  energy, the  CPI rose  0.4 percent 

in October, somewhat  faster  than earlier  in  the  year as  new car prices 

increased  sharply.  Wage  inflation has  picked up  a bit  recently, but  has 

continued at  a moderate pace.  

The  trade-weighted value  of  the  dollar  against  other  G-10  curren

cies  has declined  somewhat  on  balance since  the November  5 meeting of  the

12/15-16/86

Committee.  Exchange  rates  have been affected  by  news about  the pace  of 

economic  activity, developments  in  the  U.S. trade  balance,  and prospects 

for monetary actions  in  the United  States  and  in  key industrial  nations 

abroad.  Short-term interest  rates  rose moderately abroad,  about  in  line 

with movements  in  U.S.  rates,  while  differentials in  long-term interest 

rates moved  slightly against  dollar assets.  Over  the  period,  the  dollar 

declined about  2 percent  against  the  mark and was  essentially unchanged 

against  the yen, but  the dollar's  depreciation had  been somewhat  larger 

in early December.  As  of  mid-December, the value of  the dollar  in relation 

to  other major currencies was  little  changed on balance  from the  level  pre

vailing in August.  Economic  activity in  major  foreign industrial  countries 

was mixed  in  the  third  quarter.  The U.S.  merchandise  trade deficit was 

estimated  to be  about  the  same  in  the  third  quarter as  in  the previous 

three  quarters.  Exports  were  flat  in  the  quarter, while  the value of  oil 

imports was close  to  that  in  the  second quarter  as  price  declines  about 

offset volume  increases.  Very  preliminary data indicated  that  the deficit 

in October was  the  smallest  in  recent months as  exports  of  agricultural 

products  rose  somewhat  and  imports declined  moderately.  

At  its meeting  on November  5, the  Committee adopted  a directive 

that  called for maintaining  the  existing degree  of  pressure on  reserve 

positions.  This  action was  expected  to  be  consistent with growth in  both 

M2 and M3 at  annual  rates of  7 to  9 percent from September  to  December.  

Growth in  Ml  over  the  same period was  expected  to moderate  from its  ex

ceptional pace during  the  previous  several months.  The  Committee agreed 

that the  growth in Ml  would continue  to  be  evaluated  in  light  of  the 

behavior  of  the broader monetary aggregates  and  other factors.  The

12/15-16/86 

-5

members also decided  that  slightly greater or  slightly  lesser  reserve 

restraint  might be  acceptable depending  on  the behavior of  the monetary 

aggregates,  taking into  account the  strength of  the  business  expansion, 

developments  in foreign  exchange markets,  progress  against inflation, 

and conditions  in domestic and  international  credit  markets.  The 

intermeeting range for  federal  funds was maintained at  4 to  8 percent.  

M2 growth slowed  substantially in November  to  a 6-1/2  percent 

annual rate,  and M3 growth moderated further to  a 5-1/2 percent  annual 

rate;  through November both M2 and M3 were just  inside  the upper  bounds 

of  their  6 to  9 percent growth ranges  established by  the  Committee  for 

1986.  Ml  accelerated again in November,  reaching a rate  of  21  percent, 

as  growth  in demand  deposits  surged.  M1 growth has  remained  far  in excess 

of GNP growth so  far  this  year and  its  velocity  is  expected  to  fall at  an 

historically high rate.  

Growth of  total  reserves  picked up  sharply over  the  intermeeting 

period largely because of  a surge  in  required reserves  against  transactions 

deposits.  In  addition, excess reserves  increased from almost  $750  million 

in the  previous  three  months  to  around  $1 billion on  average  in November, 

reflecting mainly the  usual patterns  around  holidays  and social  security 

payment  dates.  Adjustment plus  seasonal  borrowing in  the  two  complete 

maintenance periods  since  the  November FOMC meeting averaged about  $300 

million, down somewhat  from the  average over  the  previous  intermeeting 

period.  Even so,  the funds  rate  firmed  from around 5-7/8  percent at 

the time  of  the  last  meeting to  well above 6 percent  in early December.  

More recently,  the  federal funds  rate  has  averaged  close to  6 percent.

12/15-16/86 

-6

With the federal  funds  rate  firmer through much of  the  inter

meeting  period, other short-term market  rates  rose  15  to  50  basis points.  

However, bond  yields  generally were  about  unchanged to down  25  basis 

points.  Rates  on  commitments  for  fixed-rate home mortgages dropped 

about  one-half  percentage point, moving  toward  a more  normal  alignment 

with Treasury  bond yields.  Although stock prices  fell  initially  on  the 

announcement of  insider trading  violations related  to  takeover activity, 

on  balance they  showed  little  change  over the  period.  

The  staff  projections  presented at  this meeting suggested  that 

real  GNP would continue  to  grow at  a moderate  rate  through the  end of  1987.  

Prospects  for an improvement  in  real net  exports  of  goods  and  services 

continued  to  be  a key element  shaping the  1987  forecast;  export growth 

was  expected  to  accelerate next  year  and  import  growth  to  moderate as 

world  trade  flows  adjusted to  increased  U.S.  competitiveness.  Gross 

domestic  purchases  were projected  to  be  relatively  sluggish  through the 

end of  1987,  reflecting  mainly a shift  toward  fiscal  restraint, the 

likely weakness  in multifamily housing and  nonresidential  construction, 

and  the  damping  influence of  higher  import  prices  on  the growth of real 

income  and consumption.  Inflation was  expected  to  pick up a bit  in  early 

1987  as  a consequence of  the  dollar's  depreciation and higher  energy 

prices.  

In  the Committee's discussion  of  current and  prospective economic 

developments, members  generally agreed  that  continuing  expansion at  a 

moderate  pace  remained  a reasonable  expectation for  the  year ahead,  but 

a number of  members  emphasized the  risks  of  a shortfall from current

12/15-16/86 

-7

projections,  especially in the  early part  of  1987.  In particular, members 

mentioned  the  risks  that  the  expected  improvement  in  the nation's  foreign 

trade  might be  relatively disappointing next  year and  that  overall business 

spending might  remain  sluggish.  A few members  also  referred  to  the  possi

bility  of  slower growth in  consumer  spending.  On  balance, however, while 

no important  sector of  the domestic economy seemed  likely to  be  a source  of 

substantial  strength in  1987,  the members  read  current  economic  indicators 

and other  business  information  as pointing  to  a fifth year  of  moderate 

expansion.  Such expansion might be  accompanied  by some  rise  in  the  rate 

of  inflation, primarily  reflecting the  effects  of  the  dollar's  depreciation 

and  energy-sector developments.  

The members again gave  considerable  attention to  the outlook for 

foreign trade.  An  improvement  in  trade  generally was  viewed as  an  essential 

factor  in  sustaining a moderate  rate of  business  expansion  in the  context 

of  perhaps diminishing growth in overall domestic  demands.  Unfortunately, 

there was no  convincing evidence  thus  far  of  a turnaround in  the  trade 

balance and  a number  of  members commented  that  the  expected  improvement 

could  be  relatively  limited next  year.  On  the favorable  side,  the depre

ciation of  the dollar evidently had enhanced  the  competitive  position of 

U.S.  firms,  and  individual reports  of  expanding  export  opportunities 

appeared  to  be  multiplying as well  as  indications  of  an  improved ability 

of  many U.S.  firms  to  compete domestically with  imports.  As  they had 

at  earlier meetings,  the members referred  to a number  of  factors  that 

were  inhibiting an overall  improvement  in net  exports,  including limited 

expansion in many  industrial nations  abroad  and strong  competition  from

12/15-16/86 

-8

a number  of  countries whose  currencies  had not  appreciated against  the 

dollar.  One member also  stressed that  persisting  debt problems  in  several 

developing countries  constituted an element of  vulnerability for inter

national  financial  markets  and  international trade  and  also  for the  U.S.  

economy.  

With regard  to  the  domestic  economy, a number of members  commented 

that  consumer expenditures  on  durables,  especially automobiles, and  some 

business  spending  appeared  to  have  been accelerated  into  1986  in  reaction 

to  provisions of  the  tax reform legislation.  Compensating adjustments in 

such spending  later  could have  a restraining effect  on  economic growth, 

notably  during the  first part of  1987.  Nonetheless, a few members  referred 

to  the  possibility that  consumer spending  might  be well maintained  during 

1987 as  a whole.  The  latter acknowledged  the  inhibiting effects  of  the 

growth in  consumer debt,  but  they  stressed  the  favorable  implications of 

cumulative  increases  in  the  total  assets  and  net  worth of  consumers and 

the  positive  impact  of  reductions  in personal  income  tax  rates.  The 

outlook for  business  spending continued  to  be  uncertain and in  some 

respects  unpromising, especially with regard  to  multifamily housing  and 

nonresidential  construction;  both  areas would be  adversely affected  by 

high vacancy rates  and negative reactions  to  the  tax reform legislation.  

There  were further reports  of  plant closings, notably in  the Midwest.  

However, one member  observed  that  business  spending  for plant  and 

equipment might well  hold  up in response  to  continuing growth in overall 

economic activity.  As  usual,  the prospects  for  inventory accumulation 

were uncertain and would  be  affected by  the outlook for  prices.

12/15-16/86

-9-

With regard  to  the outlook  for prices  and wages, members  generally 

agreed  that  increases  might be somewhat  larger in 1987,  reflecting the 

impact  of  rising  import  prices  and  indications of  a turnaround in  oil 

prices.  However,  the prospect of  only moderate  economic  growth  and  con

tinued margins  of  slack  in  labor  and product markets  suggested  that  strong 

wage  pressures were not  likely  over  the  year ahead.  One member  observed 

that  agricultural  conditions worldwide  suggested  an absence of  pressure 

on  food  prices.  Moreover, generally limited  growth in key industrial 

nations  together with an ample  availability of  productive  resources  abroad 

implied  continuing strong  competitive  pressures and  restrained advances 

in  prices  of  U.S.  imports.  Even so,  a somewhat  higher  rate of  inflation 

appeared to  be  in prospect  for next year.  

At  its  meeting in  July, the  Committee had  agreed  on  tentative 

ranges  of  5-1/2  to  8-1/2 percent for  growth in  both M2  and M3  during  the 

period  from the  fourth quarter of  1986  to  the  fourth  quarter of  1987.  The 

associated range  for growth  in total  domestic nonfinancial debt  was  set  at 

8 to  11 percent  for 1987.  In  the  case  of Ml  the  Committee had  indicated on 

a more  tentative  basis  than usual  that  it  might  retain the  1986  range of 

3 to  8 percent  for 1987.  Such a range  implied  a marked reduction  from  the 

Ml growth experienced  in  1986 and  provisionally assumed  that  the  relation

ship  of  Ml to  income,  interest  rates,  and  other economic variables next 

year would be broadly consistent with earlier historical experience.  

At  this meeting the Committee held a preliminary discussion of  the 

factors  bearing on appropriate  ranges  for  the various monetary aggregates  in 

1987.  Most  of  the attention was  devoted to  the  issue  of whether a range

12/15-16/86 

-10

should  be  established for Ml, given  the uncertainty surrounding behavior 

of  that  aggregate and  its  velocity  in recent  years.  While most members 

currently did  not  favor  establishing a formal  target  range  for Ml growth 

in 1987,  many of  them believed  that  this  aggregate  should  continue  to  be 

monitored  or evaluated  in  light  of  information  about  the economy,  prices, 

and  the  broad monetary aggregates and  other  financial  variables.  The 

Committee will  complete  its  review of  the  role  of Ml  and  the ranges  for 

the  broad  aggregates for  1987  at  its  February  meeting.  

In  the Committee's  discussion  of  policy implementation for  the 

period  immediately  ahead,  all of  the members indicated that  they were  in 

favor  of  directing  open market  operations,  at  least  initially,  toward 

maintaining unchanged  conditions  of  reserve  availability.  For now, monetary 

policy was  deemed  to  be  exerting  an appropriate degree  of  pressure on 

reserve positions  in  light  of  the  growth of  the broader monetary  aggre

gates  within -- though at  the  upper ends  of  -- their  longer-run  ranges, 

and  the  generally favorable  prospects  for  sustained,  albeit moderate, 

economic growth.  

The members  recognized that  the  outlook for  the monetary aggre

gates  remained  uncertain, notably in  the case  of Ml.  According to  an 

analysis  presented  at  this meeting,  a moderate  trend  in  the growth of  M2 

and M3 might be  anticipated, given the  outlook for  fairly limited  growth 

in  economic  activity and  an abatement of  the  effects of  earlier  interest 

rate  declines.  For  the months  ahead, growth in  the broader aggregates 

might be well within the Committee's  tentative  ranges  for  1987  on the 

assumption that  there  would  be no  significant  changes in  market  interest 

rates.  The  outlook  for M1  growth remained  highly uncertain, although

12/15-16/86 

-11

underlying forces  seemed consistent  with a considerable  slowing over time 

from the  extraordinary expansion experienced  during  1986.  Some  concern 

was  expressed  that  the  failure of  such a slowing  to  occur and  the associated 

large provision of reserves  could eventually  have  inflationary consequences.  

Even with some moderation over  coming months,  Ml might  continue  to  expand 

at  rates markedly  in excess  of  the growth in  nominal GNP.  In  view of  the 

uncertainties  that were involved  and in keeping with the  Committee's 

practice  since mid-1986, the members  did not want  to  indicate  specific 

expectations with regard  to  Ml  growth in  the  operational  paragraph of  the 

Committee's  directive.  Nonetheless,  it was understood  that  growth of  this 

aggregate would continue  to  be  evaluated  in light  of  the  behavior of  the 

broader monetary aggregates  and  other  economic  and  financial  developments.  

In their  discussion of  possible intermeeting  adjustments  in  the 

degree  of  reserve  pressure,  the members  thought  it  unlikely that  develop

ments would warrant more  than a minor, if  any, change  in  reserve  conditions 

during  the  weeks ahead.  All of  the members  understood that  some  small 

adjustment  in  either direction  might  be  appropriate under  certain circum

stances.  However,  in the  context of  what  they  perceived as greater 

downside  risks  in  the outlook for economic activity, several believed 

that  policy  implementation should  remain  especially alert  to  developments 

that  might call  for  somewhat  easier  reserve  conditions.  It  was noted 

in  this  connection that  the  relative  stability of  the  dollar  in foreign 

exchange markets over  the  past few months  provided greater  flexibility 

for  potential  easing  actions.

12/15-16/86 

-12

At  the  conclusion of  the Committee's  discussion, all  of  the  members 

indicated  that  they favored a directive  that  called for no change  in the 

degree of  pressure  on reserve  positions.  The members expected  this  approach 

to  policy implementation to  be  consistent with growth of  both M2  and M3 at 

an  annual rate  of  about  7 percent  over the  4-month period  from  November  to 

March.  Because  the behavior  of  M1  remained  subject  to unusual uncertainty, 

the  members  decided  they would continue  to  evaluate  this  aggregate  in  the 

light  of  the  performance  of  the broader monetary aggregates and  other  factors.  

The members  indicated  that  slightly greater  reserve  restraint  or  somewhat 

lesser reserve  restraint would be  acceptable over  the  intermeeting period 

depending on  the  behavior  of  the monetary aggregates,  taking into  account the 

strength of  the  business expansion, the performance  of  the  dollar  in  foreign 

exchange  markets,  progress  against  inflation, and  conditions  in  domestic and 

international  credit markets.  The members  agreed  that  the  intermeeting 

range  for  the federal  funds  rate,  which provides  a mechanism for  initiating 

consultation of  the  Committee when its  boundaries  are  persistently exceeded, 

should  be  left  unchanged at  4 to  8 percent.  

At  the  conclusion of  the meeting,  the following domestic policy 

directive was issued  to  the Federal Reserve Bank  of  New York: 

The  information  reviewed at  this  meeting suggests 
that  economic  activity continues  to grow at  a moderate 
pace  in  the  current quarter.  Total nonfarm payroll 
employment  grew appreciably further  in October and 
November, and  employment  in manufacturing  also rose 
after declining on balance in previous  months.  The 
civilian unemployment  rate  remained  at  7.0 percent in 
November for  the third  consecutive month.  Industrial 
production picked  up  considerably in November.  Total 
retail  sales  rose moderately last  month after changing

12/15-16/86

-13-

little on balance over September  and October.  Housing 
starts have weakened  and  business  capital spending 
generally appears  to have  remained sluggish.  Pre
liminary data for  the  U.S. merchandise trade  deficit 
in October suggest a moderate narrowing.  Broad 
measures  of  prices have  firmed somewhat  in  recent 
months  due  to developments  in  food  and energy markets.  
Labor  cost  increases  this  year  have  remained moderate 
compared with  other  recent years.  

Growth of  M2 slowed  substantially in November,  while 

growth of M3  remained moderate.  Expansion of  these  two 
aggregates for  the year  through November has  been just 
below the  upper end  of  their  respective  ranges  established 
by  the Committee  for  1986.  In  November growth  of  Ml 
accelerated  to  a very rapid  rate.  Expansion in  total 
domestic nonfinancial debt  remains  appreciably above 
the  Committee's monitoring range  for  1986.  Short-term 
interest  rates  have risen somewhat  since  the  November  5 
meeting of  the  Committee, while  long-term rates  have 
declined  on  balance.  In  foreign  exchange markets  the 
trade-weighted value  of  the  dollar against  other  G-10 
currencies has  declined moderately  on  balance  since 
the  November meeting.  

The  Federal Open Market Committee  seeks  monetary 

and  financial conditions  that  will foster  reasonable 
price  stability over  time,  promote growth in  output 
on  a sustainable  basis,  and  contribute to  an  improved 
pattern  of  international  transactions.  In furtherance 
of  these objectives  the  Committee agreed  at  the  July 
meeting to  reaffirm the  ranges  established  in  February 
for growth of  6 to  9 percent for  both M2 and M3,  measured 
from the  fourth quarter  of  1985  to  the  fourth quarter 
of  1986.  With respect  to Ml,  the  Committee  recognized 
that,  based on  the  experience of  recent years,  the 
behavior of  that aggregate is  subject  to  substantial 
uncertainties in  relation to  economic  activity and 
prices,  depending  among other  things  on the  responsive
ness  of  Ml growth to  changes  in interest  rates.  In 
light of  these  uncertainties and  of  the  substantial 
decline  in velocity in  the  first  half of  the  year,  the 
Committee decided  that growth of Ml in excess  of  the 
previously established  3 to  8 percent  range for  1986 
would be acceptable.  Acceptable  growth of  Ml  over  the 
remainder of  the  year would depend  on the behavior  of 
velocity, growth in the other monetary aggregates, 
developments  in  the  economy and  financial markets, and 
price pressures.  Given its  rapid growth in  the  early

12/15-16/86

-14-

part  of  the  year, the  Committee  recognized  that  the 
increase  in total  domestic nonfinancial  debt  in 1986 
may  exceed its  monitoring range  of  8 to  11  percent, 
but felt  an  increase  in  that  range would  provide an 
inappropriate  benchmark for evaluating longer-term 
trends  in  that  aggregate.  

For  1987  the  Committee  agreed  on tentative  ranges 

of  monetary growth,  measured  from the  fourth quarter of 
1986  to  the  fourth quarter  of  1987,  of  5-1/2  to  8-1/2 
percent  for M2  and M3.  While a range  of  3 to  8 percent 
for M1  in  1987 would  appear appropriate  in  the  light  of 
most historical  experience, the  Committee  recognized that 
the  exceptional uncertainties  surrounding the  behavior 
of  Ml  velocity  over  the  more  recent period  would  require 
careful  appraisal  of  the  target  range  at  the  beginning 
of  1987.  The  associated range  for  growth  in  total 
domestic  nonfinancial debt  was provisionally  set  at 
8 to  11  percent  for 1987.  

In  the  implementation of  policy  for  the  immediate 

future,  the  Committee seeks  to  maintain the  existing 
degree  of  pressure  on  reserve  positions.  This  action 
is  expected to  be  consistent  with growth in M2  and M3 
over  the period from November  to March at  an  annual 
rate  of  about  7 percent.  Growth in  Ml will  continue 
to  be  appraised in  the  light  of  the  behavior  of M2  and 
M3  and the  other factors  cited  below.  Slightly greater 
reserve  restraint  or  somewhat  lesser  reserve  restraint 
would  be  acceptable depending  on the  behavior of  the 
aggregates,  taking  into  account  the  strength of  the 
business  expansion, developments  in  foreign exchange 
markets,  progress  against  inflation, and  conditions 
in  domestic and  international  credit markets.  The 
Chairman may call  for Committee  consultation if  it 
appears  to  the Manager  for Domestic  Operations  that 
reserve  conditions during  the  period  before  the  next 
meeting  are likely  to  be  associated with a federal 
funds  rate  persistently outside a range  of  4 to  8 
percent.  

Votes for  this  action:  Messrs.  Volcker, 

Corrigan, Angell, Guffey, Heller, Mrs.  Horn, 
Messrs. Johnson, Melzer, Morris,  and  Ms.  Seger.  
Votes  against  this  action:  None.  Absent  and 
not  voting:  Mr.  Rice.

