SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY  ON  CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY  FEDERAL  RESERVE DISTRICTS

DECEMBER  1986

TABLE  OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY ..........  ....... 

..................................... .

First  District  - Boston....................................... 

i

I-1

Second  District  - New York...................................... 

II-1

Third  District  - Philadelphia.................................. 

III-i

Fourth  District  - Cleveland..................................... 

IV-1

Fifth District  - Richmond...................................... 

V-1

Sixth  District  - Atlanta...................................... 

VI-1

Seventh District  - Chicago..................................... 

VII-1

Eighth District  - St.  Louis..................................... 

VIII-1

Ninth District  - Minneapolis.................................. 

IX-1

Tenth  District  - Kansas City.................................... 

X-l

Eleventh  District  - Dallas ...................................... 

'Xl-

Twelfth District  - San Francisco 

XII-1

SUMMARY*

District  Reserve  Banks  report  economic  conditions  ranging

from  sluggish  to  generally  good  with  more  than  half  indicating  some

recent  improvement.  Strength  in  consumer  spending  is  somewhat  more

widespread  than  in  the  last  report,  and  most  retailers  anticipate  a

moderate  to  good  holiday  season.  Residential  construction  continues

at  a  healthy  pace,  but  nonresidential  construction  has  slowed  as  a

result  of  oversupply.  Manufacturing  is  still  relatively  weak,  and

some  increase  in  input  prices  has  been  noted.  While  the  energy

sector  remains  depressed,  an  increase  in  the  number  of  operating  oil

rigs  has  occurred.  Farmers  experienced  near-record  corn  and  soybean

yields  in  some  areas  despite  heavy  rainfall,  and  livestock  producers

are  benefitting  from  higher  prices.  Commercial  bank  loan  activity

has  improved  because  of  some  upturn  in  business  lending  and  strength

in  real  estate  and  consumer  lending.  Many  commercial  banks  are

actively  promoting  the  use  of  home  equity  lines  of  credit  for

consumers  to  retain  interest  deductibility under  the  new  tax  law.

Consumer  Spending

Most 

districts 

see 

an 

improvement 

in 

retail 

sales.

Philadelphia  states  that  sales  were  up  strongly,  and  California  and

Richmond  also  had  generally  good  gains. 

Sales  were  sluggish  in

Boston,  Cleveland,  Dallas  and  St.  Louis,  but  the  remaining  districts

*Prepared  at  the  Federal  Reserve Bank  of  New York.  District  reports

are  based  on  information  available  prior  to  November  21,  1986.

report  moderate  increases. 

Items  in  strong  demand  were  apparel,

electronics,  furniture,  and  other  home  furnishings.  As  a  result  of

the  recent  improvement  in  sales,  retailers  for  the  most  part

anticipate  a  moderate  to  good  holiday  season.  Inventories  are  at

satisfactory  or  manageable  levels. 

Prices  (when  mentioned)  were

generally  reported  as  stable.  However,  Chicago  attributed  a  jump  in

textile  and  apparel  prices  to  recently  imposed  import  restraints,

and  Dallas  saw  a  significant  increase  in  prices  of  imported

electronics.

All  districts  reporting  on  auto  sales  had  strong  gains  in

September  and  a  sharp  dropoff  in  October,  mirroring  the  national

pattern.

Construction  and  Real  Estate

Most  districts 

report  healthy  residential  construction

activity,  though  at  a  somewhat  slower  pace  than  earlier  this  year.

The  Richmond  district  notes  that  home  sales  have  been  weakening  due

to  the  high  level  of  home  prices  there.  Atlanta  reports  a  shift

away  from  construction  of  multi-family units  because  of  a  high  level

of  condominium  inventories  and  generally  poor  demand.  In  contrast

to  most  other  areas,  residential  building  in  the  Dallas  district  is

substantially below  a year  earlier.

Nonresidential  construction  has  slowed  in  Atlanta,  Dallas  and

parts  of  New  York  where  an  oversupply  of  office  space  now  exists.

In  Chicago  and  Minneapolis,  however,  work  on  new  office  buildings

continues  at  a  steady  pace.  Reflecting  higher  demand  for  space,

vacancy  rates  in  the  Minneapolis  district  fell  between  June  and

September  for  both  office  and  industrial  buildings.

iii

Manufacturing

Industrial  activity  remains  relatively  weak,  and  plans  have

recently  been  announced  for  additional  plant  closings  and  layoffs  in

several  districts.  The  largest  is  the  scheduled  G.M.  cutback,  which

will  result  in  more  than  20,000  job  losses  in  the  Chicago  district

and  will  affect  other  areas  as  well.  Some  industries  and  districts

do  report  gains,  however.  The  Philadelphia  and  Cleveland  districts

have  seen  an  overall  improvement  in  their  manufacturing  sectors  in

recent  months. 

Both  Boston  and  San  Francisco  state  that  the

aerospace  industry  is  doing  well,  and  the  USX  strike  continues  to

benefit  competing  steel  producers  in  the  Chicago  and  Cleveland

areas. 

Many  districts  (Boston,  Chicago,  New  York,  Philadelphia,

Cleveland,  Kansas  City  and  Dallas)  mentioned  an  increase  in  input

prices,  which  some  attributed  to  the  decline  in  the  dollar.  Most

manufacturers  are  holding  their  own  prices  firm,  however.  Several

districts  reported  no  discernible  benefit  from  the  dollar's  decline,

San  Francisco  noted  that  increased  exports  of  electronic  products

and  higher  capital  goods  orders  have  resulted  from  the  weaker  dollar.

Energy  and  Resources

The  stabilization  of  oil  prices  at  a  somewhat  higher  level

led  to  an  increased  number  of  operating  oil  and  gas  drilling  rigs.

However,  the  total  is  less  than  half  the  number  in  operation  a  year

ago  in  the  oil-producing  states.  Chicago  found  that  the  oil  and  gas

industry's  demand  for  steel  pipe  is  up  somewhat  from  a  recent  very

low  level.  The  wood  and  forest  products  industries  of  Minneapolis

and  San  Francisco  have  improved  further. 

These  districts  also

report  an upturn and  brighter  outlook  in  copper  mining.

Agriculture

Despite  heavy  rainfall  and  flooding  in  many  areas,  farmers

experienced  record  or  near-record  corn  and  soybean  yields  in  the

Cleveland,  Kansas  City,  Minneapolis  and  St.  Louis  districts.

Moreover,  a  feared  storage  crunch  was  alleviated  by  the  rain-induced

stretch-out  of  the  harvest  season.  Attractive  alternatives  that

encouraged  farmers  to  redeem  their  PIK  certificates  and  sell  rather

than  store  grain  also  helped  avert  excess  stockpiling.  Livestock

producers  and  dairy  farmers  in  several  districts  are  benefitting

from  lower  feed  costs  and  from  higher  livestock  and  milk  prices.

The  San  Francisco  district  reports  a  record  pistachio  crop  and

higher  potato  and  grape  prices,  while  Florida  expects  an  8  percent

increase  in  orange  and  grapefruit  production over  the  year.

Financial  Sector

Loan 

activity 

improved 

somewhat 

in 

recent 

weeks.

Philadelphia  reports  continued  strength  in  commercial  and  industrial

loans  and  an  upturn  in  consumer  loans,  and  Atlanta  also  states  that

lending  has  remained  strong.  Cleveland  notes  that  loan  demand  rose

slightly  in  all  major  categories,  with  real  estate  and  consumer

loans  registering  the  greatest  growth. 

A  marginal  increase  in

Cleveland's  C&I  loans  represents  an  improvement  following  no  growth

in  the  third  quarter. 

St.  Louis  also  reported  strong  real  estate

and  consumer  lending  as  well  as  some  growth  in  commercial  loans.

Several  districts  noted  that  banks  are  promoting  the  use  of

home  equity  lines  of  credit  as  a  means  for  consumers  to  retain  some

V

measure  of  interest  deductibility  under  the  new  tax  law.  Atlanta

reported  that  demand  for  home  equity  loans  "has  surged  across  the

region",  while  Chicago,  New  York.  Philadelphia,  Richmond  and  St.

Louis  noted  an  expansion  in  banks'  promotion of  these  credit  lines.

FIRST DISTRICT  - BOSTON

Economic activity  in the  First District  remains sluggish.  Retail

markets in  the  region softened in  October and were mixed  in early November;

nonetheless, sales  remain solidly ahead of  last year.  Extensive

promotional  activity is holding down prices.  Manufacturers  continue  to

report  that business  is  slow, with no  evidence  of  a pickup.  Price

competition from both domestic and  overseas  producers  is  said  to  be  very

intense.  Respondents  are  devoting much attention to  cost  containment.

Retailing

Several retail  contacts  reported  sales below plan in October but

above  last year.  November to date  is much better in  some stores, but

similar  to  October in others.  Year-to-date sales  growth figures  are

generally better than those for  recent months.  The weakening occurred in

most  product  lines,  although clothing  categories were off more generally

than appliances  and home  electronics.  Inventories  are high in some stores

but  they are not  reported  to  be a serious problem.

Prices have  changed very little because retailers  perceive a need

for persistent promotional  price  reductions.  According  to  one  contact,

"Customers  are  looking  for  victory every  time  they go  into  a store."  In  a

similar vein, a department  store  representative  reported opting  for more

and  shorter sales  events  rather  than  a few traditional  "big  seasonal sales"

to  satisfy  consumer demand  for more reduced-price merchandise.  The  decline

in the value of  the dollar may  force  some price  increases,  however.  A

contact from  a discount  chain expects vendor prices  to  rise  fairly soon

I-2

because of exchange  rate  changes;  the  chain  imports  a substantial  fraction

of  its  products.  This  contact  also  expects  to be buying more goods  in the

United States  in response.  But neither of  these  changes has yet occurred.

First  District merchants  are moderately optimistic  about  the

remainder  of the year.  They expect  "pretty good"  Christmas sales,

finishing  out  the year with sales  growth between 5 and  7 percent  on a

comparable stores basis.

Manufacturing

Manufacturing activity  in the First District  remains  slow.

Contacts have not  experienced  any deterioration in orders  in  recent months,

but with one  exception they see no improvement.  Aerospace,  consumer

electronics  and housing-related products are  reported  to  be doing well;  the

general  industrial market  is flat  to  down;  the  demand  for  construction

materials  and supplies  is down, apparently  in response  to weakness  in

nonresidential construction.  The decline  in the value of  the dollar has

been of no discernible  benefit  to most of  the  firms  contacted.

Cost  containment  is receiving much emphasis.  Most  respondents have

ongoing  inventory control  programs  that  are  enabling  them to  operate with

lower  inventories  than in  the past.  Employment levels  are being  reduced,

even  at  firms with satisfactory sales  results;  more attention is  being paid

to  the  efficiency of white collar  personnel.  Capital  spending plans  for

1987  are  conservative;  contacts planning to  reduce spending  outnumber  those

planning increases.

The manufacturers  contacted  either report no  increases  in  input

prices  or  report  increases  in  the  2 to 4 percent range,  which they  expect

to  offset with efficiencies  in purchasing procedures.  Several  respondents

have recently instituted increases  in  their  own prices  of about  3 percent.

However,  competitive pressures are  said  to  be very intense, with domestic

competitors  mentioned as  frequently as  overseas producers.

New England Economic Project  Outlook

The New England Economic Project  (NEEP),  a nonprofit  corporation

made up of New England businesses and educational  institutions, has just

released  economic projections  for the  six New England states.  Taken

together,  the six state  forecasts call  for  employment  growth in the  region

to  accelerate somewhat  in  1987,  then slow  again in  1988.  The  composition

of growth is  projected to  change.  While nonmanufacturing industries will

continue  to  account  for most  of  the new jobs  created in the  region, the

manufacturing sector will not be the drag  on the  region's  economy that  it

was  in  1985 and 1986.  NEEP forecasts  that manufacturing  employment will

increase, albeit very modestly, over  the  course of  the next  two  years.

Unemployment  rates  in the region will  average a little below 4 percent  in

1987,  slightly higher  in 1988.  Per capita incomes  in the  region are

projected to  increase  relative  to  the national average.

II-1

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

The  modest  uptrend  in  the  Second  District  economy  continued  in

recent  weeks.  Retailers  reported  over-the-year  sales  gains  in  October

ranging  from  moderate  to  very  good  and  residential  building  remained

strong.  Business  activity  was  generally  steady  to  improved,  though

leasing  of  office  space  moderated  in  some  areas.  Small  Second  District

banks  report  that  home  equity  lines  of  credit  represent  only  a  small

portion  of their  consumer  loans.

Consumer Spending

Second  District  retail  sales  showed  further  over-the-year

improvement  during  October  with  respondents  describing  gains  as  ranging

from  moderate  to  very  good.  Purchases  by  foreign  visitors  continued  to

be  an  important  factor,  particularly  in  New  York  City. 

Apparel,

accessories,  furniture  and  home  furnishings  were  cited  as  items  in

generally  strong demand.

Sales  increases  during  October  were  from  6-13  percent  above

year-earlier  levels  and,  in  most  cases,  were  2 to  3 percent  higher  than

targeted.  As  a result,  inventories are  well under control  and  respondents

do  not  anticipate  the  need  for  heavy  promotional  activity  in  order  to

move merchandise  during the  coming  Christmas  season.  Retailers  generally

expect  moderate  over-the-year  gains  in  holiday  sales  but  one  respondent,

whose  Christmas  catalogue  orders  have  been  strong,  is  looking  for  a

double-digit  increase.

Business  Activity

Little  change  occurred  in  the  Second  District's  economic

expansion  since  the  last  meeting.  Eighty  percent  or  more  of  purchasing

managers  surveyed  in  Rochester  and  Buffalo  reported  that  business

II-2

conditions  were  stable  or  improved  during  October  and  three-fourths  of

the  managers  in  the  Syracuse  area's  third  quarter  survey  also  gave  that

response.  While  inventories  were  generally  described  as  at  satisfactory

levels,  an  increasing  percentage  of  managers  has  been  experiencing  a rise

in  commodity prices.

News  concerning the  District's  employment  outlook has  been  mixed

in  recent  weeks.  On  the  negative  side,  G.E.  plans  to  end  its  color  TV

tube  operations  in  upstate  New  York,  where  it  continues  phasing  out  large

engine  production,  and  ITT  may  cut  back  its  international  operations  in

New  York  City.  On  the  other  hand,  several  thousand  jobs  in  the  chemical

and  transportation  equipment  industries  have  been  retained  due  to  the

successful  negotiation  of  some  longstanding  problems.  In  addition,  a  new

railway  car  plant  has  opened  in  Yonkers  and  plans  for  a  sizable  new

operation  in  the  garment  industry  have  been  announced.  As  of  October,

unemployment  rates  in  New  York  State  and  New  Jersey  remained  1 1/2

percentage points  below the  national average.

With  regard  to  the  District's  longer  term  development,  New

Jersey  officials  recently  announced  plans  for  the  first  new  rail  line  in

the  New  York  metropolitan  region  in  50  years. 

The  $825  million

trolley-bus  system will  link  billions  of  dollars  of  proposed  residential

and commercial  projects  along 15  miles of the  Hudson  River waterfront.

Construction  and  Real  Estate

Activity  among  District  homebuilders  continued  strong  in  recent

weeks,  though  the  pace  was  less  hectic  than  at  the  height  of  the  season

in  the  spring  and  summer.  After  two  years  or  more  at  a  record  pace,

builders  in  several  areas  report  that  pent-up  demand  seems  finally  to

have  been  satisfied,  and  they  anticipate  a more  normal  but  healthy  rate

of  activity  in  1987.  While  some  seasonal  slack  will  occur  over  the  next

II-3

few months,  a  number  of  builders  have  already  signed  contracts  for  homes

to  be constructed  in  the  spring  of next  year.

Leasing  activity  in  the  commercial  real  estate  market  was  at  a

slow  to  moderate  pace  in  much  of  the  Second  District  during  recent

weeks.  A  major  exception  was  downtown  Manhattan  where  leasing  of  new

financial  center  buildings  remained  strong.  While  no  dramatic  absorption

of  space  occurred  in  areas  such  as  northern  New  Jersey,  Fairfield  County,

and  Westchester  County,  where  more  than  ample  supplies  of  office  space

exist,  few  major  new  projects  have  been  undertaken  there  in  recent

months.  As  a  result,  vacancy  rates  in  these  areas  have  shown  over-the-

year  declines.  However,  in  downtown  and  mid-Manhattan,  where  many  new

buildings  have  come  on  line,  rates  have  moved  somewhat  higher  though  they

are still  well  below the  national  average.

Financial  Developments

Small  banks  in  the  Second  District  report  that  home  equity  lines

of  credit  currently  represent  only  a  small  portion  of  their  outstanding

consumer  loans.  While  all  of  the  surveyed  banks  have  increased  their

efforts  to market  the  product,  each  expected  only  moderate  growth  in  its

volume  of  these  loans  through  1987. 

Several  banks  believe  that  more

rapid  growth  would  be  restrained  by  competition  from  other  banks  and

non-banks  and  also  by  a  continued  surge  in  second  mortgages  and

refinancing  arrangements.  Loan  officers  state  that  the  most  common  uses

of  the  credit  line  include  consolidating  debt,  financing  education,  and

providing  additional  cash  flow  for  business.  The  banks  suggested  that

they  can  prevent  consumers  from  using  the  line  of  credit  as  a  proxy  for

other  types  of  consumer  loans  by  providing  counseling  and  by  maintaining

high  underwriting  standards.  However,  only  one  bank  indicated  that  it

required  its  applicants  to  provide  information  on  how  the  money  is  to  be

used,  and  none  used this  type  of information  as a  criterion for  lending.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT  - PHILADELPHIA

Economic  conditions  in  the  Third District are  generally good.

Manufacturing activity  increased  in November  for the  fifth month in  a row,  and

retail  sales  rose  strongly in  October and November  following  slower than

expected growth in  September.  Total  loan volume at  major Third  District banks

increased  in October at  about the  same rate as  it has  been  growing since August,

slightly above the  pace earlier  in  the year.  Bankers  say this  growth continued

into  November as well.

The outlook  in  the Third District business  community  is  generally positive.

Manufacturers expect  to make  further gains  over  the next  six months.  Retailers

are optimistic  for the Christmas  shopping season and believe  that  1987 will  be a

good year, although  they expect the  growth of  sales  to  be  somewhat  less  than it

was  this  year.  Bankers have the least  optimistic views.  They believe  economic

growth  is  likely to  slacken next year,  bringing  a slowdown  in  lending  and

possibly lower  bank profits.

MANUFACTURING

Manufacturing activity  in  the region  is  posting  its  fifth  consecutive

monthly gain,  according to  the  latest Business  Outlook Survey.  Thirty-five

percent of  the  industrial companies  participating in the November  survey have

stepped up operations  from  last month's  rate, while only  13  percent have  cut

back.  Although this  is  the most widespread improvement since February, specific

measures of  industrial activity reflect only moderate growth  this month.  New

orders  and order  backlogs  are edging up,  and shipments  are  rising  fractionally.

Employment  indicators  are mixed;  the  length of  the average workweek  is

increasing  slightly, but  payrolls  are unchanged.  Overall,  business  conditions

III-2

are  slightly better  in  the nondurable goods  sector than  in  the  durable goods

sector.

Some upward  price movement  is  noted by  this month's  survey respondents.

Although two-thirds say their  input  costs  are steady,  22  percent report  paying

higher prices  for materials  and supplies.  Area firms  have  held the  line on  the

prices of  their  own products,  however.

Local manufacturers' expectations  remain mostly positive.  Looking ahead

six months,  42 percent of  the  November survey respondents  predict further

improvement,  34 percent  foresee steady conditions,  and only 15  percent

anticipate a slowdown.  On  balance, companies  polled  this month expect  increases

in  new orders  and  shipments and  a slight buildup  in  order backlogs.  They also

plan greater  capital outlays over the next six months.  However, most firms  plan

to hold employment at  current  levels.

RETAIL

Retailers  in  the region reported  good sales  in November, generally.

Department stores have  been experiencing greater than  expected  improvement over

last  year, with some marking gains  in  excess  of  10  percent.  Although discount

stores  are not achieving  gains  quite  this  large,  store executives say they  are

pleased with the  year-over-year  increases they  are making.  Appliances and home

furnishings are selling particularly well.  Merchants  say  the new lines  of  fall

clothing  are proving  to  be  very popular also.

While sales continue  to  be strong,  store executives contacted recently  say

profits remain under pressure  due to higher  expenses.  Many retailers are

repositioning  themselves  for up-scale markets,  which involves  large  up-front

outlays for  store remodeling,  advertising, and  new inventories.

Merchants  say the  current strength of  retail  sales  indicates  a good

Christmas season  for them, and  they are  raising sales projections  accordingly.

III-3

Looking  into  1987,  retailers  in the region  believe the  first half,  at  least,

should be  good.  The consensus  forecast  for the  year as  a whole  calls  for  solid

gains  but a lower  year-over-year  increase  than expected for 1985-1986.

FINANCE

Total loan volume at  large Third District banks  in  October was  up

approximately 12  percent  from September and  16  percent above  the October 1985

level.  Commercial and industrial  lending  is described as  strong by bank  lending

officers.  However, narrowing net  interest margins and  a concern  for credit

quality have led  some banks  to  direct funds  to money market investments rather

than  loans.

Figures from weekly-reporting banks  indicate that  consumer  loan growth

slackened in October  in the Third District,  but  banks  contacted in November said

that credit card  and other  consumer  installment  lending was picking up.  Banks

in the  region are  beginning to offer  affinity group  credit card  programs  and

they are expanding promotion  of  home  equity lending;  however, they say  it is too

soon to  tell whether these programs  have significantly affected consumer

borrowing.

Bankers expect  economic  growth to  slow during  1987,  and  they expect  both

business  and  consumer  loan demand to  ease as a result.  Regardless of economic

developments  in the  coming  year, bankers  express concern about  the outlook  for

bank earnings  in  1987.  Some note  slower  deposit growth currently, and say their

cost  of funds  will rise  if they have  to  pay more for deposits  to  support asset

growth.  The impact  of  the new tax law  on banks  is also mentioned as  a negative

factor  for earnings.

IV-1

FOURTH  DISTRICT  - CLEVELAND

Summary

The  regional  economy  showed  slight  improvement  during  October.

Production  and  new  orders  are  up  in  some  major  cities  in  the  district,  and

both  manufacturing  and  nonmanufacturing  employment  continue  to  increase.

Other  economic  indicators  are  mixed:  retail  sales  have  picked  up,  mostly

in household  and  soft  goods;  housing  starts  are  progressing  at  a  moderate

pace;  but  auto  sales  have  fallen  dramatically. 

A  number  of  the

respondents  characterize  their  local  economies  as  weakly healthy.

Retail  Sales

Retail  sales  picked  up  slightly  from  a  slow  September  pace  but  were

unevenly  distributed  throughout  the  fourth  district  and  across  product

lines. 

Major  retailers  report  that  sales  in  their  Pittsburgh  outlets

improved  more  than  in  many  of  their  Ohio  outlets. 

Sales  of  major

appliances  have  tapered  off  in  the  past  6  weeks,  while  furniture,  home

furnishings,  and  soft  goods  show  strong  gains  relative  to  other  areas  of

the  country.  Inventories  are  reported  to  be  at  normal  levels.  Retailers

claim  that  prospects  for  the  holiday  season  have  improved  some,  and  they

expect  sales  increases  between  5  to  7 percent  over  last  year.

Domestic  automobile  sales  in  the  fourth  district  have  generally

followed  national  trends  in  which  sales  dipped  sharply  after  incentive

programs  expired.  Inventories  at  non-GMC  dealers  remain  on  the  low  side,

especially  on  small  cars. 

GM  dealers  report  that  inventories  are

manageable,  but  this  appears  to  be  due  to  their  reluctance  to  order  large

quantities  of  new  models. 

Import  dealers  report  mixed  sales,  but  all

state  that  inventory  levels  are  rising.

IV-2

Labor  Markets

Ohio's  unemployment  rate  dropped  dramatically  in  October,  from  a

seasonally  adjusted  rate  of  8.5  percent  (in  September)  to  7.7  percent.

The  decline  is  due  in part  to  an  increase  in  employment of  75,000  jobs.

The  service  sector  appears  to  account  for  much  of  this  growth.

Over  the  past  year,  service  industry  employment  increased  by  7.0  percent,

compared  to  4.7  percent  for  services  in  the  U.S.  Overall  employment  grew

by  3.0  in  Ohio  and  2.4  percent  in  the  U.S.  Business  service  industries

were  particularly  strong  in  Ohio  over  the  year,  expanding  employment  by

13.2  percent.

Fourth  quarter  1986  employment  projections  by  Cleveland  employers

suggest  that  these  employment  trends  will  continue  for  the  rest  of  the

year.

Manufacturing

Manufacturing  employment  in  the  fourth  district  increased by  roughly

.3 percent  during  September,  although  employment  is  still  below  the  level

achieved  a  year  ago.  The  recent  employment  growth  was  shared  by  most

metropolitan  areas  in  the  district,  with  the  notable  exception  of

Pittsburgh.  Average  weekly  hours  and  earnings  are  up  slightly  over  last

month.

Manufacturers  report  an  increase  in  new  orders,  production,  and

prices  but  constant  inventory  levels  during  October.  Part  of  the  increase

in  production  is  attributed  to  the  beginning  of  production  of  new  car

models. 

However,  a  current  strike  at  a  GM  facility  has  caused  the

shutdown  of  operations  of  a number  of  assembly  plants  in  the  district.  In

addition,  GM  recently  announced  that  two  large  assembly  plants  employing

IV-3

6400  workers  in  the  Cincinnati  area  will  be  closed by  1990.

Steel  production  in  the  fourth  district  continues  to  increase

modestly,  despite  the  continued  shutdown  of  USX.  Raw  steel  production  in

the  first  part  of  November  was  13  percent  above  the  pre-strike  level.

Falling  inventory  levels  have  now  reached  their  lowest  level  in  two

years. 

Capacity  utilization  is  still  relatively  low  at  58  percent.

Specialty  steel  production  is  also  up. 

One  customized  steel  finishing

company  reports  that  they are  fully  booked  through  December  and  overbooked

through January.

Housing

The  slowdown in  Midwestern housing  markets  has  tapered  off.  Housing

starts  and sales  are  increasing  at  a healthy but  moderate  pace.

Many  midwestern  mortgage  borrowers  prefer  to  lock  in  currently  low

mortgage  rates,  apparently  because  they  perceive  the  current  level  of

mortgage  rates  to  be  the  trough  in  long-term  rates  for  this  economic

cycle. 

Nonetheless, 

the  adjusting  rate  mortgage 

is 

growing 

in

popularity.

Banking

Loan  demand  has  risen  slightly  at  district  banks.  Loans  outstanding

in  all  major  categories  at  large  banks  increased  in  October.  Continued

strength  in  the  demand  for  real  estate  and  consumer  installment  loans

accounts  for  most  of  the  overall  loan  growth. 

Both  real  estate  and

installment  loans  rose  at  an  annual  rate  of  20  percent. 

Marginal

increases  in  commercial  and  industrial  loans  outstanding  in  October

represented  an  improvement  over  the  lack  of  business  loan  growth  in  the

third  quarter.

V-1

FIFTH  DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Overview

Manufacturing  remains  at  about  the  level  reported  a few weeks  ago,  which

was  improved  from midsummer's  pace,  and  producers  are generally optimistic

about  prospects  for their  businesses  in the  months ahead.  In retailing,

non-auto  sales  are stronger,  and  store managers  expect a good  holiday  season.

Three-fourths  of producers and  retailers  forecast  inflation  to  be between  two

and four  percent  in 1987.  Sales  of homes  are  weakening faster than  usual  at

this  time  of year,  and  realtors  believe  that  it will  take  lower  mortgage rates

to  increase  activity  in this  sector.  In the financial  sector,  home

equity-line  loans  are  being  offered  by most  large  banks  in the District,  and

customer  response has  been strong.  District agricultural  bankers  expect  a new

round of  farm failures  due  to  the  drought-depressed harvest  and  low crop

prices.

Consumer  Spending

Retail  sales,  other than  new car  sales,  are  generally strong  throughout

most  of the  District,  and  store  managers  expect a good Christmas  season,

according  to our  directors.  Their reports  are  confirmed  by our survey of

retailers;  61  percent say  that  their  sales  volume  in November  is running  ahead

of  October's  pace,  seasonally adjusted. This  month's  survey of retailers  also

indicates  that  a higher  percentage  of respondents  are  optimistic  about  the

outlook  for their  businesses  and  for  general  business  conditions  six  months

from now.

Manufacturing

Manufacturing  activity  in November  is little  changed  from October,  judging

from District  survey  results.  The average  rate of capacity  utilization  is up

one  percentage point,  but  the  percentages of firms  reporting  increases  in

shipments  or employment  are  down  slightly  from the  percentages  reported  last

month.  Reports  of increases,  however,  still  outnumber those  of decreases.

Compared  with  the  results  of  last month's  survey,  those  for this  month

show a larger percentage  of manufacturers  optimistic about  their business

prospects  six months  from  now.  Forty-five  percent of  the  respondents  indicate

that  they expect  increased sales  as  a result  of improved  international  trade

conditions, while  15  percent  expect reduced  sales  due  to  less  favorable

international  trade  conditions.  All  but a handful  of the  remaining

respondents  indicate  that international  trade  conditions  have no  influence  on

their businesses.

Housing

Housing  sales  remain  above year-ago levels  but are weakening  rapidly.  The

downturn  appears  to  be more  than  seasonal  and  is attributed  to  higher home

prices  that  are  keeping some  potential  buyers  out of  the  market,  despite  lower

mortgage  rates.  Realtors  believe  that  it will  take another decline  in

mortgage  rates  to  support  this  industry  in the months  ahead.

Inflation  Expectations

We  asked  our  survey  respondents--primarily  manufacturers  and  retailers--to

forecast  the  general  level  of inflation  for  1987.  The  results  are  summarized

in the  table  below.

1987  Inflation  Forecast 

Percent  of Respondents

Under  2 % 
2% to  3% 
3% to  4% 
4% to  5% 
Over  5% 

5
29
48
13
5

Financial

A telephone survey  of twenty  large  District  banks was  conducted  to

determine  the  activity  in and  terms  of home  equity-line  loans.  Eighteen  of

the  banks  surveyed  are  currently offering  these  loans,  and most  of  these  are

very  active in advertising their  new  product.  The  remaining  two  banks  expect

to  be  offering equity-line  loans  by  December  15.

The  loans  are structured  in various  ways.  Most  are tied  to  the  prime

rate,  but  some  are  tied to  T-bills  or  CD's.  Some  banks  offer  the  option of

balloon  payments  or a rollover  of the  principal  at  maturity periods  of  up  to

15 years,  or  amortization  in monthly installments.

Most  of the  banks  offering  the  loans  describe  the  response with  words  such

as  "very  strong,"  "dynamite,"  and  "hot,"  although  four  banks  located  in a

relatively depressed  part of the  District  did  not regard the  response  as

unusually good.  Bankers  feel  that  home-equity  line  loans  will  become

increasingly  popular.  One  respondent describes  these  loans  as  the most

significant new  product  since  money market  accounts.

Agriculture

Revised  estimates  of  crop yields  based  on  nearly complete  harvests  are  in

line with  estimates  earlier this  fall.  As  expected,  drought damage will  mean

severe hardship  for  some district  farmers,  especially because  of low crop

prices.  Agricultural  bankers  expect  that more farmers will  be  out  of business

by  next spring.

VI-1

SIXTH  DISTRICT  - ATLANTA

Economic  activity  in  the  Southeast  remains  mixed.  Manufacturing  employment

has  posted  little  growth,  although  employment  growth  in  services  is  accelerating.

Residential  and  commercial  construction  is  active,  but  there  has  been  a  shift  away  from

multi-family  dwellings  and  office  building.  Lending  has  remained  strong,  but  consumer

purchases  of  cars  and  other  durables  have  slowed.  Stabilized  oil  prices  have  prevented

further  economic  decline  in  the  western  part  of  the  District.  Crop  production  and

income  will  be  down  substantially,  although  citrus  growers  should  do well.

Employment  and  Industry.  The  District's  unemployment  rate  for  September  was

steady  at  8.1  percent.  The  services  industry  kept  its  lead  over  all  industries  in  both  the

level  and  growth  rate  of  employment.  Employment  in  the  trade  sector  grew  by  3.8

percent  from  a  year  ago  in  September,  a  slowing  from  4.8  percent  in  the  previous  year.

By  contrast,  construction  employment  growth  has been  flat since  April.

Manufacturing  employment  has  registered  little  change  since  the  first  of  the

year.  Lack  of  demand  for  petroleum-related  machinery  and  nuclear  power  generating

equipment  has  forced  layoffs  in  some  regional  states.  A  slump  in  some  capital  goods

markets-electronics  and  construction  equipment-has  hurt  fabricated  metal  producers.

Labor  disputes  in  the  steel  and  transportation  equipment  industries  have  idled  nearly

4,000  workers in  Alabama.

More  positively,  apparel  and  textile  employment  has  been  increasing  since  July.

Employment  growth  for  food  processors  has  been  steady;  falling  commodity  prices  have

stimulated  this industry.

Consumer  Spending.  Sixth District retailers  reported  moderate  sales  gains  during

October.  Cooler  weather  spurred  apparel sales  across  the region,  but  movement  of  big-

ticket  items  was  sluggish.  Retailers  in  Tampa,  Orlando,  Atlanta,  and  Nashville  noted

strong  consumer  demand  induced  by  fierce  price  and  promotional  competition,  cutting

profit  margins.  Alabama,  Mississippi,  and  Louisiana  retailers,  however,  report  weak

VI-2

demand  and  less  vibrant  competition.  Sales  in  Louisiana  are  expected  to  remain  very

weak  despite the recent  firming of  oil prices.

With  the  ending  of  aggressive  marketing  and  financing  programs  in  October,

District  car  sales  returned  to  the  sluggish  pace  prevailing  earlier  this year.  Car  dealers

in  the  region  also  fear that  September  sales have  borrowed  heavily  from  demand  late  this

year  and  early in  1987.

Construction.  After  declining  in  July  and  August,  single-family  building  permits

in  the  Sixth  District  turned  up  in  September.  Georgia  led  the  nation  in  year-over-year

sales  growth  of  existing  single-family  homes.  Florida  placed  third  in  the  ranking,  while

only  one  state  in  the  nation  suffered  a  worse  sales  decline  than  Louisiana.  Nashville

stands out  among  District cities  as a  hotbed of  activity.

Contacts  in  Miami  report  an  all-time  high  of  condominium  inventories,  and  poor

demand  has  brought  multi-family  construction  in  New  Orleans  to  a  standstill.  Although

builders  in  Atlanta  and  Nashville  note  slowing  of construction,  they  believe  their  markets

will  fare  better  in  1987  than  most  in  the  nation.

Commercial  developers  across 

the  Southeast  report  slowing  activity  and

anticipate  further  deceleration  in  the  coming  months.  New  Orleans  remains  the region's

weakest  market,  but  contacts  there report  some  expansion of  retail construction  to  meet

the  demands  of  tourists  and  conventioneers.  The  south  Florida  market  remains  saturated

with  office,  retail,  and  industrial  space.  Atlanta's  glutted  office  market  is  leading

developers 

to  focus  on  retail  and 

industrial  construction. 

The  relatively  short

construction  time  required  for  completion  of  such  projects  also  suggests  these  markets

will  soon  be  saturated.  Nashville  developers  are  confident  that  their  market  will

continue to  experience  strong  but "controlled" growth.

Financial  Services.  Total  loans  at  large  Sixth  District  banks  grew  at  the  same

rate  in  September  compared  to  a  year  ago.  Real  estate  lending  dipped  slightly  from

August,  while  business  and  consumer  loan  growth  maintained  its  August  pace.

VI-3

In  response  to  the  effects  of  tax  reform,  demand  for  home  equity  loans  has

surged  across  the  region.  Bankers  say  these  loans  have  gained  popularity  because  they

retain  at  least  partial  interest  deductibility  under  the  new  tax  laws.  Some  bankers

expect  many  homeowners  to  substitute  these  loans  for card  and  installment  credit.

Tourism.  Travel  to  the  Southeast  remains  generally  strong.  Automobile  travel

has  increased  dramatically  over  last  year.  Passenger  volume  in  the  region's  airports  is

also  up,  due  largely  to  the  addition  of  new  flights.  Cruise  ship  bookings  are  solid,

according  to  industry sources.  Convention  business  is  up  throughout  the  region.  Year-to-

date  tax  revenues  from  the  hotel  industry  are  up  around  10  percent  over  last  year.

However,  in  response  to  a  large  revenue  shortfall,  Louisiana  has  closed  22  out  of  32

state-operated  visitor facilities  and  is  laying off tourist-related  government  employees.

Agriculture,  Forestry,  and  Mining. 

Since  its  low  of  $12.25  per  barrel  in

midsummer,  the  price  of  Gulf  Coast  sweet  crude  petroleum  has  climbed  approximately

15  percent  to reach  $14  in  November.  The  price  improvement  was  accompanied  by  a  20

percent  increase  in  the  number  of  oil  rigs  operating  in  the  District.  Even  so,  the  140

active  rigs  in  early  November  equaled  slightly  less  than  half  of  the  number  a  year  ago.

Approximately  2.3  million  tons  of  coal  were  mined  in  October,  down  one  million  from

October  1985  and  roughly  9  percent  less  than  in  September  this  year.  Despite  a  5

percent  coal  price decline,  oil  and  natural  gas  remain  highly  competitive.

Agricultural  conditions  are  mixed;  poultry  and  livestock  producers  are  doing

rather  well,  but  income  is  down  for  most  crops.  Recent  unfavorable  weather  and  insect

and  disease  damage  have  lowered  field  crop  prospects  in  Louisiana,  while  recovery  from

the  drought  in  Tennessee  and  Alabama  has  improved  expected  yields.  Florida  orange  and

grapefruit  crops  are  projected  to  be  almost  8  percent  greater  than last  year.  The  lumber

market  has  been  relatively  stable  in  recent  weeks;  prices  have  been  modestly higher  than

during  the summer  but  10  to  20  percent less  than last  spring.

VII-1

SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.  Trends  in employment  indicate that  the pace of  activity  in this

District continues  to  trail the U.S.  Additional layoffs  and  plant  closings

recently have been announced  in several  industries.  Capital goods  demand generally

remains  weak.  Auto production  schedules have been reduced but  remain near

year-earlier  levels.  Consumer spending  and residential  investment are relatively

strong.  Commercial construction, mainly in  the Chicago  area but  also in  other

District centers,  continues  at a high level.  Some holders of  real estate  and other

assets  are pushing to dispose of  these by year-end to  receive more favorable tax

treatment.  Prices paid  for materials  and components  increased significantly  in

October for  steel  and various  other items.  A large  retailer  reports prices of

textiles  rose  after import  restrictions  were  imposed.  Livestock and dairy  farmers

have been helped by low feed  costs.

Plant Closings  and Jobs.  District companies  in  several  industries continue  to

announce reductions  in employment  and shutdowns  of  manufacturing plants and  other

facilities.  Most notable  is  General Motors'  planned closing of  7 manufacturing

plants  and part of  another plant  in  the  District, currently employing more  than

20,000.  Cummins Engine,  a leading diesel producer, plans  to  close two plants  in

the District employing  1,500.  We  are  informed by industry  analysts  that  the GM and

Cummins plant  closings  are part of  broad programs  to  reduce capacity.  Operations

will  be consolidated  in other plants.  Other  closings  recently announced include  a

computer parts  distribution  center  in  Indiana, a town's  largest  employer  with 1,000

workers;  an  Illinois hog processing plant,  780  employees;  two motor  vehicles parts

makers  near Chicago;  and the Michigan headquarters of  a machine tool maker.

VII-2

Reasons  cited for  these  closings  include  foreign  competition, excess  capacity,  high

labor costs,  and mergers.  A Chicago-based paper company  is  cutting  1,000  jobs

after  a merger,  and its  local  headquarters  is  expected to  close.  At  least  two  more

tire manufacturing plants  in  Illinois  and  Iowa  are  likely to  be  shut  down.

Additional jobs  cutbacks  have been announced  in computers, health care products,

banking, machine tools,  and heavy-duty transmissions.  On the plus  side,  additions

to  employment totaling  nearly 400  are planned by two  consumer  appliance makers  in

Iowa, a response  to  strong  demand.  Also favorable  are  the expansion plans of

Japanese  vehicle producers  in  several  locations.

Capital Goods.  Demand for mechanical  capital  goods  remains  weak.  The market  for

industrial diesel engines  is  very slow.  Orders  for machine tools  have declined.

Oil  and gas  development equipment  continues depressed.  The  last U.S.  producer of

50-100  horsepower  tractors plans  to  close  its Michigan plant,  and  shift all

production  to  Europe.  Most smaller  tractors  have been  imported  for years.  The

Department of  Justice has  signaled that  it  will  raise no  antitrust  objections to

consolidations that would  reduce  from  four  to two  the number of  U.S. producers  of

large  four-wheel-drive tractors.  Deere, shut down by  a strike  since August  1, has

offered aggressive  incentives  to  reduce  tractor and  combine  inventories,  including

big discounts  and  zero-interest financing  for up  to  two years.  Orders have  slumped

for  air conditioning equipment  for  office buildings,  as  construction nationwide has

turned  down.

Motor Vehicles.  Auto production  schedules have  been cut  from earlier plans  but

remain at high levels through the first  quarter  of  1987.  Heavy  truck orders  have

improved  slightly.  Sales of  heavies  are projected by one  analyst at  125,000  in

1986  and  130,000,  possibly up  to  140,000,  in 1987.

VII-3

Steel.  The  work stoppage  at USX since  August  1 has boosted  demand  for  other

steel producers.  A leading  Chicago-area producer  is  now operating  at  effective

capacity,  in part  reflecting a reduction by one-third  in the  firm's  capacity.

Steel  prices have  increased  on new contracts,  but most  integrated producers  are

still  losing money.  Analysts  expect prices  to  fall  once the  USX  labor dispute  is

settled.  Orders  for  steel  from capital goods  producers  remain  weak.  Oil  and  gas

industry demand  for pipe  is  up,  from a very  low  level.

Inflation.  Prices  paid rose  at an  "alarming  rate"  in  October, according  to  the

Purchasing Management Association of  Chicago.  Higher prices  were  reported  for  a

broad  range  of  products  and materials.  Largest  increases were  for steel  sheet  and

plates,  related to  the work stoppage at  USX, and also  to  the  Administration's

partially  effective program to  limit  steel  imports.  Other categories  with higher

prices  included corrugated  and kraft paper, wood,  caustic soda,  resins,  and

precious metals.  One airline  analyst discounts  reports  of  a renewed "fare  war."

Nonresidential  Construction.  Work on  office buildings  in  downtown Chicago

continues at  a vigorous  pace,  despite high vacancies.  Some projects have been

deferred  for  lack  of  sufficient preleasing,  but others  already underway assure  a

high  level of  activity  into  1987.  Manufacturing building  is  low except  for

warehouse facilities  in  locations well-served by major roads.  Highway work is

slowing rapidly because Congress  did not pass  enabling  legislation prior to

adjournment.

Residential Construction.  Home building  is  well  above  last  year  in many parts

of  the Midwest  including  the Chicago  area.  Multifamily starts  also  are up

substantially  in  the Chicago area.  Thirty-year  fixed-rate mortgages  are  commonly

being offered  at  rates  ranging from  9.5-9.75  percent.  Mobile home shipments by

VII-4

Indiana  builders,  a major  center  of  this  industry, are  higher  this year,  in

contrast with a declining national  trend.

Consumer  Spending.  A large general merchandise chain projects  a sizable  rise

in  general merchandise  sales  in  1986,  with prices  up  only  slightly.  A smaller rise

in  dollar  sales  and  larger  price  increases  are  expected  in  1987.  Restraints  on

textile  and apparel  imports  are  blamed  for a recent jump  in  prices  in  these  lines,

which had been stable.  Airline  traffic was up  strongly  in  September  and October,

with prices  stable.  A consultant expects  consolidations and resulting  cost  cuts  to

improve profitability in  1987.  Second mortgages  are  being  advertised extensively

by banks,  S&LS,  and other  lenders.  Some  advertisers  are holders  of  first

mortgages.  Second mortgages  are being  advertised as  a way of  tapping  accumulated

home  equity and avoiding  loss  of  interest deductibility under  the new tax law.

Agriculture.  Bumper  corn and  soybean harvest estimates were  raised  recently

for Iowa and Wisconsin, contrary  to  many analysts' projections  following heavy

September-October rains.  Production estimates were  cut  slightly  for Indiana.

Prices  remain  low but have edged higher  in  recent weeks.  A feared storage  crunch

was  lessened by a stretched-out harvest  season, caused by heavy rains,  and

attractive  options offered to  farmers which encouraged them to  redeem PIK

certificates  and sell  their grain rather  than store  it under the  government's

support program.  Returns to  livestock producers  are quite  favorable because of  low

feed  costs  and higher prices  for  cattle  and hogs.  Dairy  farmers  also  are

benefitting  from  lower  feed costs.  Milk prices have recovered to  year  ago  levels

as  cuts  in  dairy  cow numbers,  from  the whole-herd buy-out program, and  strong  gains

in  commercial demand  for milk have trimmed  the milk surplus.

VIII-1

EIGHTH  DISTRICT - ST. LOUIS

Summary

The District's  expansion  of employment  and construction exceeded

the nation's  in  recent months, while  the pace  of  retail  sales  trailed the

national  trend.  Strong real estate  and  consumer  lending characterize  the

local banking market.  Harvests  are nearly complete  except  in Missouri

where heavy rains  have delayed the  fall harvest.

Employment

District  nonfarm employment  increased at  a 4.6  percent  rate in

the third  quarter compared with 1.7  percent  for the  nation.  Nonfarm

employment growth in  the  region was  led by the  construction  sector,  with

third  quarter employment 15.8  percent above last  year's  third quarter

level.  Despite a 1.4  percent rate  of decline  in manufacturing jobs,  the

food  processing sector  continues  to expand.  Employment  in the  District

electrical equipment  sector  picked up  in the  third quarter after declines

in the  first half.  The  weaker dollar  reportedly has  led  to  increased

foreign demand  for  the region's  wood pulp and paperboard products.

Depressed  coal prices  have contributed to  the contraction of mining

activity  in Western Kentucky  this  year.  A strike  by workers in  an auto

electronics  plant  in  Indiana caused the layoff of  5,000  auto workers in

St. Louis  and  900 workers in  Bowling Green, Kentucky beginning

November  18.

Construction

Third quarter construction  activity expanded  faster  in  the

District  than in  the  nation.  The value of  residential construction

VIII-2

contracts  awarded in the  District  grew at  a 10.9  percent rate  compared

with a 5.0  percent  rate of  decline nationally.  Third quarter  residential

contracts in  the District  were 14.0  percent above  the level of  the same

period  in 1985,  exceeding  the nation's  5.7  percent  growth.  In  contrast

to  District  trends, Louisville reported a sharp increase in multi-family

building in  comparison with  last  year.  The value  of nonresidential

construction contracts  expanded  at  a 15.4  percent rate  in the  third

quarter,  compared with the nation's  0.5  percent pace.

Consumer  Spending

District  retail  sales  grew at  a 2.2  percent rate  in the  three

months  through August,  with  sharp losses  in Missouri dampening regional

growth.  In  comparison, national sales  grew at  a 6.8  percent  pace during

the  period.  Contacts  reported vigorous  spending  on new cars  in

September, but  few sales  in  October.

Banking

For  the  three  months  ending October,  total loans  at  large

District  banks  grew at  a 12.8  percent annual rate,  more than twice  the

6.2  percent rate  for  the  same  period  last  year.  Real estate  loan growth

was  the dominant  factor,  expanding at  a 24.1 percent rate compared with

4.0  percent  for  the  same August-October  period  in 1985.  Commercial

lending, which had  declined  during  the third  quarter, picked up slightly

in October.  Consumer lending continues  strong, expanding at a 19.9

percent  annual rate,  a rate  comparable with  the  same  period  last year.

A recent  survey  of District  bankers  indicates a continued

willingness  to make  consumer  installment loans  as  they have  not

VIII-3

experienced rising delinquencies.  Bankers are  actively promoting  home

equity lines  of  credit  in  response  to  the  phasing-out of  the  tax

deductibility of consumer  interest costs.  One  large bank has eliminated

all points  and  closing costs  for  home equity  loans  until January 31,  1987.

During  the last  five weeks, numerous  banks and savings and  loans

have  lowered their  passbook rate  to a range of  4.8  to 5.0 percent.  One

large  bank, however, in  an attempt  to  gain market  share,  increased its

rate  to  6.0  percent  for  accounts maintaining  a minimum balance  of  $200.00.

Agriculture

Contacts  suggest  that  despite low crop prices, high government

payments have  allowed many local  farmers  to  improve  their  financial

positions.  They indicate  that  the  failure rate  of  farmers is  unchanged

or  slightly lower  than last  year because  the  most  financially stressed

farmers have already left  farming.  The slide  in land prices  is  expected

to  slow or  stop  but no  significant appreciation is  anticipated.

Harvests  are nearly  complete or  are ahead  of schedule  in all

District  states  except  Missouri where heavy October rains  delayed corn

and  soybean harvests.  Flooding destroyed approximately 4 percent  of

Missouri's  soybean crop.  Despite  the adverse weather, Missouri  farmers

enjoyed a record corn yield  and a strong  soybean yield.

IX - 1

NINTH DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

Moderate  growth  appears  to  have  continued  this  fall  in  the  Ninth

District.  Labor  market  conditions  have  held  firm,  as  have  most  types  of  con-

sumer spending.  Aggregate nonresidential construction has held  up,  as has  the

district's  important  wood  products  sector.  The  agricultural  outlook  has  been

brightened  by  the  likelihood  of  big  crops  and  their  attendant  government

payments.  But  farm  bankruptcies have  not abated.

Employment

Ninth District  labor markets have  not weakened  recently.  The Minne-

apolis-St.  Paul  help-wanted  advertising  index  rose  2.7  percent  in  September.

District  unemployment  rates  did  not  rise  significantly  in  September.  Minne-

sota's  unemployment  rate  fell  a bit,  to  4.2  percent,  while  its  Twin  City area

rate  rose  a bit,  to  just  3.7 percent.  At  the  same  time,  additional hiring  in

durable goods  manufacturing helped bring South  Dakota's  unemployment rate down

to  3.6  percent.  Total  employment  declined  somewhat  in  both  Montana  and  North

Dakota, but the  unemployment rate  rose only slightly  in the  former and fell  in

the  latter.

Still,  Twin  City  manufacturing  employment  continues  to  be  affected

by  the  problems  of  its  large  multinational  manufacturers.  One  of  those  re-

cently  announced  that  1,000  of  its  19,000  area  employees  will  be  laid  off by

January.

Consumer Spending

Retail  spending  on  general  merchandise  has  held  up  well  recently,

reflecting  the  national  trend.  One  large  chain  reports  its  October  sales  up

12.4  percent  from  a year  ago  and  its  November  sales  also  good.  Inventories

IX  -2

are  in  good  shape.  A banker  reports  that  another  chain  operating  throughout

South  Dakota  has  had  good  October and  November  sales  too.  But  Bank directors

continue  to  report  the  problems  of  small  town, "Main Street"  retailers  in  farm

areas.

Motor  vehicle  sales  have  also  been  consistent  with  the  national

trend;  they  have  fallen  off  recently  after  big  gains  earlier  this  fall.  The

district  office  of  one  domestic  manufacturer  notes  that  this  October  its  car

sales  dropped  4.2  percent  below  last  October's  level.  Another  manufacturer

reports  a similar pattern,  but  notes  that  its  inventories  are  still  low.

Bank directors and members  of  the Ninth  District  Advisory  Council  on

Small  Business,  Agriculture,  and  Labor  report  healthy levels  of  tourist  spend-

ing  in  most  district  tourist  areas. 

They  say  summer  spending  was  generally

higher  than  last  year,  as  expected,  and  most  are  expecting  winter  business  to

be brisk.

Housing  activity  has  slowed  from  its  rapid  pace  earlier  in  the

year. 

Minnesota's  Twin  City  area  home  sales  were  lower  this  October  than

last. 

Over  the  same  period,  multifamily  housing  starts  were  also  lower

there.  A  banker  reports  that  bad  weather  slowed  housing  activity  in  South

Dakota  as  well.  But a Bank  director notes  that  the  demand  for  seasonal  dwell-

ings  in Minnesota resort areas  has been good.

Construction

In  contrast  to  housing,  the  steady  pace  of  nonresidential  building

has continued.  Reflecting higher demand  for space, the vacancy rates  for both

commercial  office  and  industrial  buildings  in  the  Minneapolis-St.Paul  metro-

politan  area  fell  between  June  and  September.  In  fact,  nonresidential  build-

ing  contracts  in Minnesota  were  64  percent  higher  this  September  than  last.  A

IX  -3

Bank  director  notes  an  unusually  large number  of  big  construction  projects  in

and  around  Duluth,  Minnesota.  And  while  a  labor  leader  in North  Dakota  re-

ports  that  construction  activity  in  North  Dakota  has  fallen  overall,  recent

activity has  included  some public  works  and  military-related construction.

Resources

Resource-related  industries  have  continued  to  show  a  wide  range  of

performance.  The  large  and growing  wood products  sector  continues  to do  quite

well.  A  Bank  director  reports  that  paper  mills  in  the  northeastern  part  of

the  district  are running at  full  capacity.  Pulp prices  are quite  firm and  may

rise  more.  He  notes  that  waferboard  plants  are  also  running  full  and  that

competition  from  new  plants  may  create  problems  for  existing  wood  products

plants  in  this  district.  An  open pit  copper  mine  employing 300  is  now operat-

ing  in  Montana,  and  the  important  White  Pine  copper mine  in  the  Upper  Penin-

sula  of  Michigan  is  now  doing  a  little  better  than  breaking  even.  But  both

iron and  oil extraction are still  at  low levels,  with an uncertain  future.

Agriculture

Big  crops  and  government  payments  are  brightening  overall  agricul-

tural  conditions. 

A  record  or  near-record  corn  crop  is  being  reaped  in  Minne-

sota.  A  Bank director  expects government  payments  on  the  excellent  wheat  crop

in Montana  to help the hard-pressed  wheat farmers  there.  One respondent  cites

the  potential  economic  stimulus  inherent  in  the  $670  million  government  pay-

ments  to  North  Dakota.  However,  a  South  Dakota banker  believes  that  farmers

are  going  to  use  a  lot  of  income  just  repaying  debts  and  increasing  their

depleted  savings. 

And  several  respondents  note  that  farm  bankruptcies  are

still  rising  in parts  of  the  district.

TENTH DISTRICT  - KANSAS  CITY

Overview.  Only modest  improvement  is  apparent  in  Tenth District

economic activity.  Retail  sales  continue  to  improve,  although district  auto

sales  shared  in the national  decline.  Inventory  levels  generally are viewed

as  satisfactory, and prices  are  expected to  remain relatively  stable.  The

energy  and agriculture  sectors  remain weak.  Some weakening in housing

activity is  expected.  Demand for mortgage  funds has  moderated and mortgage

rates are  expected  to  remain  steady.  Total loan demand at  commercial banks

was  generally constant  or  down over  the  past  month.

Retail  sales.  Tenth District retailers  report  that  sales  are moderately

stronger  than a year  ago and generally have been improving over  the  last  three

months.  Recently, retail  sales  of  furniture,  electronics,  and women's  apparel

have been particularly  strong.  Prices  have changed little  during  the  last

three months  and are expected  to  remain relatively  stable.  Most  retailers  are

satisfied with their current  inventory  levels,  although  some  would prefer to

trim  their  inventories modestly.  Most retailers  expect  sales  during  the

holiday season to  be  as  good  as  or better than last year.

Automobile  sales.  Tenth District  automobile dealers  experienced poor

sales  in October following the  end of  low-interest  factory  incentives.

Inventories  of  1986  models have been depleted, but dealers  are building their

stocks  of  1987  models  cautiously because they  are  not optimistic  about the

short-run  sales  outlook.  Buyers  have been conditioned to  expect  incentive

programs,  and many dealers  expect  that sluggish sales  will  soon  force  the

automobile manufacturers  into  a new round  of  incentives.

Purchasing agents.  Purchasing agents  in  the Tenth District continue  to

report  slightly higher  input prices, due partly to  the  depreciation of the

dollar  and the  steel  strike.  Most purchasing agents  expect  relatively stable

X-2

prices  over  the  next  three  months.  Materials  are  readily available,  and no

problems  with availability or  lead  times  are  expected.  Inventory  levels

generally are  regarded  as  satisfactory.  Some  firms,  however, have  been

trimming inventories  and plan  to  continue  this  policy for  the  rest  of  the

year.

Housing activity and  finance.  Most homebuilders  report that  single-

family housing starts  have increased from  last year's  levels, but multifamily

starts  have varied widely by  locality.  Homebuilders  expect normal  seasonal

declines  in  single-family starts  during the  winter.  Multifamily construction,

however, is  expected to  be substantially weaker because of  overbuilding in

many areas.  New home  sales  are  generally above  year-ago  levels.  Builders

report no problems with  either the  availability  or  delivery of housing

materials.  Materials  prices have been steady, although  some builders  expect

rising lumber prices.

Many Tenth District savings  institutions  have accepted  limited savings

inflows  in  the  face  of  intense  rate  competition and flat  loan demand.  Most

expect this  situation to  continue  into  1987.  Demand for  mortgage  funds has

moderated.  Mortgage  interest rates  have  stabilized and are  expected to  remain

steady  or  trend  slightly downward.

Energy.  The  district's weakened energy  industry  continues  to  suffer

from the  uncertainty surrounding  international crude  oil markets.  Oil prices

have firmed somewhat, but remain well below year-ago  levels.  As  a result,

exploration and development  activity  in the  district has  rebounded  slightly

but remains  generally  depressed.  The  average weekly number  of operating

drilling rigs  in the Tenth District was  up  again to  223  in October  from 215  in

September, but remains  far below the  550  rigs working in January.

X-3

Agriculture.  Wet  fall  weather conditions have  delayed harvest

operations  in many regions  of  the  Tenth District.  The  corn,  soybean, and milo

harvest is  85  to  100  percent complete  in  some  areas,  but elsewhere  50  to  65

percent of  the  crop  is  still  in the  field.  Yields have been high across  the

district, with record yields  expected in many  areas.  Many regions  are

experiencing tight  storage  conditions, but storage  shortages  are  expected to

ease  as more of  last year's  stocks  are  marketed.  Most areas  report  good to

excellent winter wheat and wheat pasture  conditions.

Harvest delays  have meant production loan paydown delays, but many

lenders  still  expect paydowns  to  improve  over  last year.  Lenders  also  suggest

no  loosening  in credit conditions  for the  coming production year, with credit

refusal  rates expected  to be about  the  same  as  last year.  Effects  of  the  new

farm bankruptcy  legislation may be  reflected in  the  1987  farm credit

situation.  Lenders  feel  that the new Chapter  12  provisions weaken their

position with  troubled loans  and marginal  borrowers.  Lenders  expect  the  added

creditor risk to  lead to  tougher credit review  standards  and more  cautious

lending.

Banking.  Total  loan demand was generally constant  or down, and total

deposit  activity was mixed at  Tenth District banks  during  the past month.  In

all categories of  loan demand, more bankers  reported increased weakness  than

reported increased strength. 

Consumer, real  estate,  and agricultural  loans

were  areas  of particular weakness.  While  most banks  have  lowered rates  on

consumer  loans,  further interest  rate  declines  are  generally not  expected.

Demand deposits,  large CDs,  and small  time  deposits  tended to  remain constant

or  decline, while NOWs,  Super-NOWs,  and passbook savings  accounts  tended to

remain constant or  increase.  MMDAs,  IRAs,  and Keough accounts,  on balance,

remained unchanged.  Most banks  are considering lowering  their  passbook

savings  rate below 5 1/2  percent,  if they have  not  already done  so.

XI-1

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

The Eleventh District  economy  is  flat.  Manufacturing  is  showing

slight  evidence  of  strengthening.  Drilling has  been  stable  for  several

months.  Construction  is  substantially below  a year  earlier, but  it  appears

to  be  leveling  off.  Auto  sales have weakened  lately,  chiefly owing to  the

end  of concessionary  financing.  Retail  sales  are  slipping  compared to  last

year's  level.  The balance  sheets  of  the District  financial  institutions

reflect the weakness  of  the District  economy.  Lower  feed prices  and higher

meat prices  have  increased the profitability of.District  ranchers.

District  manufacturers  continue to  report  that  orders  have

stabilized at  low  levels.  Some  respondents note slight  increases  stemming

from  strengthening  in  the national  economy.  For  makers  of  primary metals,

fabricated metals,  and nonelectrical machinery, sales  increases  outside  the

District  have helped to  compensate  for  flat  to declining  sales  in  the

region.  Orders  of  electrical  machinery are  stable.  Among  apparel

manufacturers,  sales  are unchanged overall  and product  prices  are  firm.

Demand  for stone,  clay, and glass  products,  and  for  lumber  and wood

products,  is  weak because of  reduced orders  from  the  construction  sector.

Chemical  and paper products  sales  are  increasing slightly.  Transportation

equipment manufacturers  say  the pace  of  their orders  is  little  changed.

Refinery production has ebbed  slightly as  inventories  of  many products  have

been built  up to  high  levels.  A significant  number  of manufacturers  link

the  falling value of  the dollar  to  increases  in prices  of  their  inputs  and

to  small upturns  in  their  orders.

XI-2

Drilling  activity has  varied  little  during the period  from June

through October.  The  number  of well  permits  issued in  the District  states

has  been fairly  steady  since  June.  Respondents  expect  some  upward movement

in oil  prices,  but  they believe  that  the  increases will  not  lead to  a

significant upturn  in  drilling activity.

Construction continues to  show  signs  of stability, but  the

potential  for  further downturns  is  evident.  In Texas,  the  total  value  of

construction  contracts  for the  third quarter was  slightly  above  the second

quarter's  total,  but  it was  down  25  percent  from a year earlier.  As  with

total  construction, nonresidential  contracts  have  been steady  in  recent

months  at  roughly 30  percent  below  last  year's  level.  The  downturn has

been  concentrated in  office  and  retail  construction,  leaving other

categories  of nonresidential  building only  slightly  lower  than  a year

earlier.  The market  for  office  space  is  still weakening.  In Houston,

bankruptcies  and consolidations  have  led  to  reductions  in  the  amount  of

office  space  that  is  occupied.  The office  absorption rate in  Dallas has

dropped by half  since  last  year.  Residential  construction  is  falling

slightly.  The value  of  residential contracts was  slightly  less  in  the

third quarter than  in  the  second quarter.  Permits  continue to  drop,  led by

precipitous declines  in  multifamily  building.  Nonbuilding  construction  is

steady.

Dealers  attribute a recent  sharp  drop  in  automobile  sales  to  the

end of  concessionary  financing programs.  As  a result of  sluggishness  in

the District  economy,  sales  have  also  fallen significantly  from  a year

earlier.  Inventories are  not excessive,  as  dealers have  held their  orders

to modest  levels.  Respondents  report  that  the  full  advantage  of the

XI-3

appreciating yen  has  been  reduced by  increases  in  the price  of  domestic

models  and  by  increased imports  of  non-Japanese autos.

Retail  sales  continue  to  falter.  The  largest  declines  have been

in  the  energy-intensive  regions  of the District.  Prices  of  imported

electronics have  risen  significantly.  Apparel  prices  remain stable, but

respondents  expect  increases  as  a result of  new import  restrictions.

Retailers  are keeping their  inventories  quite  low  in  anticipation of

continued economic  sluggishness.

Total  assets  at  large District  banks  are  still  declining,

principally as  a result  of  reductions  in  business  loans.  Real  estate

lending  continues to  expand, but  at  a decreasing rate.  Consumer  loans show

slight  growth on  a year-over-year basis.  Holdings  of  securities have

increased steadily  throughout the year.  Total  deposits  at  large District

banks  have  fallen  dramatically since  the  first quarter,  led by  reductions

in  large time deposits.  Borrowings  have  increased, but  not  enough  to

completely offset  the  reductions  in  time deposits.  A decline  in  deposits

at  commercial banks  has  been more than  offset by  growth  at  thrifts,  so  that

deposits  at  all  financial institutions  are  up  from  a year  earlier.  The

pace  of  expansion has  slowed, however.

In District  agriculture,  crop prices  are  markedly down  from  a year

earlier while  livestock prices  are up.  Since  last  July, cattle prices  have

increased 5 percent while  feed  prices  have  fallen 25  percent.  As  a result,

profit margins  for  ranchers  have widened.  An  early  freeze has  reduced the

value  of District  cotton production, through  quantity  and quality  losses,

by an estimated  $100  million.

XII-1

TWELFTH DISTRICT --  SAN  FRANCISCO

Overall  improvement  in  the  Twelfth  District  economy  appears  to  be

continuing.  The  trade  and  service  sectors  continue  to  stimulate  growth  in

regions  not  hard  hit  by  other  economic  problems. 

Available  information

suggests  that  exports  of  products  manufactured  in  the  West  are  likely  to

improve. 

Moreover,  markets  for  some  western  agricultural  products,

including potatoes,  pistachios,  and  grapes,  have  improved  in  recent  months.

Forest  products  industries  are  prospering  while  gold  and  copper  mining

appear  likely  to  recover  during  the  next  several  months.  Although  single

family  residential  building  activity  has  slackened  in  recent  months  it

remains  relatively  healthy. 

Apartment  and  nonresidential  construction

activity,  in  contrast,  continues  to  weaken  in  many  areas.  Surveyed  bankers

agree  that  asset  quality  problems  are  likely  to  continue  through  next  year,

particularly  in  sectors  that  have experienced  problems  already.

Consumer  Spending

The  trade  and  service  sectors  continue  to  flourish  in  most  parts  of

the  Twelfth  District. 

Retail  sales  growth  has  been  very  strong  in

Washington  and  California,  and  has  been  satisfactory  in  Oregon  as  well.

However,  in  areas  with  struggling  economies  sales  are  weak.  In  Idaho,  for

example,  retail  sales  have  shown  virtually  no  increase  during  the  past  24

months.  Alaska  retail  sales  also  have  been  slow.  In  California's  central

valley,  retail  sales  reportedly  have  been  flat,  which  actually  represents

an  improvement  compared  to  recent  declines.

Manufacturing

Several  respondents  argued  that  exports  of  manufactured  products

should  improve  soon. 

Exports  of  some  electronic  products  have  risen  in

XII-2

recent  months  due  to  the  reduced  value  of  the  dollar. 

Aircraft  exports

have  shown  strong  improvement,  largely  due  to  global  increases  in  demand

for  commercial  aircraft.

Capital  goods  producers  indicate  that  machinery  orders  from  Europe  are

picking  up,  due  to  declining  U.S.  production  costs  as  well  as  to  the

declining  U.S.  dollar.  In  addition,  one  respondent  reports  that  Japanese

distributors  have  begun  contacting  U.S.  companies  about  purchasing  consumer

products,  partly  because  Japan  now  is  encouraging  the  purchase  of  U.S.

products  and  partly  because  of  the  changing  dollar-yen  relationship.

Taiwan  also  is  beginning  to  promote  imports  from  the  U.S.  in  an  attempt  to

deter  U.S.  protectionist  measures.

Recent  trade  developments  are  not  all  positive,  however. 

Forest

products  industry  sources  report  that  the  decline  of  the  U.S.  dollar  has

only  slightly  increased  the  prices  of  imported  machinery  used  in  lumber

mills. 

This  machinery,  most  of  which  is  produced  in  northern  Europe  and

Scandinavia,  still  enjoys  price  and  quality  advantages  relative  to  U.S.

made machinery.

Agriculture and  Resource Related  Industries

Although  problems  continue  for  many  Twelfth  District  farmers,  some

recent  improvements  have  been  noted. 

In  Idaho,  potato  prices  have  risen

significantly,  providing  farmers  a chance  to  return  to  profitability.  In

California,  the  pistachio  crop  harvest  was  the  largest  ever  recorded,  and

the  bumper  crop  should  not  depress  pistachio  prices  much  because  pistachios

bear  only  in  alternate  years.  Although  12  percent  fewer  wine  grapes  were

harvested  this  year  than  last  year,  grape  prices  are  higher  than  last

year's.

XII-3

Most  economic  indicators  in  the  forest  products  industries  suggest

that,  despite  the  national  slowdown  in  residential  construction,  prosperity

has  returned  at  least  for  the  moment.  In  Oregon,  the  number  of  millworking

jobs  in  September  set  a new  record  for  that  month.  Exports  of  many  forest

products,  including  lumber,  pulp,  and  paper  have  increased,  although  not

dramatically.  Competition  from  Canada  has  been  less  fierce  lately,  partly

because  Canadian  lumber  workers  are  on  strike  with  little  hope  of  an

imminent  settlement,  and  partly  because  a  preliminary  ruling  that  would

impose  a  15  percent  tariff  on  softwood  lumber  imports  from  Canada  requires

that,  while  waiting  for  a  final  decision,  Canadian  exporters  post  a  bond

with  customs officials  equal  to  the  15  percent  duty.

The  lingering  problems  of  the  mining  industry  in  Utah  appear  to  have

bottomed  out,  and  stability  or  perhaps  even  slight  improvement  is  expected

during  the  coming  months.  The  outlook  for  the  copper  industry  currently  is

much  brighter  than  it  has  been  for  several  years,  and  some  observers  expect

copper  to  be  a  source  of  strength  during  the  coming  year. 

The  prospects

for  gold  mining  in  Nevada  also  have  improved. 

Additional  gold  deposits

have  been  discovered,  but  at  this  point  it is unclear  whether  they  can  be

mined  profitably.

Construction and  Real  Estate

In  most  areas  of  the  District,  the  pace  of  multifamily  and

nonresidential  construction  is  slowing.  Single  family  home  construction

remains  relatively  strong  despite  recent  slackening.  Although  activity  has

been  heavy  in  both  new  and  used  home  markets,  housing  prices  in  most  areas

reportedly  are  flat  or  down.

Financial  Sector

Surveyed  bankers  indicate  that  significant  loan  quality  problems  are

XII-4

likely  to  continue  in  such  sectors  as  agriculture,  energy,  consumer  credit,

and  commercial  real  estate.  In  addition,  a  few  bankers  expect  problems  to

emerge  in  health  care  portfolios. 

Strength  in  mortgage  portfolios  should

at  least  partially offset  these  problems.

