SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICTS

JANUARY  1987

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS

SUMMARY  . . . . . . . . . . .

First  District - Boston  .

. .

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

Second District  - New York  . .

Third District  - Philadelphia.

Fourth District - Cleveland.

Fifth  District - Richmond.  .

Sixth District  - Atlanta  . . .

Seventh District  - Chicago  . .

Eighth District  - St.  Louis.

Ninth District - Minneapolis

Tenth District  - Kansas  City

Eleventh District  - Dallas  . .

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

Twelfth District - San Francisco  .

I-'

111-1

IV-1

V-i

VI-'

VII-'

VIII-l

IX-i

X-1

XI-l

XII-1

SUMMARY*

The pace  of economic activity appears  to have  quickened  slightly at

year-end,  according to  this month's  commentaries on  regional economic

conditions.  Retailers  in most Districts  enjoyed moderate year-over-year

sales  increases,  in line  with expectations.  Auto  sales were  very strong  in

December, although  the  loss  of the  sales tax deduction in 1987  is  widely

regarded as  the  reason for  this  strength.  Manufacturing employment

increased  in  several Districts.  The  improvement was spotty, however, with

an  industry expanding  in one  District but not  in  another.  Residential

construction activity  remains  strong  in some  Districts, but has  slowed  in

others.  The rate  of nonresidential construction also  varies  considerably

from one  part of  the  country to  another.  Oil and gas  drilling  is gradually

increasing  from very depressed  levels.  The agricultural  situation is

improving.  While agricultural prices  remain weak, higher production levels

and lower prices  for petroleum-based  inputs  are positive  factors.  Banks  in

most  Districts  experienced very strong  commercial  and real  estate  loan

demand  in December.  Some of  this strength  is attributed to  efforts  to

complete transactions before  the new tax laws  are  in  effect.

Consumer Spending

Christmas sales  in most  Districts were described as moderately

ahead of year-ago levels  and consistent  with retailers'  expectations.  The

most notable  exceptions were  the  Boston and New York Districts, where

retail  respondents reported strong  sales  increases  ranging from 5 to  25

percent over year-ago levels,  and  the Dallas District, where  sales were

*Prepared  at  the Federal  Reserve Bank  of Boston.

said to  be below year-ago  levels  although still  consistent with

expectations.  Sales  were  generally slow  in  the  early  part  of  December but

strengthened as  Christmas  drew closer.  January sales were  reported as

healthy  in  the Philadelphia District  and weak in Richmond.

Retail  inventories  at  the  end  of the  Christmas  season were said  to

be  at  comfortable levels  and,  in two  or three  Districts, lower  relative  to

sales than in past years.  For  the most  part, changes  in  exchange rates

have  not had much effect on  retail prices,  although merchants  in several

Districts  expect  rising  import  prices  to  show up more  in 1987.  Retailers

are generally  optimistic about  future sales,  but  there  is some  concern that

the  first  quarter will  be soft  as  consumers start  paying  for  the  cars  and

other  large  items  purchased  late  in 1986.

Reports of motor vehicle  sales were all  the  same.  Sales were very

strong  in December;  dealers  are  generally satisfied with  current inventory

levels;  sales are  expected to be  slow for  at  least  the  first several months

of  1987.  Most  reports  attribute the  strength  in December and  the weakness

projected for  early 1987  to  consumers'  shifting purchases  from  1987  to  1986

in order  to  take  advantage  of the  deductibility of  the  sales  tax.  In  this

regard,  San Francisco notes  that  in Oregon, where  there  is no  sales  tax,

sales  did not  pick up  appreciably.

Construction and Real Estate

Reports  of residential  construction were  mixed across  the

Districts.  Activity has been particularly strong  in  the New York, Chicago

and St.  Louis  Districts.  Mild weather was  said  to have  contributed  to  the

strength in New York.  Where home building has  slowed,  overbuilding,

overpricing and a shortage of suitable  land were  cited as  the  primary

causes.  In the  San Francisco  District, multifamily construction has  slowed

but  single-family building  is  doing well;  the new tax laws  are  thought  to

have made  multifamily units  less  attractive for  investment  purposes,

whereas  they are  expected to  have little  effect  on the  single-family unit.

Home sales  are  strong, according  to most  reports, and  are  expected to

remain so  into  1987.

Nonresidential  construction levels vary  from busy  in Minneapolis

and Chicago  to  slow in San Francisco.  About  half the Districts mentioned

that  some  office markets  face an oversupply  of space;  absorption rates  are

said to be  strong  in many areas,  however.  Similarly, in areas with newly

constructed retail  space, occupancy rates  are  improving.  Construction for

retail buildings has  continued  at  a healthy  rate  in Atlanta,  in part

because  of net  in-migration.  Substantial growth in nonresidential

construction was  reported  in parts  of the Chicago and St.  Louis Districts.

Manufacturing

Manufacturing  activity appears to  have picked up  slightly  in the

last months  of  1986.  Several Districts reported modest  increases  in

employment,  and  in  the  Dallas District, where manufacturing activity had

been declining, "Manufacturers are noting more positive  signs than at  any

time  in the last  two years."  The  industries  cited as  responsible  for  this

improvement varied  from District to  District:  in the  Dallas  District

orders  are  bottoming out  for  energy-related durable  goods;  San Francisco

reported that  commercial  aerospace  is gaining  strength;  employment

increases  occurred  in glass and general  industrial machinery in  the

Cleveland District,  in  textiles  and electrical  equipment  in St.  Louis and

in  printing and publishing  and textiles  in Atlanta.  Several Districts

mentioned  increasing defense  activity.  For many  industries, however, there

appears  to  have been no  improvement.  San Francisco noted that  the

electronics  and  semiconductor industries  continue  to  suffer  from fierce

competition and  low prices.  Boston and Chicago both reported that  reduced

capital  spending by domestic  auto manufacturers  is hurting  the machinery

and  metalworking industries.

Manufacturers in  different Districts vary  considerably in  their

views of  the  future.  Those  in  the  Philadelphia and Richmond Districts

think  that business will  improve  over  the  next six months,  those  in Boston

foresee  little  change,  and those  in Cleveland  expect  the  first  quarter of

1987  to  be very poor  and are  uncertain whether the national  expansion will

continue.

Mining

The number  of  oil  and gas  drilling  rigs  in operation  increased  in

December  in the  Kansas City  and Dallas  Districts, but  remains  far below the

number  a year  ago.  Drilling  in Atlanta was  at  its highest  level  since  last

spring.  Coal  production increased  over  the year in  the Richmond District

but decreased in Atlanta.  Gold mining  in the Minneapolis District  is

reported to be  doing fairly well  and  the San Francisco District's  copper

industry is  hiring after an  extended period of layoffs.

Agriculture

The  situation in agriculture  shows some  signs  of improvement.

Agricultural  prices remain generally weak, but  low grain prices have helped

livestock producers, especially  those  raising poultry.  Lower  prices  for

petroleum-based  inputs  such as  fuel  and fertilizer  are  also  a positive

factor.  Prices rose  slightly  in December  for wheat, corn and  soybeans in

the Minneapolis District and  farm crops  in Texas, but most  prices  remain

below year-earlier levels.

Farm incomes are  not  as weak as  farm prices  in all  cases,  since

production levels  are higher.  Good weather contributed to  a bountiful

vegetable and citrus  harvest  in Florida, more  calves were held over the

winter  in  the Kansas  City District,  and crop  production in  the Richmond

District should be higher  than this year's  drought-reduced levels.  On  the

down side,  a significant decline  in  Texas cotton production projected  for

1986  means  lower incomes  in  already distressed areas of  the  state.

Banking

In most  Districts, commercial  and real  estate  lending  increased

strongly in  December, although  in the Dallas  District business  loans were

far  below year-ago  levels.  Banks  in the  New York, Philadelphia and San

Francisco Districts attributed some  of  December's strength to  tax  changes

and  the desire  to  complete transactions  before year-end.  In the

Philadelphia  and Atlanta Districts  consumer loan growth has  slowed  and in

San Francisco  construction loans dropped  off sharply in  the  last  months of

the year.  Home  equity  lending is increasing,  according to  several  reports.

In the  St.  Louis District  agricultural lending by banks  continues

to  decline as  a result  of  reductions  in the  costs  of  inputs and  land,  on

the  one hand, and more rigorous scrutiny by lenders,  on the  other.  In  the

Kansas  City District loan paydowns  are  reported to  have  improved over  last

year.

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

Retailers  in  the First  District  enjoyed strong year-over-year

holiday sales.  Manufacturing activity, on  the other hand,  remains  flat.

Export sales  have  increased, but  the  improvement  is  small.  Orders  of

capital  equipment  from the  auto  industry have  fallen sharply.  Although

some  retailers  report  that vendor prices  are  rising faster  than a year  ago,

others  see no acceleration.  The  prices  of manufacturing  inputs  are

stable.  Commercial  construction activity is  said  to  be down from the  level

of  the  past  two years,  but  still  high by  the standards  of  earlier years.

Retail

Christmas  selling  results  in  the  First District were mixed;  but

among  those  contacted,  the weakest year-over-year sales  increase  still

exceeded  5 percent  on a comparable stores basis.  Some  retailers  enjoyed

increases  ranging as high as  25  percent.  Several  respondents noted  that

the  season started slowly but became almost  frenzied  in  the  last  week or

so;  margins  suffered at  stores  that  responded  to  the  early weakness with

price reductions.  Electronics, VCRs, TVs,  and microwave ovens  continued to

sell  well.  Selected  apparel  categories picked up.  Pre-holiday toy sales

showed  significant growth.

Inventories  are  said  to  be  in good shape.  A number of  stores have

made significant  efforts  in  the  last  year to  reduce  inventory levels.

Several of  those  contacted  reported that  post-holiday  inventories are no

greater than last  year even  though they  are  supporting  significantly higher

sales.

Some merchants report  domestic and  foreign vendor prices  rising

somewhat faster  than a year  earlier,  others note very  little  change.  One

of  those  facing  rising  import  prices  plans  to  shift  from Japanese  suppliers

to  Korean.  Another said that  even after sizable price  increases  six months

ago  (which have since leveled off),  foreign hardgoods  suppliers  offer

better  quality relative to  price  than domestic competitors.  One  firm

expects its  import  prices  to  increase more  in 1987  than in 1986;  this  firm

orders up  to  a year  in advance and by buying  foreign currency when  the

orders  are  placed,  it locks  in  exchange rates.

Retailers  continue to  report  difficulties  in  finding high-quality

employees  in  the  tight New England labor market,  even as  they  reduce  staff

after  the holiday season.  This  situation gives  them confidence  that  the

region's  consumer sector will  remain robust  in 1987.

Manufacturing

Most manufacturing respondents  in the  First District report  that

business  remains  flat.  However,  in  the metalworking and  machinery

industries  there has been a substantial falling-off  in orders  from  auto

makers.  Various manufacturers of capital  goods  report  that  the  chemical

industry  is increasing  orders,  defense demand remains  strong, but  orders

from the  oil  and gas  industry remain depressed.  Several  contacts in  the

computer  industry have  experienced moderate  increases  in demand.

Exports have picked up, but  the  improvement  is modest.  Europe

accounts  for most  of the gains.  In addition, several manufacturers  of

large-scale  capital goods  are  experiencing increased  success  competing

against Japanese  and  German suppliers  in  third  country markets,

particularly in the  Far East.  Most manufacturing respondents do not  see

any  lessening  in  import  competition, but  a representative of the  textile

industry  reports  that  the prices  of  European products have  increased

I-3

and U.S.  mills have  regained a little market  share.  None  of the  firms

contacted  is shifting production to  the  United States  to  take  advantage  of

the  lower  dollar.  On the  contrary, several are  expanding  overseas

operations,  in some cases  with the  intention of exporting  to  the United

States.

Manufacturers  in  the First  District do not  expect  1987  to  be much

different  from  1986.  Seeing  little  growth potential,  they  are  focusing

attention on cost  containment.  Many have  reduced employment  levels  in  the

past  year;  several are  continuing  to  do  so.  Administrative staffs  are

being  reorganized and  reduced.  Manufacturers are also  continuing  to  cut

inventories  through the use  of more  computerized  controls and just-in-time

procedures.  Respondents  are  reasonably satisfied with their  progress  in

reducing  inventory  levels, but  they are  trying  to  bring  them lower  still.

With respect  to  capital  spending,  most  contacts  plan to  spend about  the

same  in  1987  as  in 1986.  Two  themes were heard, often  from  the same

individuals:  1) approval standards  are  very stringent  and  2) if  the  project

will yield  substantial productivity gains,  it will  be approved.

Prices  of  inputs,  whether  imported  or domestic, are  not  rising  to

any  significant  degree.  One  exception is the  price of raw wool  from

Europe.  Manufacturers also  report a continued inability  to  raise their own

prices.

Commercial  Real  Estate and  Construction

The  commercial  real-estate market is healthy for  the most part,

according  to  local  agents.  Boston, despite  the  addition of a significant

amount  of new  commercial  space,  still  enjoys  one  of the highest  occupancy

rates  of  any  city  in  the  country.  Agents in most  areas  in the  region are

reporting  a strong  market  for  office  space.  Construction  in  this  sector

continues but  at  a level  somewhat below that  of  the  past  two years.

Where  over-building has been reported,  absorption rates  are  said  to  be

catching up with vacancy rates.  Retail space  is tight  in many suburban and

prime downtown locations.  Other than the  current  expansion of some  rural

shopping malls,  little  retail  construction is  underway.  Reports were mixed

for  industrial  real  estate.  While  some  agents  report high vacancy rates,

others suggest an even match between supply and demand.  Industrial  space in

some  locations  has priced  itself  out  of high occupancy by  charging retail

rents  for  industrial  footage.  Other  industrial  sites  are  being  converted to

research  and development  and other uses  that  generate higher revenues.

II-1

SECOND DISTRICT - NEW YORK

Conditions  in most  sectors of  the  Second District  economy were

stable  to  improved  in  recent weeks.  Consumer spending  during  the holiday

season was  at  or  above  expectations  and  inventories were generally low

going  into  the new year.  Residential  construction remained strong, in  part

because  of mild weather.  An  increased number  of firms  however,  reported  a

worsening of business  conditions,  although the majority continues  to

experience  stability  or  improvement.  On the  financial  side,  lending

activity  increased  substantially during late  1986  at mid-sized banks  in  the

District.

Consumer  Spending

Consumer  spending at  Second District  stores  ranged  from 6 to  23

percent above year-earlier  levels during  the  1986  Christmas  season, and

several  retailers  reported sales  above plan.  After a strong

post-Thanksgiving period,  sales activity slowed  in  early December as  buyers

apparently waited for  the  pre-Christmas markdowns which had been the

pattern in  some recent years.  Most  retailers had  entered  this holiday

season with slim inventories, however, and refrained  from offering

additional  promotionals.  As  the holiday drew nearer, a decided upturn in

sales  occurred and most  retailers ended  the  season with overall  sales  at  or

above plan.  One department  store  chain with somewhat  disappointing  sales

attributed  this  to  a special  promotional  in November  which detracted  from

its December  business.

II-2

Among  items  in strong demand were apparel, jewelry and  electric

appliances.  In addition,  a new laser toy  proved so  popular  that  stores

could not  keep  it in  stock.  As  the new year began, most  stores  reported

inventories at  quite comfortable levels.

Business Activity

The  Second District's  economic expansion slowed  somewhat in  recent

weeks.  Most purchasing managers  in  Buffalo and Rochester  continue to

report  stable  to  improved new orders  and  production.  However,  the

percentage of  firms with declining business  conditions  has been rising,  and

in November such  firms  surpassed the number with  improved situations  for

the  first  time  in several months.

Employment  remains  at  a record level  in  the District  as  declines  in

manufacturing have  continued being offset  by gains  in other sectors.

Moreover  the December unemployment  rates  of 4.3%  and 6.0%  in New Jersey and

New York,  respectively, were  below the national  average.  However, a

development which could have an adverse  impact  on District  employment  is

A.T.&  T's  recently announced plans  for  a 27,400  reduction in its workforce

by the  end  of  1987.  While no  information was  given as  to where the

cutbacks would occur, some  67,000  of the  company's  employees  are  in  the

New York-New Jersey area.

Construction and Real Estate

Residential  construction continues  to  be  strong in the  Second

District.  Aided by  the  lack of  frost  and unusually warm weather, builders

have remained quite  active working  on contracts  from  the  fall.  A scarcity

of suitable land  is a growing  problem in  some  areas and  rising  home prices

II-3

are widespread.  Developers are  increasingly  resorting to  subdivisions  in

order  to keep house prices  at  affordable levels.  Despite  these problems,

builders are generally optimistic that  1987's  activity will  come  close to

matching  the busy pace  of 1986.

Office market  conditions were  relatively stable  in  recent weeks

with few major new projects undertaken.  Additional  leasing activity

continues  to  help in  areas of oversupply.  Moreover, some  observers

anticipate  an actual  tightening  of the  office market  on Long  Island  because

of  the unabated  demand and limited  construction activity there.  In

Manhattan, opinions are mixed concerning  the  likely impact  of the  recent

collapse  of rental negotiations  for  the last  of the World Trade buildings.

Some  anticipate  a sizable increase  in the downtown vacancy rate  as  these  2

million square  feet  of new office space  re-enter the market,  but others

beieve  it can be  absorbed without much difficulty.

Financial Developments

Mid-sized banks  in the  Second District  report  that  lending activity

increased dramatically  in late  1986.  The  surveyed banks  attributed  the

increase primarily to  changes  in the  tax code which encouraged  transactions

to  be completed by year end.  The  changes  include the  future  elimination of

investment  tax credits, a higher capital  gains tax rate,  and less  favorable

treatment of depreciation expenses.  All  of  the banks surveyed  stated that

last minute merger and acquisition activity was not  a factor  in the  loan

surge.  In general,  real  estate loans,  which had been strong  throughout  the

year,  increased  the most.  The  banks added  that  they  expect  demand  for both

real  estate  loans  and  small business  loans  to  increase further  during  early

1987.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

The  Third District  economy appears  healthy, although growth  in several

sectors has slowed  recently.  Manufacturing activity was only steady in  January,

following six consecutive months of  expansion.  Retail sales  during  the holiday

shopping season met merchants' plans, which called for modest year-over-year

gains, and they have been enjoying a healthy rate of  sales  since  Christmas.

Automobile  sales were high in December but  low  in January.  Total  loan  volume at

major Third District banks was  growing slowly as  1986  came  to a close,  although

real estate  lending remains  strong.

Expectations for  the  Third District economy are generally positive.  A

majority of manufacturers polled  in January predict steady or  improving business

during the  first  half of  the year.  Retailers also expect  a good year,  but

express some concern  that  consumer debt  burdens  could  limit discretionary

spending.  Automobile dealers say  it  will be  several months before  the  slack

following the  December rush of  car  sales  is  reversed.  Bankers expect  business

lending to  parallel moderate economic  growth  in  1987,  but  they believe  consumers

will not  be willing  to  add much to  their  current  debt  levels.

MANUFACTURING

After posting six consecutive monthly gains,  the Third District

manufacturing sector  is  pausing  in  January,  according to  the  latest  Business

Outlook Survey.  Overall, business  is  running at  a steady  rate  in  both  the

durable and nondurable goods  sectors.  While firms  reporting  improved  business

in January edged out  those reporting  slower  business,  they did so  by only a slim

margin.  This  lull  is  reflected  in most measures  of  industrial activity.  New

orders  are  up  fractionally, but  shipments,  order  backlogs,  and  inventories  are

111-2

virtually unchanged.  Employment  is  also at  a standstill.

Industrial  prices  in the area are mostly stable;  80  percent of  the firms

contacted in January said both  input and output prices were unchanged  from

December.  However,  15  percent noted increased  costs for  the goods  they

purchase, and  12  percent charged more for their own products.

In  their  outlook for  the  first half  of  1987,  local manufacturers have

mostly positive views.  Forty-three percent of  the January survey respondents

expect  continued growth and 38  percent anticipate  steady conditions;  only 15

percent forecast  a slowdown.  Overall,  survey respondents  expect  increases  in

orders and  shipments.  They remain  cautious, however,  and are  planning no

changes  in either  employment or  capital  spending schedules  during  the next six

months.

RETAIL

Retailers generally made  their modest Christmas  sales  targets,  averaging

4-5  percent over  1985,  after a late  burst  of  buying.  Year-over-year gains

varied widely by  type  of store, however.  Specialty retailers  recorded the  best

increases, with sales  at  some  stores up  around 10  percent  from the previous

year;  general merchandise stores  posted  gains  at  the lower  end of  the scale.

Clothing and housewares were the best performing product  lines.  Going  into the

holiday season,  inventories  were  leaner than  in previous  years;  thus,  retailers

did not resort  to  unplanned markdowns despite the  slow start of  Christmas

buying.  Store executives  contacted  in January  said  their inventory-to-sales

ratios remain  about  where they want them.  Automobile sales were strong  in

December as  buyers  took advantage of  the expiring  sales  tax deduction, according

to  dealers.

Retailers  are optimistic that the healthy rate of  sales  so  far  in  January

indicates  a good  year  ahead.  However,  some express concern  that  discretionary

III-3

spending could  lag,  as  consumers  make payments  on  automobiles  and  other

high-priced merchandise purchased  late  in  1986.  Automobile dealers  reported a

sharp slowdown  in sales  in January, which they attribute to  the  shifting  of

purchases  into  1986;  they do not expect sales  to  pick up  for  several months.

FINANCE

Total  loan volume at  large Third District banks  edged up slightly during

the first  three weeks of  December, and near the end of  the year stood

approximately 15  percent above the December  1985  level.  Real estate  lending is

especially robust, and commercial  lending  is  also  strong.  Bankers  say  loan

demand  in  these  categories  was high near the  end of  the  year due to  tax  changes

which became effective January  1.  Lending officers expect  commercial and

industrial  loan  demand to  grow this  year at  nearly the  same rate  as  it  did  in

1986,  provided the economy does  not weaken.  But bank profits may come under

pressure despite a healthy economy.  Although still  a minority, an  increasing

number  of  Third District  banks  say their  net  interest margins may shrink this

year  as  a result  of  increased  competition  in  lending to  the middle market and a

slowdown in  deposit growth.

Growth  in  consumer  loan volume  at major  Third District banks  tapered  off

during  1986,  and near  the end of  the year consumer credit  outstanding was

approximately 10  percent above the  December 1985  level.  This  is  a continuation

of  a trend to  slower  growth  in consumer  lending  that  began  in the second half of

1985.  Local  bankers  generally believe that  consumers  are approaching the  limit

of  their willingness  to  add to  debt burdens.  Nevertheless, home equity lending

appears  to  be  increasing,  prompted by the new tax  law and strong  promotion by

banks.  A significant  portion of  this new lending  reflects  consolidation of  bank

and merchant  credit  card debt,  however.

REAL ESTATE

III-4

Commercial  and residential real  estate markets  in the Third District are

active,  and most  real  estate contacts expect healthy conditions  in 1987.  Demand

for  office space continues  to absorb new construction;  new buildings  are

substantially pre-leased, especially  in the Philadelphia and Wilmington central

business districts.  There  is more slack  in suburban areas,  and  leasing activity

is  expected to decline somewhat this  year  in these outlying markets.  For

industrial  properties,  realtors forecast stable or  slightly easing demand this

year.

Residential real  estate activity  is  strong.  The  average rate  for  30-year

fixed rate mortgages  has fallen to around  9 percent  in  the  region, and  realtors

say this  enables a substantial number of buyers  to  afford homes  for  the first

time.  Consequently, sales  and prices rose throughout  1986,  and  realtors expect

this trend to continue.  However, builders note  increasing  resistance to higher

prices for  newly constructed homes.  One  large mortgage lender  is predicting a

10  percent decline in  housing starts  in  the  region  this year, but  most  builders

think this  is  an overly pessimistic view.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT  - CLEVELAND

Summary

As  regional businesses close  the  books  on  1986,  the  consensus  is

that  the  past  year  did not  stand up  to  their  initial high expectations.

The  first  quarter of  1987  is  marked by uncertainties about  the  effect  of

the  recent  tax  reform  and about the  length  of the  current  recovery.  At

present, economic  indicators  show a moderate increase  in  production,  new

orders,  and  retail sales  and a slight reduction in inventories.

Retail  Sales

A  late  holiday  shopping  spree  helped many retailers recover  from

slow sales  early in  the  season.  Sales  continued to  be  strong  after  the

holiday  season  due  partly  to  post-Christmas bargains and mild weather.

Retail  sales  grew at  a  5  to  6  annual  percentage  rate  throughout  the

fourth 

quarter. 

Low 

profit  margins  by  foreign  manufacturers  and

importers  have  lead  some  retailers  to  expect  import prices  to  rise  at  a  3

to  5 percent annual  rate  over  the  next  quarter.

Domestic  automobile  sales  were up  as much as  50 percent  over  sales

a year ago.  Most of  the  increase  is  reportedly due  to changes  in  the  tax

laws. 

Consequently,  sales  so  far  in  1987 have been weak.  One  dealer

commented  that  sales  were  the  slowest  in  4  years. 

Since  most  dealers

anticipated 

the 

year-end  rush,  inventories  are  reported  to  be  at

"comfortable" levels.

Import dealers  reported  similar  sales  volumes. 

Some  foreign  car

dealers  feared  that  a weak dollar may result  in price  increases for  cars

produced abroad.

IV-2

Labor Markets

Ohio  added 19,500 new jobs  in November, increasing  total  employment

by  0.43  percent  compared  to  0.27  percent  growth  in the  country as  a

whole.  This  increase brought the  Ohio unemployment  rate  to  7.2  percent,

just  slightly higher than  the  national rate.

First 

quarter 

1987 

projections  by  the  Manpower  Incorporated

Employment Outlook Survey suggest  that  this  region's  employment  growth

will  be  slower  than the nation as  a whole.  However, three  of the  largest

cities  in  the District have  outlooks  better  than  those  of  the  nation.

These  include  Pittsburgh,  Columbus  and Cincinnati.  Employment  increases

are expected services,  wholesale/retail and  durable  manufacturing,  while

job  losses  are  expected in  finance,  insurance  and real  estate.

Manufacturing

Manufacturers 

report  for  November  an  increase  in  new  orders,

production, and prices  and a reduction  in  inventories  from  the  previous

month. 

Total  manufacturing  employment  increased  slightly  in November,

although  it  is  over  2 percent below its  level  of a year  ago. 

The  recent

gain  came  exclusively  from  durables,  which were up  1.2 percent.  Glass

and  glassware,  and  general  industrial 

machinery  led 

the 

monthly

employment  increases.

Steel 

production  in  Ohio  fell  by  3  percent  during  November,

approximately the  same  rate  of  decrease  as  U.S.  production. 

However,

since  November  of  1985,  steel  production  increased  8 percent  in Ohio

while  falling 20  percent nationwide.  Consequently, Ohio's  share  of  total

tonnage  produced  in  the  U.S.  rose  from 15  percent to  20  percent over  the

IV-3

last year.  LTV  recently announced intentions  to  spend  $500  million  over

the  next two  years to  improve its  flat-rolled steel  division.

Uncertainty  about  the  ability  to  sustain the  recovery much  longer

and the  effects  of tax  reform  have  generated  pessimism  among  business

executives,  especially  in Northeast Ohio.  Respondents of a recent  survey

expected the  first  quarter  of  1987  to  be  the  worst  in  three  years.

Twenty  percent  of  businesses  surveyed reported unplanned expenditures  in

1986:IV in order  to  take  advantage of  the  old  tax  laws,  and  the  same

percentage  indicated  cut  backs  in  spending  plans  in  1987 because  they

lost  investment  incentives.  In  addition, a record  high  percentage  (20%)

of business executives  expected no profits  in the  first quarter of  1987.

Housing

Housing  is  at  a  seasonal  ebb. 

The  level  of  seasonally adjusted

housing construction  and  the  volume  of  mortgage  lending  in  1987  is

expected  to  remain  at  moderate  levels  in most  markets.  Builders expect

strong demand for  single-family  homes  because  of  tax  reform  and  low

mortgage  rates. 

However,  the  shortage of developable  land may  slow some

housing  starts,  especially in  the  Columbus  and Cincinnati  areas.

The  consensus  among those  interviewed is  that  mortgage  rates  will

decline  during  the  first  half  of 1987,  but will rise  slowly during the

second half.  Lenders  report  keen competition for mortgages and  have  been

forced  to  drop  interest  rates.  They are partially offsetting  the  lower

rates  by  charging  higher  points. 

Mortgage  refinancings  are  a  small

proportion  of  current  volume,  but  most  lenders expect  another wave of

refinancings  if  mortgage  rates  decline  another  50  to  75  basis points.

IV-4

Banking

District  loan  demand  strengthened  considerably  over 

the 

past

several 

weeks. 

Loans 

outstanding 

in 

all  major  categories  grew

substantially  in  the  last  two 

months, 

particularly 

in 

December.

Commercial  and  industrial  loans  expanded  at  an annual  rate of over  65

percent  in December, up  sharply  from little or  no  growth  experienced  in

the  fall  and  summer  months. 

In addition  to  the  turnaround in business

loan  volume,  consumer  and  real  estate  lending  also  accelerated 

in

December  from  their already high levels.

However,  loan  demand  may  soften  in  the  next  few months  as both

manufacturing  and nonmanufacturing companies surveyed  have  reported  that

outside 

financing 

is  considered  unlikely  in  the  next  few  months.

FIFTH DISTRICT  - RICHMOND

Overview

Manufacturing has  resumed  its  rise  after leveling  off late  last year  from

an  upward  trend  that  began  in midsummer.  Producers  are even more  optimistic

than  a few weeks  ago  about  prospects  for  their businesses  in the months  ahead.

Coal  production  has  increased  in  recent  weeks and  further increases  are

expected as  the year progresses.  In retailing,  sales  were weak  in early

January, but  inventories  are  at  desired  levels,  prices are  mostly unchanged,

and  revenues  are  expected to  rise  again  soon.  In the  District economy as  a

whole,  somewhat slower  growth  is expected  in 1987.  The  region's  farmers,

however, should  enjoy a significant  increase  in income.

Consumer Spending

Retail  sales  activity was  weak  in early January,  according  to  our survey.

Fifty-six  percent  of the  respondents  report  seasonally adjusted declines  in

sales  and  employment.  Retail  inventories  appear  to  be  in line with

expectations;  retailers  are  optimistic  that  business  will  improve  in the

coming months  and they  are restocking  accordingly.

Seventy percent of  responding  retailers  report  no change  in the  prices  of

the  goods  they  sell  or  in the  cost of goods  they buy.  Among  the  remaining  30

percent,  those  reporting  price  increases  outnumber those  reporting declines.

Manufacturing and Mining

Our  survey  indicates  an  increase  in  the  seasonally adjusted  pace  of

manufacturing activity  in early January as  compared with December.

Thirty-seven  percent  of  the  respondents  report  January-over-December  increases

in shipments  and  24  percent  report  declines.  In our  previous  survey,  29

percent reported  November-over-October  increases  in  shipments  and  27  percent

reported declines.  Manufacturing  employment  appears  to  be  up  slightly  in

January;  only  six  percent of the  respondents  report  fewer employees,  77

percent  indicate  no  change,  and  17  percent report more workers  on  the  job.

Nondurable goods  industries  continue to  show greater  strength  than  durable

goods  industries,  although  furniture  industry  representatives  report  further

increases  in activity.

The  manufacturing  outlook  also  appears  to  be  improving.  Among

respondents,  35  percent  report  increases  in new orders  and  25  percent report

declines.  In the  previous  survey,  increases  were reported  by 25  percent,

declines  by 26  percent.  Unfilled orders  also  appear  to be  rising.

Looking  ahead, manufacturers  continue to  anticipate  increases  in shipments

and  new orders.  In our  latest  survey, about two-thirds  indicate  that  they

expect  increases  in these  categories,  compared with  about half  in the  previous

survey.  Fifty-nine  percent  of the  respondents  believe  general  business

conditions  in the  nation  will  be  better six  months  from now;  this  percentage

rose  in January  after declining  in each  of  the  three previous  surveys.

Manufacturers'  inventories  of  finished goods  were  apparently rising  in

early January, a change  of  direction  from the  four previous  surveys.  Higher

inventory  levels  in January as  compared with  December are  reported by  30

percent of  the  respondents;  20  percent  report  lower levels.  In the  previous

survey, 26  percent had  reported  higher  levels,  and  43  percent had  reported

lower  levels.  Manufacturers'  inventories  of materials,  however, appear to

have  declined for the  fifth  consecutive  survey.

Regional  coal  production  was  slightly higher  in mid-December than a year

ago.  Coal  producers  are  cautiously  optimistic  about their sales  in 1987

because  they are  less  worried about  the  impact of  possible acid  rain

legislation  on  demand,  they expect buyers  to  stockpile  coal  this year because

of the  threat  of a strike early  in 1988, and they expect  to  compete  better

with  foreign  coal  suppliers.  Increased  coal  production will  probably not

result  in more  jobs  for  coal  miners,  however,  because of advanced mining

technology.

Agriculture

A survey  of agricultural  specialists  indicates  farmers  in  this  region

should  face  brighter  income  prospects  in 1987.  Crop  producers will  probably

be  selling  their harvests  at  low prices,  but their  production  should be  up

substantially over  the  drought-reduced  levels of  1986.  Livestock  producers

will  likely  benefit from  the  low grain  prices.  Poultry production,  a large

part of  the  region's  livestock  sector, stands  to benefit  the most  because the

costs  of  producing  poultry are  especially sensitive  to grain  prices.

District Outlook  and  State  and  Local  Government Purchases

A combination of forecasts  from economists  who  project activity  in their

home  states yields  a forecast for moderate growth  in 1987  in the  District as  a

whole.

Regional  forecasters  are  about evenly split between  those  who expect  their

state  and  local  governments  to  increase real  purchases significantly and  those

who  expect little  change  in economic  stimulus from their state and  local

governments.

VI-1

SIXTH  DISTRICT  - ATLANTA

Economic  growth  in  the  Southeast  continues  at  a  moderate  pace.  Service

employment  gains  are  strong,  but  manufacturing  job  gains  are  weak.  Holiday  spending

was  checkered  because  oil  patch  weakness  somewhat  offset  gains  in  areas  benefiting

from  strong  population  and  income  growth.  Home  building's  momentum  may  be  slowing,

and  weakness  in  office  building  is  causing  overall  commercial  construction  to  shrink.

Tourism  continues  to  boost  the  regional  economy. 

In  agriculture,  bountiful  crops

depressed  vegetable  prices  and  grower  profits but  raised  revenues  for  citrus producers.

Employment  and  Industry.  District  labor  force  growth  outpaced  employment

growth  in  November,  and  the  region's  unemployment  rate  edged  upward  to  8.1  percent.

The  unemployment  rate  has  hovered  near  8  percent  since  April.  Job  gains  in  services

maintained  the  momentum  of  previous  months  as  business  and  health  services  posted

especially  strong  employment  gains  over  the  past  year.  Employment  in  the  real  estate

sector  also  has  continued  to  expand.

Manufacturing  activity  has  registered  little  overall  change  for  most sectors since

September.  Although  textile  and apparel  imports were  at  record  levels  in  1986,  mergers,

consolidations,  and  the closing  of  inefficient  mills have  resulted  in  a  more  productive  and

competitive  domestic  textile  industry.  Mills  are  running  at  92  percent  of  capacity,  up  9

percent  from  last  year,  and  textile  employment  has  turned  up.  Labor-intensive  apparel

producers  are  bearing  the  brunt  of  import  competition;  apparel  employment  is  down  by

7,900  workers  just in  the  last  year.

Appliance  producers  report  record  levels  of  shipments  due  to  the  strong  housing

market.  Printing  and  publishing  companies  have  been  adding  to  job  rolls  as savings  and

loans,  brokerage  houses,  and  banks  offer  new  financial  services  that  require  checks  and

documentation. 

The  transportation  equipment  sector  continues  to  add  jobs  on  the

strength  of  auto  sales  and  aircraft  parts  production.  Weakness  in  energy  drilling activity

continues  to  batter  Louisiana;  employment  in  oil  and  gas  extraction  fell  by  about  22,600

workers  last  year.

VI-2

Consumer  Spending.  Holiday  consumer  spending  was  sluggish  in  Louisiana  and

Mississippi,  while  retailers  elsewhere  in  the  region  posted  moderate  sales  gains  that

generally  met  expectations.  Because  of  limited  markdowns,  most  retailers  expect  their

1986  profit  performance  to  be somewhat  better  than in  1985.  Merchants  reportedly  were

very  satisfied  with  inventory  levels  at  the  end  of  their  fiscal  year  and  were  generally

optimistic  about 

the  outlook 

for  1987  despite  fears 

that  some  buyers  may  be

overextended.

District  car  sales  rebounded  sharply  in  December  from  the  sluggish  pace  of

October  and  November,  largely  in  response  to  the  well-advertised  sales  tax  deduction

advantage  of  purchasing  a  new  vehicle  before  January  1987.  Ford  Motor  Company's  sales

in  the  Southeast  soared  45  percent  in  December,  matching  the  company's  strong  car  sales

growth  nationally.  For  all  of  1986,  Ford  sales  in  the  Southeast  and  the  nation  were  off

3.3  and  0.2  percent  from  1985  levels.  Because  fewer incentives  are  available  to maintain

consumer  interest,  the  1987  car  sales outlook  is uncertain.

Construction.  November  marked  the  second  successive  monthly  decline 

in

single-family  building  permits,  perhaps  foreshadowing  a  construction  slowdown  in  the

region.  However,  single-family  houses  in  the  medium  price  range  of  $80,000-$120,000

still  are  selling  very  well,  and  rising  land  costs,  coupled  with  improved  home

affordability,  have  prompted  some  builders  of  lower-priced  homes  to  move  into  the

medium-priced  housing  market.

Although  overall  commercial  construction  is  slowing,  retail  construction  has

continued  at  a  healthy  pace,  spurred  by  continuing  population  in-migration.  Occupancy

rates  are  high  at  new  shopping  centers  in  Birmingham  and  Atlanta,  and  few  lease  rate

concessions  are  being  given. 

In  Tampa,  a  slowdown  in  retail  construction  has  helped

boost  occupancy  rates  and  effective  lease  rates,  while  new  store  openings  have  caused  a

glut  in  New  Orleans. 

Industrial  construction  over  the  past  year  has  been  strongest

region-wide  in  the  high-tech  office  and  warehouse  space  segment.

VI-3

Financial  Services.  Loan growth  at large  regional  commercial  banks  continued  to

edge  downward  in  November  as  consumer  lending  experienced  its  largest  drop-off  since

July. 

Increased  competition  from  nonbank  institutions  and  slow  economic  growth  have

contributed  to  the  consumer  lending  performance.  Real  estate  lending  has  remained

firm.  The  market  for  home  equity  loans  continues  to surge  at  about  the  same  fast  pace

reported  for  the  nation.  December  automobile  loans  undoubtedly  grew  sharply  with  the

year-end  acceleration  of  car  sales.

Tourism.  Travel  to  the  Southeast,  particularly  by  auto,  remained  strong  in

November;  hotel/motel  tax  receipts  for  most  of  the  southeastern  states  posted  double-

digit  year-over-year  increases.  Hotels  in  parts  of  Florida  experienced  occupancy  rates

near  capacity  during  the  holiday  season.  Moreover,  advance  room  bookings  in  Florida are

up  4  to  5  percent  from  last  year.  To  date,  the  fifteenth  anniversary  celebration  at

Disney  World  has  been  a  huge  success  and  is  expected  to  continue  to  boost  attendance

through  next  October.  Convention  business  also  is posting  favorable  gains  throughout  the

Southeast.

Agriculture  and  Mining.  Regional  coal  production  fell  15  percent  in  1986  from

1985's  depressed  level;  Alabama's  production  decline  was  much  greater  than  Tennessee's.

Strong  competition  from  cheaper  oil  and  natural  gas  led  to  lower  coal  prices,  reduced

production,  and  losses  for  mining  operations.  Oil  price  stability  stimulated  well  drilling

in  the  District  even  before  the  current  price  rise.  The  number  of  oil  rigs  operating  at

year's end  was the  highest  since last May  and  23  percent  more  than last summer.

Extremely  favorable  weather  in  late  1986  over  much  of  Florida's  vegetable-

producing  area  has  resulted  in  a  bountiful  winter  harvest,  especially  of  tomatoes.

Unfortunately,  vegetable  prices  reportedly  are  below  production  cost  for  many  growers.

Florida's  citrus  farmers  are  faring  better  with  a  larger  crop  than  last  season  because

prices  are  holding up  better.

VII-1

SEVENTH DISTRICT - CHICAGO

Summary

Activity has been sluggish in the  Seventh District,  but

construction and retail  sales have  been surprisingly vigorous.  Growth of

total  employment  in  the District  continues  to be  less  than  in  the U.S.;

however, manufacturing  employment  rose  recently, after an  extended

decline.  Other steelmakers  continue  to  benefit  from the  5 1/2-month strike

at USX.  Auto  output  has been cut back modestly,  from high levels.  Most

lines  of mechanical  capital goods  remain weak, reflecting  limited demand

from both domestic buyers  and  overseas,  including  less developed countries

that had been good  customers.  Construction in major  markets  in  the

District  continues vigorous.  An expected slowing  in offices  and apartments

is  not yet  evident.  Consumer  spending improved  in November and December,

through a broad  range of products.

Employment

Total  payroll  employment  rose  less  last year  in  the  District's

five-state  region,  taken as  a whole, than in the  nation.  However,  Indiana

outpaced  the U.S.,  reflecting strength  in construction and various

services.  In  contrast,  employment  in Iowa declined.  Total  employment  in

the  five-state  region finally has drawn  even with peaks reached  in

1978-79.  Employment estimates  for  Indiana and Wisconsin are  2 percent

above previous peaks,  but Illinois,  Iowa,  and Michigan are  still below that

level.  Manufacturing employment  turned up  in the  fourth quarter  in  the

VII-2

District  states,  along with the nation, after trending lower  for about  two

years.  However, various  employers  continue to  announce plant  closings and

new reductions  in staff.

Steel

Developments in  steel have been dominated by  the  protracted USX

work  stoppage begun  last August  1.  Other mills at  the  foot of Lake

Michigan are  running at  or near capacity for  steel sheet,  chiefly for

autos.  A drop  in  industry shipments  in November  is  thought by  industry

analysts  to  reflect depletion of USX's  inventories built up before  the

strike.  Unemployment benefits  for eligible steel  strikers are nearly

exhausted.  Because  start-up to  full operation will take  6-8  weeks  for  its

major mills, USX must  return  to work soon  if  it  is  to  get  its  share  of the

seasonally  strong second quarter market.  Local  press reports hint  at

progress  toward settlement.  Steel  imports  continue above  the

Administration's market-share  targets.  A larger share of  imports  is coming

from countries  whose  currencies have not declined versus  the dollar.

Motor Vehicles

The surge  in  car  and light  truck sales  at year-end, driven by  tax

law changes,  reversed a two-month inventory buildup.  GM extended holiday

shutdowns at  two District  plants, and at  several other plants, most for  two

extra weeks,  to  control  stocks.  Industry analysts  expect  car sales  to  fall

in 1987,  with domestic models  accounting  for most  of the  drop.  Another

Japanese motor vehicle  assembly plant will be built  for  Fuji-Isuzu near

Lafayette,  Indiana.  Demand for  larger  trucks has  improved, reflecting a

rise  in truck  freight tonnage  over  the past year and increased  replacement

VII-3

demand.  Inventories of used trucks  are  down.  The production rate  for

heavy trucks  has  risen about  8% from 1986  lows.  Trucking industry

adjustments  in  response  to  deregulation appear  to  be  largely over.  Like

autos,  purchases  of mobile homes  and boats were boosted  in  late  1986 by tax

considerations.

Equipment

Demand  for most  capital  equipment  remains  soft.  Cutbacks  in auto

industry  capital spending have  adversely  affected producers  of  industrial

robots,  machine tools,  and other  capital goods.  Heavy construction

equipment also  continues weak.  The  top maker of  earth-moving  equipment

plans  to  close  3 more plants,  including  one  in  Iowa.  Demand by  less

developed countries  for  construction equipment  remains  low.  Two  leading

producers  of mobile hydraulic construction cranes  are  said  to view these

lines  as  "discontinued businesses".  Most  of Deere's  plants have been shut

by a labor  dispute  since August  1986.  Despite  the  strike, stocks  of  farm

equipment  remain ample because demand  is  extremely weak.  However, stocks

of  light  construction equipment  have become tight.  Orders  for  railroad

equipment  are  virtually at  rock bottom.  The leading locomotive  producer

halted output of new units  indefinitely last November  at  its Chicago-area

plant.  Demand for petroleum  industry equipment  is very low, despite an

upturn  in drilling  activity  in the  latter part  of  1986.  In  this  and other

lines,  demand for new equipment  is held down by  a market  overhang  of good

used  equipment.  Demand  for  some types  of specialized equipment,  including

food machinery and airline  equipment,  is  reported slightly stronger.  A

steel  company and a large  aluminum fabricator  in  the District  plan

VII-4

substantial upgradings  of their  facilities.  Expansion plans  are  likely  to

be  raised  in the  chemical and  paper  industries because  of pressures on

capacity.

Nonresidential Construction

Contracts  for nonresidential building  in District  states  in  1986,

through  11 months, were  slightly ahead of  last year, with Michigan up

substantially, and the  other states  somewhat lower.  Construction activity

and bidding  on commercial  projects  continue strong in the  Chicago area.

Sales  of  commercial  and  industrial buildings  surged at  year-end  to beat  the

new tax law.  Commercial  construction activity  in  this  area  is  expected to

fall  10  percent  or more  in 1987,  but shows no  clear evidence yet  of doing

so.  Some proposed  office  buildings have been postponed awaiting  anchor

tenants.  However,  others  are being pushed  ahead,  including several of over

1 million square  feet.  Activity in December and January was boosted by

mild weather.  Repaving  and other highway work will be  abnormally low until

federal  funding  is restored.

Residential Construction

Homes  and apartment construction was up  strongly  in  1986  in many

District  centers.  Conditions varied widely, however.  Areas dominated by

agriculture  and heavy  industry remain depressed.  Shortages  of skilled

tradespeople, particularly carpenters,  in the  Chicago,  Indianapolis, and

Detroit areas have  put upward pressures  on builders'  costs.  Some analysts

expect  housing  starts  in the  Chicago area  to  fall  in 1987 due  to  fewer

multifamily starts.  A survey of  landlords  indicates  that  apartment  rents

in  this  area  will  rise  only 3.8%, on  average, in 1987,  much less  than would

VII-5

be needed to  cover  the  adverse effects  of tax reform on  cash flow from new

apartments.  Markets  for  condominiums have  improved,  as  the  excess  of

"investment  condos" has been worked down.  Home  resales were up  strongly  in

the Chicago  area in 1986,  and  this uptrend continued  into January  1987.

Used home prices  in the  area rose  an estimated  14%  on  average in 1986.

Detroit  and Milwaukee resales  also  rose strongly  in 1986,  with  further

growth  expected in  1987.  Interest rates  on  fixed-rate home mortgages are

predominantly in  the  9 to  9 1/4%  range, but  lenders  increasingly are

cutting  rates below 9%.  Particularly attractive fixed rates,  e.g.  8 1/2%,

attract  lengthy waiting  lists of would-be applicants.  Initial  rates  on

adjustable  rates  loans  vary widely, with some below 7%.

Consumer Spending

District  reports  on department and  chain store sales  indicate

improvement  in November and December.  Sales  of most  types  of general

merchandise were  described as  good,  especially apparel,  toys,  and home

furnishings.  An Iowa producer  of major home  appliances  is adding workers

to meet  strong demand.  Mild weather has restrained sales of

weather-related consumer products.  Inventories  are  generally in good

shape,  but somewhat  low  for  fast-moving items.  Credit use  continued heavy

through  the  Christmas sales period.  Price  increases  on  imported items due

to  the  lower dollar  and trade  restraints have not yet  appeared at  retail  in

most  cases, but will be  increasingly evident  in 1987.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT - ST.  LOUIS

Summary

Despite an upturn by  the manufacturing sector,  the  expansion of

District employment has been  sluggish in recent  months and has  trailed

the  national average.  Construction, however, has grown more  rapidly in

the  District  than  in  the nation, led primarily by the  residential

sector.  Preliminary reports  suggest  that District holiday sales were  up

moderately from the  previous year's  level.  Fourth quarter  lending

activity at District  banks was  characterized by continued  strong growth

in commercial and real  estate loans.  Agricultural loan volumes  and loan

quality continue  to  decrease.

Employment

For  the  third  consecutive month, the District's  seasonally-

adjusted unemployment rate  was  7.7  percent in November.  District nonfarm

employment grew at  a 2.2 percent annual rate  during the  three months

ending November, trailing  the nation's 3.0  percent  rate.  Employment  in

Tennessee  grew quickly during  the period  (4.8 percent rate) while little

change  occurred in Kentucky or Missouri.  The number of construction jobs

in the  District expanded at a rapid 7.2  percent rate  for  the three month

period.  District manufacturing employment  grew at a 1.0  percent rate for

the  three months  ending November, but was  still 0.5  percent below

year-ago levels.  Gains  in the  textile/apparel and electrical  equipment

sectors  contributed  to the  recent  turnaround.  Employment in  the District

transportation sector has  trended downward  since early 1986 with gains  in

aircraft manufacturing offset by  losses  in motor vehicle production.

VIII-2

Construction

For  the  three months ending November, the value of  District

residential construction contracts  grew by 12.6  percent, exceeding the

nation's  1.9  percent growth.  Residential contracts during  the period

were  8.9 percent above the  level of the  same  period last  year, slightly

higher  than  the  increase nationally.

District nonresidential construction contracts  grew by 6.5

percent in  the  September-November period, nearly matching the nation's

6.3  percent  expansion.  Compared  with year-ago  levels, however, District

contracts  for  the period were 11.2  percent higher in contrast  to a 5.7

percent  decline nationally.  Missouri was  responsible  for much of  the

District's  construction growth with the value of  residential and

nonresidential  contracts  issued  in  the  three-month period up  27.3 and

34.1  percent,  respectively,  from year-ago levels.

Consumer Spending

District retail  sales  followed national trends  in  October by

falling sharply due  to a drop  in auto  sales.  Holiday sales  generally met

retailers'  expectations of a moderate 4-6  percent rise  over  year-ago

levels.  Most retailers  indicated  that  inventories were  close to  desired

levels.  Reports  indicate  that holiday sales were soft  in the  Little Rock

area despite widespread unscheduled markdowns  the week before Christmas.

Banking

Total loans  outstanding at  large weekly-reporting District  banks

grew at  a 14.2 percent annual  rate for  the  three months ending December.

Fourth quarter  loan activity saw a continued acceleration in commercial

VIII-3

and  real  estate  lending.  Commercial loans  expanded at  a 15.8  percent

rate  for  the  three months  compared with a 3.4  percent rate  for the  same

period  last year.  The  St.  Louis and Memphis markets have  experienced

strong  growth  in the  commercial area as  a result  of  increased purchases

of  loan participations rather  than as  a result  of  strong loan demand.

Real  estate loans  grew at  a 26.5  percent annual rate  in the  fourth

quarter versus  a 5.3 percent rate  for  the  same  period  in 1985.  Consumer

lending gained  momentum during the  period, growing at  a 26.3 percent

annual rate,  a rate  comparable  to  that  of  the  same period  last  year.

Agriculture

The volume of  agricultural loans at  District banks has followed

a two-year  downward trend.  The volume  of  farm loans outstanding for  the

third quarter was  9.6  percent  lower  than one year earlier and 13.4

percent lower than two  years  earlier.  Nationally, farm loans  fell  by

13.8  percent  from year-ago levels.  The largest decrease in the  District

was in Missouri where farm loans  fell by  15.5  percent  from the  previous

year.  The lower  levels  of  farm debt  can be attributed to  lower costs  of

many petroleum-based inputs  such  as  fuel and  fertilizer, lower land

prices  and increased  scrutiny of farm loans on  the part  of lenders.

While  banks'  farm loan volumes are  falling,  their  share of  farm loans  is

increasing  because of  the Farm Credit System's higher interest rates.

The quality of  farm loans, as  measured by nonperforming farm

loans, has  continued to  deteriorate both  in the nation and the  District.

Loan losses at  District agricultural banks, however, have stabilized

while  they  continue  to  increase at  the national level.

IX - 1

NINTH DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

Economic  growth  in  the  Ninth  District  may have picked  up a bit late

in  1986.  Consumer  spending  was  somewhat  stronger  than  expected  in  December.

Ongoing  commercial  projects  have  kept  contractors  busy.  Major  resource  sec-

tors  have  not  deteriorated,  and  some  may  pick  up. 

A  few  scattered  bright

spots  have  appeared  in  agriculture.  But  district  states  are  still  struggling

with  projected  budget  deficits.

Consumer  Spending

A  late  buying  rush  helped  keep  1986  holiday  sales  of  general  mer-

chandise  moderately  above  1985's. 

One  general  retailer  says  its  planned

promotions  did  quite well.  Another  says  its  December  sales  were  higher  than  a

year  earlier, with  most  of  the  increase  coming during  the  holiday week.  Both

retailers were  left  with  only normal  levels  of  inventories.  Reports  from  this

Bank's  directors  and  the  district's  newspaper  editors  indicate  that  holiday

sales  followed  the  dichotomy  of  weaker  sales  at  small  town,  Main  Street  re-

tailers  and  stronger  sales  at  regional  shopping  centers and  in  larger, diver-

sified  cities.

In  accord  with  the  national  trend,  district  sales  of  motor  vehicles

were also strong in December, as  buyers rushed  to  take  advantage of  their last

chance  to  deduct  sales  taxes  from  their  federal  taxable  income.  During  the

last  10  days  of  December,  district  sales  of  domestic  manufacturers were  50.4

percent  ahead  of  the  comparable  period  in  1985.  Due  to  this rush,  one  domes-

tic  manufacturer reports, its  total  sales  for the whole month of  December were

"great,"  and  it  had low inventories  of both  cars  and  trucks  left  for  January.

Lower  interest  rates  have  continued  to  fuel  housing activity.  Home

sales  in  the  Minneapolis/St.  Paul  area  registered  big  gains  late  last  year:

IX  - 2

They  were  23  percent  higher  during  November  and  December  than  during  those

months a year ago.  Homebuilders contacted  in  Minnesota report  statewide gains

during  1986,  but  think  a  recent  tariff  on  Canadian  lumber  may  raise  home

prices  a bit  in 1987.

Tourist  spending at  district  ski  resorts  has  been  spotty  lately, due

to  scattered  snowfall. 

Fortunately,  the  hard-pressed  Upper  Peninsula  of

Michigan  has  had  a  strong  season  so  far,  according  to  a  Bank  director.

Resorts  in  Montana  with  adequate  snow  have  benefited  from  Idaho's  lack  of

snow.

Nonresidential  Construction

The  geographic  pattern  of  nonresidential  construction has  also  been

varied  lately. 

Despite  moderately  high  vacancy  rates,  contractors  in  the

Minneapolis/St.  Paul  metro  area  have  been  kept  busy  into  1987  by  commercial

construction.  Several large  downtown office  projects  are  under way there, and

some  large  new  office  and  retail  complexes  have  been  planned  in  the  area's

southern  suburbs.  Contractors  in  Duluth,  Minnesota,  are  looking  forward  to

over  $700  million  of  nonresidential  construction  lasting  through  1988. 

A

Pierre,  South  Dakota,  booster  notes  that  two-thirds  of  the  work  on  its  new

convention  center  and  hotel  still  remains. 

But  a  Montana  contractor  says

construction  sector activity is  "all  but nonexistent" in  that  state,  due  to  a

slow economy  and  a state  budget crunch.

Resources

Resource-related  industries  have  continued  their  mixed  performance,

although  some  improvement  is  foreseen.  Wood  products  sectors  have  continued

to  do  well. 

A  recently  established  plywood  operation  may  add  50  more

workers.  Gold  mines  in  Montana and the  Upper  Peninsula of  Michigan are one  of

IX - 3

the  few  bright  spots  in  the  mining  industry.  But  the  oil  and  gas  sector  is

still  nearly  idle,  with  only  28  rigs  working  in  the  district.  The  recent

increase  in  crude  oil prices  should  help that  sector  some.

Agriculture

Signs  of  stability  for  some  farmers  in  some  parts  of  the  district

have  appeared  recently.  Wheat  prices  rose  somewhat  in  December,  and  corn and

soybean  prices  were  up  a bit  as  well.  One  Bank  director  notes  that  federal

government  payments  have  helped  struggling  Montana  wheat  farmers.  Livestock

operations  have  continued  to  be  aided  by  low  feed  prices,  good market  prices,

and  mild weather.  Two  surveys  of  district  agricultural  bankers  indicate  some

improvement.  One  of  them  suggests  that  bankers  thought  fourth  quarter  farm

earnings  were  higher  than  a year  earlier;  the  other,  only  that  general condi-

tions  deteriorated  at  a  slower  rate  in  1986  than  in  1985. 

Better-than-

expected  demand  materialized  during  some  recent  land  sales. 

Still,  many

district  farmers  are  still  struggling,  with  little  prospect  for  dramatic

improvement.

Public  Finance

A big  cause  for  concern  recently has  been  the  fiscal  health  of state

governments.  District  states  are  struggling  to  balance  their  budgets.  North

Dakota's  governor has  called  for  a special  session  to  deal  with  the  issue,  and

voters  may be  faced  with  increases  in  sales  or  income  taxes.  Montana,  stung

in  part  by lower  mineral  taxes,  has  had  to  plan  cutbacks  in  its  higher  educa-

tion  spending.  And  Minnesota,  though partly aided by higher-than-expected tax

collections  in  December,  still  must  plan  for  a  potential  shortfall  next

biennium.

TENTH DISTRICT  - KANSAS  CITY

Overview.  Tenth District economic  activity continues  to  improve

modestly.  Retail  sales  are  moderate  to  strong, and  auto sales  for  December

were  up due  to  tax law effects.  Inventory  levels  are viewed as  satisfactory

to  slightly high, and prices  are  expected  to remain relatively stable.

Housing activity has been helped by mild weather.  The  energy  industry remains

generally depressed.  Deposits at  district banks  are stable  to higher compared

with a month earlier.  Paydowns  on  farm  loans  are  improved compared with  a

year ago.

Retail  Sales.  Retailers report moderate  to  strong  increases  in  sales

over  year-ago  levels, with sales  of women's  apparel particularly  strong.

Prices  have  changed little  during the  last  three months  and are  expected to

remain stable.  All  retailers  report satisfactory inventory levels.  Although

some  retailers  are  optimistic about  1987  sales, many express  concern that

first  quarter  sales might be soft.

Automobile  sales.  December auto  sales were up from previous  months,

mainly due  to  the  1987  elimination of  the  sales  tax deduction.  Favorable

credit market conditions  have also  helped sales.  While  inventory levels  are

generally  acceptable, a few dealers  report slightly high inventories.  Dealers

report a cautious  optimism regarding future  sales.

Purchasing agents.  Purchasing agents  in the Tenth District report stable

to  slightly higher  input prices.  Most expect relatively stable  prices over

the next three months.  Materials are readily  available, and no problems with

availability or  lead  times  are  expected.  Most firms  are  reported to be

trimming inventories  and generally plan to continue  this policy over  the near

term.

Housing activity  and finance.  Mild weather  this  winter has  allowed

housing starts  to  run at  or  ahead of  last  year's  levels.  Multi-family housing

construction has been strong in  some  areas, while  strength in  single-family

construction has been more widespread.  Homebuilders are  optimistic for  new

home  sales  after  some  sluggishness  in December  sales.  Builders  report  no

problems  with either the  availability or  delivery  of housing materials,  and

materials prices are  generally steady.

Most  savings  institutions  report  light  savings  outflows  over the  last

twelve months  due  to  competition for  these  funds, but flows  have  leveled off

in the  last month.  Most expect  some  savings  inflows  in the near  future.

Demand for mortgage funds  varies  from up  slightly to  down moderately.

Mortgage  interest  rates  have declined  slightly, and respondents  expect

continued modest declines  in  the  future.

Energy.  The  district's  energy industry has  recovered only slightly  from

the weakness  caused by the dramatic  decline in  oil  prices  in  1986.  Oil prices

remain well  below year ago  levels,  although a recent OPEC agreement to

restrict output has  caused prices  to  firm somewhat.  Exploration and

development activity  in  the  district has  rebounded only  slightly and remains

generally depressed.  The average weekly number of operating drilling rigs  in

the  Tenth District  increased from 272  in November  to  294  in  December, about

half  the number recorded a year earlier.

Agriculture.  Throughout much of the  Tenth District, paydowns  on

agricultural loans  are  satisfactory, and generally improved over  last year.

However, due  to  late harvests and wet weather, some  areas  in  the  district

report delayed paydowns  on 1986  agricultural  loans.  Late harvests have  also

delayed spring credit  decisions  for  some  district banks.  Even so, most

bankers  report  that very few of  their current borrowers will be  denied credit

this  spring, due  to previous  action to  eliminate  problem credits  from  loan

portfolios  and  to use  of  the  loan guarantee program of  the Farmers  Home

Administration.

To  limit  additional build-up  in commodity surpluses,  1987  farm programs

will  allow producers to  idle up  to  35  percent  of their acreage.  Across  the

district, bankers  generally expect  a high proportion of farmers--perhaps

exceeding two-thirds--to participate  in  the  set-aside program, although few

farmers have  committed to  date.

A mild winter, abundant winter wheat pasture, and  low grain prices have

encouraged many district  cow-calf operators  to hold more  calves  through the

winter this  year  than last.  Low grain prices and  relatively strong hog

prices  have  led to  expectations of an expansion in hog production, but few

signs  of an expansion have  emerged.

Banking.  Total  loan demand was mixed, and total  deposit  activity was

generally constant  or  up,  at  Tenth District banks  during the  past month.  The

number  of bankers  reporting an  increase  in  loan demand equaled the number  of

bankers  reporting a decrease.  The prime  rate  did not  change  at most banks,

and changes  in  the near term are  not generally expected.  Consumer  loan rates

either fell  or remained constant, and  further changes  in  the near term are  not

generally expected.  Demand deposits,  NOW's,  Super-NOW's, MMDA's,  and passbook

savings  accounts  tended to  increase.  IRA's,  large  CD's,  and  small  time

deposits  generally remained constant.

XI-1

ELEVENTH  DISTRICT--DALLAS

The Eleventh District  economy has begun a modest  recovery, but

overall  activity  is  still  below  a year  earlier.  The  decline in

manufacturing appears  to  be  leveling  off.  Drilling has  rebounded somewhat.

Nonresidential  construction remains  stable, but  residential  construction

contract values  have  declined.  Retail  sales  have  been weak,  but  auto sales

were particularly strong  in  December.  The  condition of the  financial

institutions  still  reflects  the  overall weakness  of the  region's  economy.

Despite  some  increases  in  December,  prices of  District  agricultural

products  remain below a year  earlier.

Manufacturers  are  noting more positive  signs  than at  any  time  in

the  last  two years,  although  refineries  have  cut production slightly  in

anticipation of  a seasonal  downturn  in  demand.  A host  of  manufacturers of

various  energy-related durable  goods  report  that orders  have either

bottomed out  or  that  slight  recoveries  have begun.  Construction-related

durable goods  producers  say  that  declines  in  orders  are over.  For primary

metals  manufacturers,  increases  in  demand  from  the rest  of  the country  are

offsetting declining orders  from  District  customers,  so  that  overall  orders

are  unchanged.  The steady pace  of nonresidential construction  that  has

continued since  early  in the  first  quarter  has  led  to  stability in the

fabricated metals  industry.  Production  of  high technology goods  such as

instruments  and  electronics  is  stable.  Orders  for  transportation

equipment, chiefly  in  the  area of  defense-related aircraft,  are up.

The drilling rig  count  in  the District  states has  risen  12  percent

on  a seasonally adjusted basis  since hitting bottom  in  July.  Nevertheless,

XI-2

the  count  for  December was  still  less  than  half  its  year-earlier  level.

Leading indicators  of  drilling activity suggest that  the rig  count  will

continue to  increase  slowly  in the  near term.  The  seismic crew  count

reversed its  prolonged decline  and rose  in  both  October and  November.  In

Texas,  well  permit  applications  have also  edged upward.  Respondents  say,

however, that  recent oil  price increases  will not  result  in  large  increases

in  drilling  activity anytime  soon.

Although nonresidential  construction has  stabilized  after  falling

severely in  the  first  half  of  1986,  residential  construction continues  to

decline.  While residential  construction  has been  declining  throughout most

of  1986,  the  bulk  of the  reductions  have  generally occurred  in  multifamily

construction.  During the  fourth quarter,  however,  the weakness has  spread

to  single  family building.  Nonbuilding construction  remains  fairly steady.

Automobile  dealers  attribute  strong  sales  during December to

buyers  rushing to  make purchases while  they could  still  take  advantage of

the  deductibility of  the  sales  tax under federal  income tax  law.

Inventories  are  generally near their  desired levels.  Respondents  report

that Japanese manufacturers  continue to partially  offset  the price  effects

of  the  appreciating yen by  accepting  lower  profit margins.  Dealers  expect

a slow  first  quarter because of continued  weakness in  the  regional  economy

and  changes  in  the tax  laws.

Retail  sales  remain slow  because of  lackluster  economic conditions

in  the District.  Some  retailers  note that  holiday sales  were somewhat

stronger than  expected, but  they say receipts  were still  below a year

earlier.  Big ticket  goods,  such  as  furniture and  appliances,  continue to

sell  very poorly.  Respondents  report  some  increases  in  apparel  prices

XI-3

stemming from new  import  restrictions.  Retailers  generally expect  sluggish

sales  through the  first  quarter.

District bank performance continues  to  reflect the  region's

sluggish economic  conditions.  At  large  banks,  total  loans  have fallen well

below  the year-earlier  level,  led  by a significant  year-to-year decline  in

business  loans.  Consumer  loans  are  only  slightly lower  than a year

earlier, while  real  estate  loans  are  slightly up.  Securities holdings  have

increased markedly, although at  a somewhat  slower  rate than  at  large banks

nationally.  Securities  holdings  as  a share of total  large  bank  assets,

however,  have  risen at  a substantially faster  rate  in  the  District than

nationally.  Total deposits  at  the  large  banks  remain  far  below

year-earlier  levels,  while borrowings  continue  to  surge  and were 36  percent

above  last  year's  figure  in  December.  The  largest  proportional  deposit

reduction has  been in  large  time  deposits. 

At  all  District banks,  total

deposits  are  also  down from  a year earlier.

Texas  farmers  received slightly higher  prices  in  December,

compared with  a month earlier,  but  livestock  and  crop prices  generally

remain below a year earlier.  Despite  a dip in  livestock prices  in

December,  cattle producers  continue to benefit  from  low  feed costs  and

relatively strong  demand for  beef.  Texas  cotton production  in  1986  is

estimated to  be down almost  34  percent from that  of  1985,  as  a result  of

government acreage  reductions  and  because bad weather  reduced harvested

acres,  yields,  and  quality.  Weather-related gross  income  losses to cotton

producers  will  exceed  $50 million.  These  losses  will primarily  affect

areas  of  west  Texas where  financial  stress  is already  relatively high.

XII-1

TWELFTH DISTRICT -- SAN FRANCISCO

Summary

The  end  of  1986  saw  continued  moderate  growth  in  most  parts  of  the

Twelfth  District,  although  some  areas  failed  to  share  in  the  overall

growth.  The  Christmas  season was  a good one  for  retailers  in  most  parts  of

the  District. 

Manufacturing  industries  continued  to  present  a  mixed

picture,  with  strong  aerospace  activity  but  weakness  in  other  areas

including  electronics.  Oil  and  copper  mining  activity  appear  to  be  inching

ahead,  a marked  improvement  from  the  sharp  downslides  seen  until  recently

in  both  sectors.  Construction  and  real  estate  activity  were  affected  by

tax  reform  considerations  at  the  end  of  the  year,  and  activity  in  single-

family  home  markets  currently  is  much  stronger  than  is  multi-family  or

commercial  activity. 

Financial  developments  reflect  those  in  the  real

estate  sector,  with  tax-related  activity  at  the  end  of  the  year,  weak

multifamily and commercial  lending, and  continued  strong mortgage activity.

Consumer  Spending

The  Christmas  season  got  off  to  a  slow  start  in  many  parts  of  the

District,  but  a pickup  later  in  the  season  led  to  satisfactory sales  growth

in  the  5 percent  range  in  most  areas.  Washington  retailers  reported  sales

growth  of  about  10  percent,  which  they  attribute  in  part  to  the  year-end

bonuses  averaging  $3000  that  over  115,000  Seattle-area  Boeing  employees

received.  The  gains  in  Washington  were  particularly  welcome  because  they

were  achieved  with  few  price  markdowns. 

In  sharp  contrast,  respondents

from  some  communities  with  weak  economies,  such  as  Idaho  and  some

agricultural  areas  in  eastern  Oregon  and  central  California,  reported  flat

or  even  declining  sales  and  aggressive  promotional  activity.

XII-2

Reports  indicate  that  end-of-year  auto  sales  were  strong  in  most  parts

of  the  West,  largely due  to  the  elimination  of  sales  tax  deductions.  Some

respondents  reported  particularly  dramatic  year-end  sales  surges  for  luxury

automobiles.  In  Oregon,  which  has  no  sales  tax,  little  change  in  activity

at  the  end  of  the  year  was  reported.  Most  observers  agree  that  the  year-

end  sales  spurt  borrowed  from  next  year  so  sales  during  the  first  few

months  of  1987  are  expected  to  be  slow.  Evidence  regarding  the  impact  of

tax  reform  on  the  purchase  of  other  consumer  durables  is  more  mixed,  as

some  respondents  reported  significant  effects  but  most  reported  little

discernable  year-end  activity.

Manufacturing

Little  has  changed  for  the  West's  major  manufacturing  sectors.

Western  defense  contractors  continue  to  pull  in  large  projects,  while

orders  for  commercial  aircraft  also  continue  to  roll  in. 

These

developments  represent  good  news  for  Seattle  and  Los  Angeles,  as  well  as

the  many  other  western  cities  for  which  aerospace  activity  contributes  to

the  local  economy.

The  electronics  and  semiconductor  industries  continue  to  suffer  the

consequences  of  weak  demand,  fierce  competition,  and  resulting  low  prices.

For  example,  one  Utah  company  recently  announced  a  layoff  of  just  over

10  percent  of  its  employees.  Many  companies  throughout  the  District  lost

money  in  1986.

Mining

At  the  end  of  1986  some  glimmers  of  hope  began  to  appear  for  various

beleaguered  sectors  of  the  mining  industry.  In  Utah,  copper  companies  were

hiring  rather  than  laying  off  workers,  while  in  Kern  County  (California)

some  laid-off  oil  workers  have  been  called  back  to  their  jobs.  Moreover,

XII-3

some  previously  shut  down  oil  wells  in  Kern County now are  pumping again.

Construction  and  Real  Estate

Construction  of  multifamily  and  nonresidential  building  has  slowed

considerably  in  most  parts  of  the  District,  and  respondents  agreed  that

overbuilding  has  reduced  substantially  the  incentive  to  build.  Some  areas

saw  further  slowing  just  prior  to  the  January  1 imposition  of  the  new  tax

bill,  but  this  was  not  true  in  areas  where  economic  conditions  caused  a

slowdown  in  activity  during  the  second  half  of  1986. 

Some  observers  also

report  that  because  changes  in  the  tax  law  have  reduced  the  attractiveness

of  real  estate  as  an  investment,  real  estate  prices  have  fallen  or  are

expected  to  fall  in  the  near future.

Single-family  construction  activity  continues  to  fare  much  better

because  the  reductions  in  interest  rates  already  seen  have  made  housing

more  affordable.  No  tax  related  changes  have  been  seen  or  are  expected  in

single  family home  building.

Financial  Sector

Reflecting 

changes 

in 

construction  activity, 

the 

demand 

for

construction  loans  dropped  off  sharply  during  the  last  months  of  1986.

However,  there  was  a  surge  in  tax-related  deals  at  the  end  of  the  year  as

sellers  raced  to  collect  capital  gains  under  the  old  tax  law,  which

generated additional  loan  demand  among  buyers.

Mortgage  lending  volume  fell  towards  the  end  of  1986  in  some  areas,

but  remained  very  strong  in  California.  Through  the  first  ten  months  of

1986,  California  savings  and  loans  had  closed  50  percent  more  mortgage

loans  than  they  had  during  the  same  period  of  1985,  and  loan  commitments

for  October  suggested  that  the  trend  was  likely  to  continue  through  the  end

of  the  year. 

Thus,  resale  activity  remained  strong  even  though  housing

XII-4

starts  declined  over  the  same  period. 

In  addition,  some  lenders  report

that  home  equity  loans  are  becoming  more  popular  as  borrowers  seek  to

deduct  their  interest  payments.

