FEDERAL  RESERVE  press  release 

For  Use  at  4:30  p.m. 

July 10,  1987 

The  Federal Reserve  Board and  the  Federal  Open Market 

Committee  today  released  the attached  record of  policy  actions 

taken  by  the  Federal Open Market  Committee at  its  meeting on 

May 19,  1987.  

Such records  for each meeting of  the Committee  are made 

available  a few days  after  the next regularly scheduled  meeting 

and are  published in  the Federal  Reserve Bulletin  and  the Board's 

Annual  Report.  The  summary descriptions of  economic and financial 

conditions  they  contain are  based  solely  on  the information  that 

was available  to  the  Committee  at  the  time  of  the  meeting.

Attachment

RECORD OF  POLICY ACTIONS  OF THE 
FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 

Meeting  held  on May  19,  1987 

Domestic  policy directive 

The  information reviewed  at  this meeting  suggested  that economic 

activity has  been expanding  at  a moderate  pace,  despite some  weakness  in 

the  industrial  sector.  However,  the  rate  of  inflation  has  risen  in  recent 

months, reflecting especially  the  impact  of  higher prices  for  energy and 

non-oil  imports.  

Labor demands  grew at  a  brisk pace  in April.  The  household survey 

indicated  a  sharp  increase in  employment and  an unusually  large  decline  in 

unemployment.  As  a  result,  the  unemployment  rate  fell  to  6.3  percent,  0.4 

percentage  point  below its  first-quarter average.  Payroll  employment  rose 

considerably in April  with gains  concentrated  again in  trade  and  services.  

Manufacturing employment  has  changed  little  on  balance  so  far  this  year, 

and  the  factory workweek  dropped sharply  in April, partly because  of  the 

observance  of  religious  holidays  during  the  survey week.  

The  industrial production index declined  0.4  percent  in April 

following a  smaller drop  in March.  Most  of  the  decline  in output  in April 

was  associated with  cutbacks  in motor vehicles,  although  small  but wide

spread  reductions  were  evident  in other areas.  Cutbacks  in auto production 

and  a  pickup  in  sales  slowed  the  growth in  dealer  stocks, but  the  level 

of  stocks  remained  high.  Outside  of  autos, trade  inventories did not 

appear excessive, while  inventory-sales  ratios  in manufacturing  were near 

record  lows.

5/19/87

As  a result  of  the  higher auto  sales,  real  consumer  spending 

appeared  to  be  strong.  Excluding autos  and  nonconsumer  items,  retail  sales 

rose moderately  in April.  Housing starts  were  down  somewhat  from  their 

first-quarter  average.  Total  starts were  at  an  annual  rate of  1.7 million 

units  in April.  Single-family  starts  rose  during  the month, but multifamily 

starts  fell sharply as  high vacancy rates  and  the  elimination of  some tax 

advantages  for  investment in  income  properties  continued  to  depress 

apartment  construction.  

Business  fixed investment  has  shown signs  of  improvement  from 

the depressed  level  early in  the  year.  Shipments of  nondefense  capital 

goods  rose and  orders  inched up  in February and March.  Outlays  for 

construction  of  commercial  and industrial  structures have continued 

trending  down  in recent months.  New commitments,  however, have  firmed 

recently.  

Inflation rates  have  been higher  so  far  this  year.  The CPI rose 

at  a 6.2 percent annual  rate between  December and March, compared  with a 

rate  of  2.5 percent  in  the fourth quarter.  Much of  the  first-quarter accel

eration was  caused  by  the  rebound in  energy prices, which now appear to  have 

adjusted  to  the  bulk of  the  year-end runup  in the  price of  imported  crude.  

Larger price  increases  also were posted  for a number  of  consumer  goods, 

probably reflecting  the influence  of  higher import  prices.  At  the producer 

level,  too, large  price increases were  posted  in  a few industries  that  had 

been subject  to  strong  import  competition, such  as  chemicals  and paper.  

Commodity prices  began moving higher  in the  latter  part  of  1986  and have 

risen noticeably  since the Committee's  meeting on March 31.  However, wage

5/19/87 

-3

growth has  continued  at  relatively moderate  rates,  with the  index  for 

average hourly earnings  rising  at about  the  same  pace  as  in  1986.  

In  foreign exchange  markets,  the dollar was  under heavy downward 

pressure over much of  the intermeeting period, and  intervention purchases 

were substantial.  In  the  latter  part  of  the period,  the dollar was  bolstered 

by  slightly  firmer  monetary  conditions  in the  United  States  and by  easier 

conditions  in  Japan, Germany, and the  United Kingdom.  On  balance,  the 

dollar dropped 1 percent, with declines of  about 4 percent against  the  yen 

and  3-1/2  percent  against sterling, the  two strongest major currencies  over 

this  interval.  Economic activity  in most major foreign  industrial nations 

continued  to  be  relatively sluggish in  the  first quarter, except  in  the 

United Kingdom and  Italy.  In March, the  merchandise trade  deficit was 

close  to  the average  for  January and February and  about  the same  as  the 

fourth-quarter rate.  

At  its meeting in March, the  Committee adopted a directive  that 

called  initially  for maintaining the  existing degree  of pressure on reserve 

positions.  The members decided  that  somewhat  greater reserve  restraint 

might be  acceptable  depending on developments  in  foreign exchange markets, 

taking  into account  the behavior  of  the monetary aggregates, the strength 

of  the  business  expansion, progress  against  inflation, and conditions  in 

domestic credit  markets.  M2 and M3 were  expected to  grow at  annual  rates 

of  about  6 percent  or less  from March  through June, while growth in Ml was 

expected  to slow substantially from the  pace in  1986.  The  intermeeting 

range  for  federal  funds  was left  unchanged at  4 to 8 percent.

5/19/87

In  light  of  downward  pressures  on  the dollar,  the  provision of 

reserves  was  cautious  at  times  during  the  intermeeting period,  and open 

market operations  were adjusted  in  a slightly  less accommodative  direction 

in late April.  At  the  same  time, uncertainty associated with transactions 

related  to  a huge  volume  of  tax  payments  in mid-April  complicated  the 

management  of  reserves  during  the  intermeeting period.  Demands for reserves 

strengthened substantially,  reflecting increases  in  required  reserves  asso

ciated with a steep  rise  in  transactions  balances  near midmonth.  In  the 

second half  of  the month, as  these  payments  cleared, Treasury  balances  at 

Federal Reserve  Banks  rose  sharply and absorbed reserves,  at  times more 

rapidly than had been estimated.  This decline  in  reserves was largely off

set  by  a sizable  volume  of  outright purchases  of  U.S.  government  securities, 

which necessitated two  temporary  increases  in  the  intermeeting limit  on 

changes  in  the  System's  portfolio, as  well as  by large  temporary  injections 

of  reserves  through repurchase  agreements.  Nevertheless,  partly  reflecting 

technical factors,  borrowing  at  the  discount window rose  substantially, 

averaging around  $800  million over the  intermeeting period.  

The  federal funds  rate  firmed  somewhat over  the  period.  Most other 

interest  rates  also rose with the  largest  increases  occurring  in  long-term 

markets.  The  downward  pressures  on  the dollar  created uncertainty among 

market participants  about private  demands  for  dollar assets,  the  prospects 

for U.S.  inflation, and  the  response  of monetary policy.  In addition, rising 

commodity and producer  prices  both reflected  and  added to  concerns  about  the 

inflation outlook.  Most  bond yields  increased  slightly over a percentage 

point since  the March meeting.  Commitment  rates  for  fixed-rate mortgages

5/19/87 

-5

rose  somewhat more, reflecting increased lender  caution  in  a volatile rate 

environment.  Short-term rates  were up 1/4  to  1 percentage point,  including 

three  one-quarter percentage point  increases  in the  prime  rate.  

Growth of  all of  the monetary  aggregates picked up substantially 

in April.  Ml  was  boosted  by  the  tax-related  surge in  transactions  balances.  

Partly  reflecting these  tax  effects, growth  in M2  also picked up,  though 

remaining fairly moderate.  Growth in M3 was  boosted by  the need  to  fund 

stronger expansion in bank credit.  The  growth of  the  broader  aggregates 

was  consistent  with the Committee's expectations  for the March to  June 

period and  left  these  aggregates  in April  just  below the  lower  ends  of 

their ranges  established by  the  Committee  for  the  year.  Liquid  deposits 

ran off at  the  end of  April  and in  early May  as  the  tax  payments  cleared, 

reversing  much of  the previous  bulge  in  Ml.  

The  staff projections  continued to  suggest  that  real  GNP would 

grow at  a moderate rate  through the  end of  1987.  A primary contributor  to 

the  projected growth  remained  the foreign sector.  The decline in the  value 

of  the  dollar was  expected to make American products more competitive, 

boosting exports  despite the  effects of  relatively weak foreign economic 

growth and damping expansion in  the volume of  imports.  The  growth in 

domestic purchases  was  likely to  be  restrained by  constraints  on government 

spending, high vacancy rates  in  the  office and  rental housing markets, and 

increased  mortgage rates.  In addition, rising import  prices were expected 

to  moderate  the growth of  real personal  incomes and  thus  consumer  expendi

tures,  especially in the light  of  an already  low personal  savings  rate.  

However, business equipment  spending was  projected  to  resume a moderate 

uptrend  partly in  response  to  a growing export market.  Inflation was

5/19/87 

-6

expected  to moderate  after accelerating in the  first  quarter but  to  remain 

appreciably above the average  pace  in  1986.  With output  growing  at a rate 

approximating  that  of potential GNP, the  unemployment rate  was  expected to 

remain close  to  the  lower level achieved recently.  

In  the  Committee's  discussion of  current  and prospective business 

conditions,  the  members gave  attention to  indications  that  inflationary 

expectations  had worsened in  recent  weeks.  Some commented  that  the  somewhat 

faster  rise of  various price measures thus  far  in 1987  was not  unexpected, 

given the  depreciation of  the  dollar,  the energy situation, and  supply 

conditions  for  some agricultural products.  To  a considerable extent,  those 

developments appeared  to  involve special  factors  that  might normally be 

expected  to  result  in one-time adjustments  to  the general  level of  prices.  

However,  it  also was  noted  that  the  rising prices,  including  the  upturn 

in  commodity prices in recent  weeks,  had become  associated with an appre

ciable  deterioration in  inflationary attitudes,  judging from conditions  in 

financial  markets and  contacts with many business executives  around the 

country.  There  were regional differences  in inflationary expectations,  to 

be  sure, and  some  members observed  that  reactions  in financial markets had 

probably been  overdone.  Nonetheless, most  of  the members  believed  that 

there was  an increased  risk of  more inflation than  they had  expected 

earlier, particularly if  inflationary attitudes became  imbedded in future 

wage settlements.  On  the other hand,  some  members pointed  out that  under

lying pressures  on resources  could  remain damped and inflation relatively 

subdued, given the  outlook  for  less  than  robust  economic growth in the 

United States  and abroad  and  a worldwide oversupply of  some  commodities.

5/19/87

The prospective  behavior  of  the  dollar in  foreign exchange  markets 

was a key uncertainty bearing on  the outlook for inflation  and on  that  for 

overall business  activity.  Earlier declines  in  the exchange  value of  the 

dollar  had resulted  in higher  import  prices  -- an adjustment  process  that 

undoubtedly was  still under  way -- and  further dollar depreciation, if  it 

occurred, would  add  to  future  inflation pressures.  In  this  regard, members 

noted  that  some  domestic  producers  were  raising  their prices  as  those of 

competing  imports went  up,  thereby adding  to  the inflation  impact  of  a 

lower dollar.  In  general, however, while  the  depreciation of  the  dollar 

had undoubtedly contributed  to  inflationary expectations, direct  evidence 

of  an  inflation impact  on domestic pricing was still fairly  limited.  

With respect to  the  course of  domestic  business  activity, a number 

of members  commented  that developments  in  recent months were  in  line with 

earlier projections,  and while there  were both domestic  and foreign risks 

to  sustained  expansion,  further growth at  a moderate  pace  remained  a reason

able expectation.  As  at  previous meetings,  the members  generally expected 

domestic demands  to  be  relatively sluggish over the  quarters ahead,  and 

they  felt  that  significant  progress  in  reducing  the nation's  foreign  trade 

deficit was needed  to  support  the expansion.  Some  members  expressed  concern 

that  the  improvement  in  the  trade balance  would be  limited over  the  quarters 

ahead.  While  further progress  could be  anticipated  as  exporters and im

porters  continued  to adjust  to  a lower value  of  the dollar, such  progress 

might be  restrained  in  particular by  sluggish economic growth in  foreign 

industrial  nations.  Nonetheless,  the members generally expected continuing 

improvement in  net  exports and  many felt  that  it would provide considerable 

impetus  for domestic growth.

5/19/87

On  the  domestic side  no sector of  the  economy was  believed likely 

to  contribute much strength to  the  expansion, and weaknesses  persisted  in 

a number  of  key  sectors such as  energy, agriculture,  and nonresidential 

construction.  Moreover, the  recent  rise  in  mortgage  rates  was likely  to 

have  some  impact  on  housing demand.  However,  in  their  review of  business 

developments  in  different parts  of  the country,  several members  reported 

on  indications  of  some  improvement  recently in local  conditions  and  others 

noted  that  difficulties in  the  agriculture  and energy sectors were, at  the 

least,  no longer intensifying.  Business  sentiment also  appeared  to  have 

improved  in many  parts  of  the  country.  More  generally, while  the members 

recognized  the  risks  of  a shortfall from current projections,  especially 

given  the persisting weaknesses  and  financial  problems  in  some  sectors  of 

the economy,  current developments  on the whole appeared  to  be  consistent 

with continuing moderate  growth in  overall  business  activity.  

At  its meeting in  February the Committee had agreed  on policy 

objectives  that  called  for monetary growth ranges  for  the period from the 

fourth quarter of  1986 to  the  fourth quarter of  1987  of  5-1/2  to  8-1/2 

percent  for both M2  and M3.  The  associated range  for growth in total 

domestic nonfinancial debt was set  at  8 to  11  percent.  The Committee 

anticipated that growth in Ml would  slow in  1987  from its  very rapid  pace 

in  1986, but  the members  decided not  to  establish a numerical  target for 

the  year;  instead, the  appropriateness of  Ml  changes would  be  evaluated 

during  the  year in the  light of  the  behavior of  M1 velocity, developments 

in  the economy and  financial markets, and  the  nature of  emerging  price 

pressures.

5/19/87

In  the  Committee's discussion of  policy  implementation for  the 

weeks  immediately ahead, members noted  that  unsettled reserve conditions 

associated  with  tax payments  and related  flows  of  funds  had  produced  a 

greater degree of pressure on  reserve  positions from  time  to  time  in  recent 

weeks  than had deliberately been sought,  even after  the  slight  firming move 

of  late  April.  Market  expectations  about Federal Reserve  policy  intentions 

also  seemed  to  contribute  to  higher short-term interest  rates  at  times.  

All  but  one  of  the members  indicated  that  they wished  at  least to  maintain 

the  generally firmer reserve conditions  that  had  prevailed most  recently, 

even  though such conditions  had not been  fully anticipated in Desk opera

tions, and  a number  felt  that  some  slight  further firming might  be  appro

priate.  The members generally agreed  that  some  firming of  reserve  conditions 

had been desirable  to  counter the  apparent  intensification of  inflationary 

expectations in  recent  weeks and  to help  stabilize  the dollar  in the  foreign 

exchange markets.  In another view any monetary restraint  beyond  what  had 

been sought  recently would not  be desirable, because  additional  tightening 

would incur an undue risk of  stalling the  economic expansion at  a time 

when, in  this  view, underlying inflation pressures were  likely  to  remain 

in  check.  Most members  saw a lesser  and  relatively limited  risk to  the 

expansion under  current  economic  conditions and  one  that  needed  to  be 

accepted given the pressures  on  the dollar  and the  potential  for  inflation.  

In  the view of  several Committee  members,  the  desired  reserve 

restraint  might be more  appropriately achieved  by means  of  an immediate 

increase in the  discount rate,  providing a more  overt means  of  reassuring 

financial markets with regard  to  the  System's  continuing  commitment  to

5/19/87 

-10

an anti-inflationary  policy;  others  felt  a possible  discount  rate  increase 

should, in effect,  be  held in  reserve  for use  if  a more visible  signal 

became  desirable.  In  any event,  any decision with  respect  to  the  discount 

rate  lay with the  Board of  Governors,  and all  but  one of  the Committee 

members  agreed  that,  in  the  absence of  a near-term rise  in  the discount 

rate,  open market operations would be  directed  toward  some  increase  in 

the  degree of  reserve  pressure  beyond  that  sought  in  recent  weeks  (but 

not necessarily greater than  that  prevailing  recently).  If  the  discount 

rate were increased  shortly  after  the meeting, such  firming through open 

market operations  would not  be necessary,  at least  in the  early part 

of  the  intermeeting  period.  

With regard  to  factors  that might  trigger some  adjustment in  open 

market  operations  during  the intermeeting period,  the members  generally 

agreed  that  both inflationary developments and  the  dollar should  receive 

special emphasis.  In  particular, should inflation  or  inflationary ex

pectations seem  to  be  intensifying  or  the  dollar  come  under renewed  down

ward pressure, the  Committee  would be  ready to  see  some  prompt  further 

firming  of  reserve  conditions.  At  the  same  time,  the members  did not  rule 

out  the  possibility of  some easing during  the period  ahead, but  they viewed 

the potential  need for  a correction  in that  direction as  less  likely.  In 

keeping with the  Committee's  usual  approach  toward  policy implementation, 

any decision  to alter  reserve  objectives during  the  intermeeting period 

should  take account  of  the  behavior of  the monetary aggregates  and  the 

overall performance of  the  economy.

5/19/87 

-11

In their  consideration of  the  near-term outlook for growth of  the 

monetary aggregates,  the  members  took note  of an analysis which suggested 

that  the broader  aggregates would expand  at moderate rates  over  the balance 

of  the second quarter.  The  outsized  tax  payments of mid-April had  continued 

to  affect  the  broad  aggregates  as well  as  M1  through early May.  Beyond 

that,  M2 was likely  to grow a little more  slowly than  income, given  the 

slight  restraining effects  of  the  recent  rise  in interest rates  that would 

be  felt  in  coming months.  M3  expansion was  less  likely  to  be affected  by 

interest rate movements, at least  in the  near term, and was  expected  to be 

sustained  by  issuance of  managed  liabilities to support  credit  growth at 

depository institutions.  On  a cumulative  basis  through June,  growth in M2 

would  remain somewhat  below the  lower bound of  the growth  "cone" representing 

the  Committee's  5-1/2  to  8-1/2 percent  range for  the  year, though within the 

parallel  lines associated with the  end  points  of that  range;  growth in  M3 

would  be  very near  the lower bound  of  its growth  cone and well within its 

parallel  band.  Under  prevailing circumstances,  Committee members  indicated 

that  they were willing  to accept relatively limited growth in  the broader 

aggregates,  at  least for now, but  a few observed  that  such growth signaled 

the  need for caution.  Growth in Ml also was believed  likely  to moderate 

greatly on  average in May and  June, after  its  surge in April.  However, 

because  of  the  persisting  uncertainties about  the behavior  of  Ml,  most 

of  the members  indicated  a continuing preference for not  specifying a 

numerical  growth expectation for  this  aggregate in the Committee's  policy 

directive.

5/19/87 

-12

At  the conclusion  of  the Committee's  discussion,  all  but one  of 

the  members indicated  that  they  favored or could accept  a directive  that 

called  for  some  increase  in  the  degree  of  reserve  pressure  beyond  that 

sought  in recent  weeks, taking account  of  the  possibility  that  such firming 

might  be accomplished  through  an  increase  in the  discount  rate.  Subsequent 

to  some  initial firming  in  reserve conditions  through a reduced availability 

of  reserves  or  through an increase  in  the  discount  rate, the members  in

dicated  that  somewhat  greater reserve restraint would be  acceptable, and 

somewhat  lesser reserve  restraint might be  acceptable, over  the  intermeeting 

period  depending on developments  relating  to  inflation and  the performance 

of  the dollar  in  foreign exchange markets, while also giving  consideration 

to  the behavior  of  the monetary aggregates  and the  strength of  the business 

expansion.  This  approach to  policy  implementation was  expected  to be  con

sistent with growth in M2  and M3 at  annual  rates  of  around  6 percent or 

less  for the  three-month period  from March  to June.  Over the  same  period 

growth in  Ml  was expected  to  remain well below its  pace  in  1986;  the members 

would  continue  to  evaluate  this  aggregate  in the  light  of  the performance 

of  the  broader  monetary aggregates and  other  factors.  The members agreed 

that  the  intermeeting  range  for  the federal  funds  rate, which provides a 

mechanism for  initiating  consultation of  the Committee  when its  boundaries 

are persistently exceeded,  should  be  left unchanged at  4 to  8 percent.  

At  the  conclusion of  the meeting, the  following domestic policy 

directive  was issued  to  the Federal Resrve Bank of  New York: 

The  information  reviewed at  this meeting  suggests 

on balance  that  economic activity is  expanding  at  a 
moderate pace  in  the  current quarter.  Total nonfarm 
payroll employment  rose  considerably further  in April,

5/19/87

-13-

with most of  the gains  continuing  to be  in  the  service
producing sectors.  The  civilian unemployment  rate  fell 
to  6.3  percent  from 6.6 percent  in  March.  In April, 
industrial production declined  after  increasing at  a 
moderate  rate  in  the first  quarter.  Total  retail  sales 
changed little  but were  up  somewhat  from  their average 
level  in  the  first quarter.  Housing starts  were  down 
somewhat  in April  from their  first-quarter  average.  
Recent  indicators of  business  capital spending  point 
to  some  recovery  over the near  term from a depressed 
level  in  the  first quarter.  Consumer and  producer 
prices  have risen more  rapidly this  year, primarily 
reflecting sizable  increases in  prices  of  energy and 
non-oil  imports.  Labor cost  increases have  remained 
relatively moderate  in  recent  months.  

Growth of M2 and  M3  strengthened  in April from a 

sluggish  pace in  February and March, but  for  1987  to 
date  expansion of  these  two  aggregates has been slightly 
below the  lower ends  of  their respective  ranges  estab
lished  by  the  Committee for the year.  Ml  surged  in 
April  prompted  by exceptionally large  tax payments.  
Expansion in  total domestic nonfinancial debt  has 
moderated  somewhat  thus far  this  year.  Most interest 
rates  have risen  considerably  since  the March 31  meeting 
of  the  Committee, with  the largest  increases  occurring 
in longer-term markets.  

In foreign exchange markets,  the dollar was under 

heavy downward  pressure  over most  of  the  intermeeting 
period and  intervention purchases  of  dollars were sub
stantial.  Recently the  dollar has  tended to  stabilize, 
but  on balance its  trade-weighted value  against  the 
other G-10  currencies declined over  the period.  In 
March the merchandise  trade deficit was  close  to  the 
average  for January and February.  

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and 

financial  conditions that  will foster  reasonable  price 
stability  over time,  promote growth in output  on a 
sustainable basis,  and  contribute  to  an improved pattern 
of  international  transactions.  In  furtherance  of  these 
objectives  the  Committee at  its  February meeting  established 
growth ranges of  5-1/2  to  8-1/2  percent  for both M2  and M3, 
measured from the  fourth quarter of  1986  to  the  fourth 
quarter of  1987.  The associated  range for growth in  total 
domestic nonfinancial  debt was  set  at  8 to  11  percent for 
1987.

5/19/87

-14-

With respect  to Ml,  the  Committee recognized  that, 

based on experience, the  behavior of  that aggregate must 
be  judged in  the  light  of  other evidence relating  to 
economic activity  and  prices;  fluctuations  in M1 have 
become  much more  sensitive  in  recent  years  to  changes 
in  interest  rates,  among other factors.  During  1987, 
the Committee anticipates  that  growth in  Ml should  slow.  
However,  in  the  light  of  its  sensitivity  to  a variety 
of  influences,  the Committee  decided at  the February 
meeting not  to establish a precise  target for  its growth 
over the year as  a whole.  Instead, the  appropriateness 
of  changes  in Ml  during the  course  of  the year will be 
evaluated  in  the  light  of  the  behavior of  its  velocity, 
developments  in  the  economy and  financial  markets, and 
the  nature  of  emerging price  pressures.  

In  that  connection, the  Committee believes  that, 

particularly  in  the  light  of  the  extraordinary expansion 
of  this aggregate in  recent  years,  much slower monetary 
growth would  be  appropriate in  the  context of  continuing 
economic  expansion accompanied by  signs of  intensifying 
price  pressures,  perhaps related  to  significant  weakness 
of  the  dollar  in  exchange markets, and  relatively strong 
growth  in  the  broad monetary aggregates.  Conversely, 
continuing  sizable increases  in Ml  could  be  accommodated 
in  circumstances  characterized by  sluggish  business 
activity, maintenance of  progress  toward  underlying price 
stability, and  progress  toward  international equilibrium.  
As  this  implies,  the  Committee  in  reaching  operational 
decisions  during  the  year might target  appropriate  growth 
in Ml from time  to  time  in  the  light  of  circumstances then 
prevailing, including the  rate  of  growth of  the  broader 
aggregates.  

In  the  implementation of  policy  for the  immediate 

future,  the  Committee  seeks  to increase  somewhat the 
degree  of  reserve pressure  sought  in  recent  weeks, taking 
into account  the  possibility of  a change in  the  discount 
rate.  Somewhat  greater reserve  restraint would, or somewhat 
lesser  reserve restraint might, be  acceptable depending on 
indications  of  inflationary pressures  and on developments 
in  foreign exchange markets, as  well as  the  behavior of 
the  aggregates and the strength of  the business expansion.  
This  approach is  expected  to be  consistent with growth 
in M2  and  M3 over the  period  from March  through June at 
annual  rates  of  around 6 percent  or  less.  Growth  in Ml

5/19/87

-15-

is  expected to  remain well below its  pace  during  1986.  
The Chairman may call  for Committee  consultation if  it 
appears to  the  Manager for  Domestic Operations  that 
reserve conditions  during the  period before  the next 
meeting are likely to be  associated with a federal  funds 
rate persistently  outside a range of  4 to  8 percent.  

Votes  for this  action:  Messrs. Volcker, 

Corrigan, Angell,  Boehne, Boykin, Heller, 
Johnson, Keehn, and Stern.  Vote against 
this  action:  Ms.  Seger.  

Ms.  Seger dissented  because  she did  not want  to  lean on the 

side  of  any tightening  of  reserve conditions beyond  the  firming that had 

occurred  since  the March meeting.  She was  concerned  that  the degree  of 

reserve pressure prevailing recently, which was  somewhat greater  than 

intended,  represented  a risk to  an already weak economic expansion.  She 

noted that  the negative  effects of  recent  increases  in  interest  rates  had 

not yet been felt  in  the  economy.  She  also  referred  to  recent indications 

of moderating growth in  the monetary aggregates, and  she did not  expect 

inflationary pressures  to  persist  in  the context of  excess  production 

capacity  and commodity  surpluses worldwide.

