FEDERAL  RESERVE  press  release 

For Use  at 4:30  p.m. 

August 21,  1987 

The  Federal Reserve  Board and  the  Federal Open Market 

Committee today  released the  attached record of  policy  actions 

taken by  the  Federal Open Market  Committee at  its meeting on 

July 7, 1987.  

Such records  for each meeting  of  the  Committee are made 

available a few days  after the next  regularly scheduled meeting 

and  are  published  in  the Federal  Reserve Bulletin and  the  Board's 

Annual Report.  The  summary descriptions  of  economic and  financial 

conditions  they  contain are  based  solely on the  information that 

was  available  to  the Committee at  the  time  of  the meeting.

Attachment

RECORD OF  POLICY ACTIONS OF  THE 
FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 

Meeting held on July 7, 1987 

Domestic policy directive 

The information reviewed  at  this meeting  suggested  that economic 

activity expanded at  a moderate  pace in  the  second quarter,  as  consumer 

expenditures  grew at  a relatively modest pace,  business  capital spending 

experienced  some  recovery, and  the  trade deficit  apparently continued  to 

narrow in volume  terms.  Producer  and  consumer prices  slowed  in May, after 

sizable  increases earlier  in  the year  that  reflected, to  a considerable 

extent, higher energy  prices.  Rising  import  prices  also  contributed  to 

higher  consumer  prices.  Wage  increases have  remained  relatively limited 

in  recent months.  

Payroll employment  rose modestly further in May  and  June,  follow

ing substantial  increases  in  the first  four months  of  the year,  with the 

gains  again concentrated  in the  service-producing  sector.  Employment  advances 

in  the  goods-producing sector were  lackluster  as manufacturing employment 

rose minimally.  In June,  the household  survey  indicated a small drop  in 

employment,  but  the labor  force  fell  noticeably.  As  a result, the  unemploy

ment rate  fell  0.2  percentage  point to  6.1  percent;  most of  the drop  in 

employment was  attributed  to  fewer  young people  than normal  entering the 

labor  force  as  of  the early June survey week.  

The index of  industrial  production  rose  0.5 percent  in  May;  and 

following upward  revisions  to  the  three preceding months, the  index was 

2-1/2 percent  (annual rate) above  the  first-quarter average.  The  recent 

growth reflects  in  part  the  increased production of  business  equipment,

7/7/87 

-2

especially high-technology capital  goods, and  of  a wide  variety of  consumer 

goods.  In  the motor vehicles  sector, however, auto  assemblies  have  slowed 

in  recent months  due  to  relatively depressed sales  and  large dealer  stocks.  

Partly because  of  the  lagging auto  sales,  consumer  spending  in 

real  terms  has  been  sluggish in  recent months,  though above  its  first

quarter pace.  Outlays  for  services  have  continued to  advance steadily,  but 

total  auto  sales dropped  back noticeably in  May to  the  slow pace  experienced 

in  the  first  quarter.  Excluding  autos,  outlays for durables  have  been flat 

on  balance since  the end  of  1986, while  spending  on nondurable goods has 

edged  down.  

Housing activity  has dropped back from its  elevated  pace early 

this  year.  Total  starts  fell  to  an annual  rate  of  1.62 million units  in 

May.  Single-family  starts  were down  appreciably, apparently  reflecting the 

upturn  in mortgage interest  rates  after March.  Multifamily starts  increased 

somewhat  from an extremely low level  in April  but  remained below  the  first

quarter average.  

Business  fixed  investment  has  rebounded after  a tax-related de

cline at  the beginning  of  the  year.  Shipments  of  nondefense capital  goods 

were about  flat  in April and May but  on average were above  the first

quarter level.  Outlays  for nonresidential structures  turned  up  in  May, 

with the gains  fairly widespread;  and petroleum-drilling  activity has  con

tinued to  recover.  In  addition, new orders  for  nondefense capital goods, 

excluding aircraft,  picked up  in  the spring and  new commitments  for non

residential  construction have moved up  slightly.  

Inventory investment  apparently  slowed in  the  second  quarter  from 

its  rapid first-quarter  pace.  Production cutbacks  trimmed auto inventories,

7/7/87 

-3

but  the level  of dealer  stocks  still was  relatively high.  Outside of 

autos,  inventory  changes have  been relatively  small in  recent months 

and inventory-sales  ratios  have  remained low.  

The U.S.  merchandise trade  deficit  in nominal  terms was  about 

unchanged  in  the  first  quarter  from its value in  the final  quarter of  1986.  

Preliminary data suggest  that  the  deficit declined  in April  as  exports  rose 

and imports  fell  from their  first-quarter rate.  Economic  activity has 

remained  sluggish in most  major foreign  industrial nations  so  far  this 

year.  Real GNP and  industrial production declined  sharply in Germany in 

the  first  quarter, although industrial production picked up  in April and 

May.  Japan has  shown  the  reverse pattern with declines  in  industrial 

production registered in  both April  and May.  

Inflation rates  slowed  in May.  The  consumer  price index (CPI) 

rose  0.3 percent, after more  rapid  increases  earlier  this  year.  Increases 

in  retail  energy prices,  which had boosted  prices  during  the first  quarter, 

were  smaller  in April  and May and  accounted  for much of  the slower  rise 

in  consumer  prices.  However, the  price of  crude  oil  has advanced  further 

since  mid-April, which suggests  upward pressure  on  retail  energy prices  in 

the  period  ahead.  Excluding food and  energy, the CPI has  risen about  1 per

centage  point  faster so  far  this  year  than in  1986 partly because  of  more 

rapid increases  in  consumer goods  that  have high  import  proportions.  Wage 

inflation, in  contrast, has remained  relatively low for  the year  to  date.  

At  its  meeting on May 19,  the Committee  adopted a directive  that 

called for  increasing  somewhat  the degree  of  reserve  pressure  from that 

sought  in  the  weeks just  before  the meeting, taking  into account  the  possi

bility of  a change  in  the discount  rate.  The members agreed  that  somewhat

7/7/87 

-4

greater  reserve  restraint  would, or somewhat  lesser  reserve restraint 

might,  be acceptable depending on  developments  relating  to  inflation and 

the  dollar  in  foreign exchange markets,  as  well as  the  behavior of  the 

monetary aggregates  and the  strength of  the  business  expansion.  M2 and M3 

were  expected  to  grow at  annual rates  of  around 6 percent  or  less  from 

March  through June, while  growth in Ml was expected  to  be well  below its 

pace  in  1986.  The  intermeeting range for federal funds  was  left  unchanged 

at  4 to  8 percent.  

Adjustment plus seasonal  borrowing  at  the  discount window aver

aged  $580 million for  the  three  complete maintenance periods  since  the May 

meeting,  close to  its  average  level  around the  time  of  that meeting.  Bor

rowing  during  the  first  full  maintenance period  after  the  May meeting was 

heavy, particularly over  the long  Memorial Day weekend when an  imminent 

increase  in  the  discount  rate  was expected  by market  participants.  Total 

reserves  decreased at an annual  rate of  about  2 percent  between April  and 

June, reflecting a falloff  in  required  reserves  associated with a net  con

traction in Ml.  

M2 grew only  a little  on balance in May  and  June, bringing its 

growth rate  for  the March to  June period  to  2-3/4  percent,  and  its Ml 

component  declined  over the  two  months.  While  some  of  the weakness in May 

reflected the  unwinding of  the previous  tax-related  buildup,  more generally 

these aggregates  appear to  have  been substantially affected  by  the  increase 

in market interest  rates among  other factors this  year.  Expansion in M3 

was better  maintained as  banks  and  thrift  institutions  continued  to  fund  a 

moderate pace  of  credit  extension, and  for the  March to  June period  this 

aggregate increased  at  an  annual  rate  of  5-1/2 percent.  The growth of M2

7/7/87 

-5

in  1987  through June  left  this  aggregate below  the lower end of  the  growth 

"cone"  representing  the  Committee's 5-1/2  to  8-1/2  percent range  for  the 

year, and growth of  M3  around  the lower  end of  its  5-1/2  to  8-1/2  percent 

growth cone.  

Early  in the  intermeeting period interest  rates  remained  near 

the higher  levels reached  in  the weeks  before  the May meeting, as markets 

continued  to  reflect  concerns  about the  course  of  inflation and the  dollar.  

However, rates  subsequently declined  in  response  to  a sharp drop in some 

commodity  prices,  a firmer dollar, and an abatement  of  inflation  fears.  

The  federal  funds  rate  continued  to  average around 6-3/4  percent  during  the 

intermeeting  period, but  other short-term interest  rates were  down  10  to  55 

basis  points on balance.  Longer-term Treasury yields  were about  60  basis 

points lower and  corporate  bond rates declined  about half  that much.  The 

commitment  rate  for  fixed-rate mortgages  fell  slightly  since  the May FOMC 

meeting, but still was well above  the  low established earlier  in  the year.  

Stock  price  indexes increased  strongly over most of  the period  to  record 

levels.  

The dollar strengthened  somewhat  during  the  intermeeting period, 

boosted in  part  by  the announcement of  an economic stimulus package in 

Japan as well  as  better  than  expected  economic and price news  for  the 

United  States.  On balance,  the weighted-average  foreign exchange value of 

the dollar against  other G-10 currencies moved up by about  3-3/4  percent 

since  the May meeting,  including  increases  of nearly  7-3/4 percent  against 

the yen and  3-3/4  percent  against the mark.  Over  the  same  period, bond 

rates  rose  substantially  in Germany  and Japan and with U.S.  long-term rates 

declining  somewhat,  the  rate  differentials narrowed.

7/7/87

The  staff  projections suggested  that  real  GNP would  grow at  a 

moderate  rate  through the  end of  1987 and  perhaps  slow slightly  from this 

pace in  1988.  Improvement  in  the  external  sector was  expected  to  be  a 

major  factor contributing  to growth in  overall  output.  Growth in domestic 

demand was  anticipated  to  be  sluggish over  the  forecast  horizon.  In  parti

cular,  the rise  in  import  prices  associated with  the fall  in  the  dollar was 

expected  to  hold  down real  income gains  and  thus  consumer expenditures.  

Construction spending was anticipated  to  be  damped  by high vacancy rates 

for office  structures and  rental housing  and  recent  increases  in mortgage 

rates, while the expansion of  government  expenditures  would  likely be  held 

down  by budgetary  limitations.  Business  equipment  spending,  however, 

should rise  moderately in coming  quarters,  reflecting  continued moderni

zation efforts  and expanding  domestic production.  Inflation rates were 

forecast  to  edge  down over the  second half  of  this year  but  then  to move  up 

again in  1988,  primarily due  to  increases  in non-petroleum import  prices.  

Moreover, with the  civilian unemployment  rate  projected to  remain close  to 

6-1/4  percent,  labor market  slack would have a reduced  influence  in damping 

inflationary pressures.  

In the  Committee's  discussion of  the economic situation  and out

look,  the members generally agreed  that  business activity was likely  to  ex

pand  at  a moderate pace  over  the  balance  of  the  year.  Greater uncertainty 

surrounded the  outlook  for  1988,  but  most  of  the members  felt  that further 

moderate growth also was  a reasonable  expectation  for next  year.  In  general, 

the  members anticipated  relatively sluggish expansion  in  domestic demands 

over  the  projection horizon, and  as  at  earlier meetings  they believed that

7/7/87 

-7

sustained growth  in  overall  activity would depend to  an important extent 

on the achievement  of  significant  improvement  in  the nation's  balance of 

trade.  Most  of  the  members  anticipated a marginally higher  rate of  price 

increase  in 1988.  

In keeping with the usual practice at  meetings  when  the Committee 

considers  its  long-run objectives  for monetary growth,  the members  of  the 

Committee and the Federal  Reserve  Bank presidents not  currently serving as 

members  presented specific projections  of  economic growth, the  rate of 

unemployment,  and changes  in  the  overall price  level. 

With regard  to  the 

rate of  expansion in  real GNP,  the projections  had a central  tendency of 

2-1/2  to  3 percent  for  1987 as  a whole and  the  same  central  tendency  for 

1988,  though with a slightly  wider range  of  individual  forecasts for next 

year.  Projections  of growth  in nominal  GNP  centered  on  ranges  of  6-1/4  to 

7 percent  for  1987  and  5-3/4  to  7 percent for  1988.  The  rate  of unemploy

ment was  not  expected  to  deviate  significantly from  current levels;  the 

central  tendency of  the forecasts  was  6.2  to  6.4  percent  for  the  fourth 

quarter  of  1987  and  6.0  to  6.5  percent for  the  fourth quarter  of  1988.  With 

respect  to  the  rate of  inflation, as  indexed by  the GNP deflator,  the pro

jections  centered  on  rates  of  3-3/4 percent  for  1987  and  4 percent for  1988.  

In making  these  forecasts,  the members took account  of  the  Committee's 

objectives for monetary growth established  at  this meeting.  The members 

also  assumed  that  fluctuations  in  the exchange  value of  the dollar  would 

not  be  of  sufficient magnitude  to  affect  the projections  significantly.  

While the  central  tendency of  the members'  forecasts  suggested 

some moderation in  the  rate  of  expansion from  the  pace  currently indicated

7/7/87 

-8

for  the  first half  of  this  year, business  activity was  thought  likely  to  be 

better balanced  in that a number  of  previously depressed  industries, notably 

in manufacturing, would benefit from further growth in net exports.  Some 

members  commented  that  relatively moderate  expansion in  line with that  fore

cast  by most of  the  members would  represent a satisfactory economic  perform

ance under foreseeable  circumstances.  In  this view appreciably  faster 

growth would  incur  a considerable  risk of  increased  inflationary pressures 

and  the  resulting distortions  would  threaten the  sustainability of  the ex

pansion  itself.  Relatively  rapid growth  in domestic demands,  in  particular, 

would be  inconsistent with needed external  adjustment.  

In  the Committee's  discussion of various factors  bearing on  the 

business  outlook, some members  commented that  the  growth in  consumer  demands 

seemed  likely to  be  reasonably well maintained, especially  in the  services 

area,  based  on current  trends  and  on  prior cyclical  experience.  Others 

gave more weight  to  recent  indications  of  softness  in  overall  consumer 

spending  and,  in  the  context  of  increased  consumer debt  burdens  and  a 

relatively  low saving rate,  they saw  relatively weak growth as  a more  like

ly  prospect  for  the  next  several  quarters.  The members generally expected 

further  improvement  in  net  exports as  both importers  and  exporters  continued 

to  adjust  to  a lower value  of  the dollar, but the  extent  of  such  improvement 

remained  subject  to  considerable uncertainty.  The possibility of  relatively 

limited economic  expansion in  key  foreign industrial  countries  was  again 

cited as  a negative  factor.  With regard to  the  federal budget  deficit, 

the members emphasized  that  further  reductions were  essential  to  assure 

satisfactory economic performance over  time.  The  outlook for  continuing

7/7/87 

-9

progress  in  lowering  the  deficit was uncertain, but any reduction in  the 

deficit would tend  to  relieve  pressures on  financial markets,  particularly 

in  the  context of diminished inflows  of  funds  from abroad as  the balance  of 

trade improved, and  would enhance  the ability of  the  domestic economy to 

fund needed private  capital  formation.  

The members differed  to  some  extent  in  their  assessments  of  the 

outlook  for inflation, although most  expected  higher import  prices  to con

tribute to  slightly greater price  pressures  in  the  period  through 1988.  

In  one view, there was a considerable risk that rising  import  prices would 

have a sizable impact  on domestic pricing  decisions as  well.  That  risk 

might  be augmented by efforts  to  raise wages in line  with increasing infla

tion, particularly with reduced  levels of  unemployment  and  possible pres

sures on capacity in some industries experiencing  strong  export demand.  

Other members commented, however,  that most  industries were  still  operating 

appreciably below capacity, including in  many cases  industries  that had 

been depressed earlier by the effects of  the dollar's  appreciation;  some 

members  also  noted that  most  commodities  remained  in ample supply on  world 

markets.  A key factor  tending to  limit  inflationary pressures  was  the 

continuing moderation in overall wage increases,  but  the  members  recognized 

that  a substantial  upturn, if  it  were  to  occur,  would deal  a major setback 

to  the effort  to  restore  price stability.  The members  also  observed that 

potential developments in world  oil  prices were a major uncertainty  in the 

inflation outlook.  

At  this  meeting  the Committee  reviewed  its  ranges  for growth of 

monetary and  debt  aggregates  in  1987 and  established  tentative  ranges  for

7/7/87 

-10

1988 within  the  framework of  the  Full  Employment and  Balanced Growth Act  of 

1978 (the Humphrey-Hawkins  Act). 

At  its meeting  on February 10-11,  1987 

1/ 

the  Committee had  adopted growth ranges of  5-1/2  to 8-1/2  percent  for  both 

M2  and M3 for  the period  from the  fourth quarter  of  1986  to  the  fourth 

quarter of  1987.  The associated range  for growth in  total  domestic non

financial  debt  was  set  at  8 to  11 percent.  The Committee  had  anticipated 

that  growth in  M1 would  slow in  1987 from its very rapid  pace in  1986,  but 

the members  had  decided not  to  establish a numerical  target  for  the year; 

instead,  the appropriateness  of  Ml  changes would  be  evaluated  during  the 

year  in  the  light  of  the  behavior  of Ml  velocity, developments in  the 

economy and  financial  markets,  and potential  inflationary  pressures.  

In  the  course  of  the Committee's  review of  the  ranges  for 1987, 

most  of  the  members  indicated  a preference for  not  changing the  existing 

ranges  set  in  February, but  some sentiment also was  expressed  in favor  of 

a slightly lower  range  for M2.  The members  took  account of  the sharp 

deceleration in  the  growth of  the  broader  aggregates  thus  far  in 1987, 

especially in M2.  However, with the advance  in business  activity evidenc

ing  reasonable momentum and velocity  showing  signs  of  increasing  in the 

context  of  rising interest  rates associated with a pickup  in  inflation and 

a weaker dollar,  the members  viewed such a development  as  acceptable.  

According  to  a staff  analysis  prepared  for this  meeting, the 

relatively weak growth in  the monetary aggregates  in  the first  half of  the 

year  appeared  to reflect  a number of  developments whose  impact might be 

greatly diminished over  coming  quarters. 

To  some  extent,  special  factors 

1/  The midyear Monetary Policy Report prepared  pursuant  to  this  legislation 

was  transmitted  to  Congress on July 21,  1987.

7/7/87 

-11

related  to  the tax  reform legislation may have  helped to depress  the growth 

in M2, while growth in M3  also was restrained  by  some  unusual patterns  in 

funding asset expansion at  depository institutions.  However, the  available 

evidence suggested that  a substantial portion of  the  slowing  in monetary 

growth could be attributed  to  relatively slow adjustments  in deposit  inter

est rates  to  rising market  rates.  Opportunity costs  of  holding money bal

ances  had increased over the spring after  an  extended period  of  declines.  

By  the  time  of  the meeting, rates  on many components of  the  broad  aggre

gates  had adjusted  to  the  higher  market  rates  and  the  impact  of wider  oppor

tunity costs on  overall M2 and M3 growth  appeared  to  be  abating.  The  anal

ysis  concluded that  growth in M2  could  be  expected  to  pick up over the 

balance of  the  year  to a rate closer  to  the expansion in  nominal GNP, 

assuming  steady  reserve  conditions and market  interest  rates  near current 

levels, and  for  the  year as  a whole M2 might  expand  at  a rate around  the 

lower  end of  the  Committee's existing  range.  Growth in M3 also might 

strengthen  somewhat  over  the balance  of  the year,  leaving this aggregate 

well  within its  range.  

In  further  discussion a number of  members  took the view that the 

existing  M2 range  should not  be  "fined  tuned" at  this  time despite  the out

look for actual  growth near  the  bottom  of  the  range for 1987  as  a whole.  

The members  recognized  that  in light of  the  weakness during  the first  half 

of  the year  and  the uncertainties  that  were  involved, growth in  this  aggre

gate  might  in fact be  somewhat  below the  lower end  of  the  range  for 1987.  

The  latter  development,  if  it  occurred,  would be  acceptable provided  it was 

associated with some  strengthening  in M2  velocity and  satisfactory economic

7/7/87 

-12

performance;  in  particular, a very limited  pickup  in M2  growth might 

be appropriate should  the dollar  tend  to  weaken or inflation concerns 

intensify.  A number of members  expressed  concern that  a reduction in  the 

M2  range at  this  point might be misread  as  an indication of  intended  firm

ing  in monetary policy.  On  the  other hand,  several members  observed that 

they would not  endorse  an  easier policy posture  solely for  the purpose of 

assuring M2 growth within  the  Committee's existing range without  regard 

for  ongoing economic and  financial developments,  including  the behavior  of 

the  dollar in  foreign exchange markets.  

The members  anticipated  that  growth in  the  debt  of  nonfinancial 

sectors would remain well within its  monitoring range  for  the  year, re

flecting a marked  reduction  from the  expansion in  other recent  years.  The 

reduced rate of  expansion was  in  large measure  the  consequence of  a lower 

federal  deficit and  some  slowing in state and  local  government borrowing.  

However, with growth in  private debt  remaining  relatively strong and that 

in  federal  debt  still  on  the  high side,  expansion in  total  nonfinancial 

debt  appeared likely to  continue  to  exceed that  in  nominal GNP and average 

close  to  its  pace of  recent  months over the  balance  of  the  year.  

Turning  to  Ml, the  members  considered whether  or  not a specific 

numerical  range  should  be  reestablished  for  its  growth over  the  balance of 

this  year  or  tentatively for  1988.  The  sharp  slowing of  Ml  growth thus  far 

in  1987  following a long  period of  rapid  expansion, while appropriate  in 

the  circumstances  of  the  first  half  of  the  year, provided further evidence 

that  this  aggregate  had  become  highly  sensitive  to  movements in  interest 

rates  and other  factors.  The  members concluded  that  the  prospective be

havior  of  Ml  remained  subject  to exceptional  uncertainties, and  no member

7/7/87 

-13

favored establishing a specific  target  range  at  this  time.  However, the 

behavior  of  this  aggregate, evaluated in  the  light  of  other economic  and 

financial developments, would  be taken  into account  in  implementing  policy 

over  the  second half of  the  year.  The  Committee also  discussed M1A--a 

narrower  measure of  aggregate  transactions  accounts  that  includes  demand 

deposits  plus currency  in circulation but  excludes  other checkable  deposits 

from M1.  The members noted  that  the  characteristics  of  this  aggregate  prob

ably also had  changed in  recent  years  as  households  shifted  transactions 

deposits  from demand  to  NOW accounts and  more businesses  adopted  sophisti

cated  techniques  for managing  their cash  balances.  The velocity of  this 

aggregate had varied less  than  that of  M1,  but given the uncertainties  in 

its  relationship to  the  economy and prices,  the members  saw no advantage at 

this  time  in introducing MA as a formal guide  to policy.  

At  the  conclusion of  the  Committee's  review, all  of  the members 

indicated  that  they  favored, or  could accept,  a proposal  not  to  change  the 

ranges  for growth  in  the  broader aggregates  or  the monitoring range  for 

nonfinancial debt  that  had been established in  February for  the  year 1987.  

Growth in both M2 and M3 around  the  lower ends  of  their ranges might be 

acceptable depending on  developments relating  to  their velocities  and 

attendant economic and  financial  conditions,  notably the  strength of infla

tionary pressures.  No numerical  range  would be  established for Ml growth 

in  1987,  or  tentatively  for  1988, but M1 developments,  weighed in  the 

context  of  emerging  economic and  financial  conditions, would  be  taken  into 

account  in  reaching  operational  decisions  over  the balance  of  1987,  and

7/7/87

-14-

the  desirability of  a numerical range  for  1988 would be  reassessed  early 

next  year in  the  light of  circumstances  at  that  time.  

Thereupon, the  Committee  approved  the following  paragraphs  relat

ing  to  its  objectives for  the broader aggregates and  nonfinancial  debt  in 

1987  and  the  role of  Ml: 

The  Committee  agreed  at  this  meeting to  reaffirm 
the  ranges  established  in  February  for growth of  5-1/2 
to  8-1/2  percent for  both M2 and M3, measured  from the 
fourth quarter  of  1986 to  the  fourth quarter  of  1987.  
The Committee agreed  that growth in  these  aggregates 
around  the  lower ends of  their  ranges may be  appropriate 
in  light  of  developments  with respect  to  velocity and 
signs  of  the potential for  some  strengthening in underlying 
inflationary pressures,  provided  that  economic  activity 
is  expanding  at  an acceptable pace.  The monitoring  range 
for  growth in  total domestic  nonfinancial debt  set  in 
February  for  the  year was  left  unchanged  at  8 to  11 
percent.  

With respect to Ml, the  Committee  recognized that, 

based on  experience, the  behavior of  that  aggregate must 
be judged  in  the  light  of  other  evidence relating  to 
economic activity and  prices;  fluctuations  in M1  have 
become much more  sensitive  in  recent years  to  changes 
in  interest  rates,  among  other  factors.  Because  of  this 
sensitivity, which has  been reflected in  a sharp  slowing 
of  the  decline  in M1  velocity over  the  first  half  of  the 
year,  the Committee  again decided not  to  establish  a 
specific  target  for growth in Ml  over  the remainder 
of  1987 and  no  tentative  range has  been set  for  1988.  
The  appropriateness of  changes  in Ml  this  year will 
continue  to  be  evaluated  in  the  light of  the  behavior 
of  its  velocity, developments  in  the economy and 
financial  markets, and  the  nature  of  emerging price 
pressures.  The  Committee welcomes  substantially 
slower growth of Ml  in 1987  than in  1986 in  the  context 
of  continuing economic expansion and some  evidence 
of  greater  inflationary pressures.  The Committee  in 
reaching operational  decisions over  the  balance of 
the  year will  take  account of  growth in Ml  in  the  light 
of  circumstances  then prevailing.  The issues  involved 
with establishing  a target  for Ml will be  carefully 
reappraised at  the beginning  of  1988.

7/7/87 

-15

Votes  for this  action:  Messrs. Volcker, 

Corrigan, Angell,  Boehne,  Boykin, Heller, 
Johnson, Keehn, Kelley, Ms.  Seger, and 
Mr.  Stern.  Votes  against  this  action: 
None.  

With regard  to  the  tentative  ranges  for 1988, all but  one member 

of  the Committee  felt  that some  reduction in  the broader  aggregates from 

their  1987  ranges would  be consistent  with the  Committee's  longer-run 

objective  of  fostering progress  toward price  stability while  also encourag

ing sustained  expansion in  business  activity.  A majority indicated  a 

preference for  reducing  the M2  range  by  1/2  percentage point.  Of  these, 

a number  commented  that,  should economic  and  financial  conditions  warrant, 

they would  be  prepared  to support  a further reduction  of 1/2  percentage 

point  when  the  tentative  ranges were  reviewed in February 1988.  Some 

sentiment  was expressed  for  lowering  the M2  range  by a full  percentage 

point  at  this  time  on  the  ground that  such a reduction  appeared fully 

consistent with satisfactory  economic growth and with  the  reduced rate  of 

inflation  that  was anticipated  and desired over  the  longer run;  in  this 

view a smaller  reduction might  not appear  sufficiently  decisive with 

respect  to  restraining inflation.  However, one member expressed concern 

that  a reduction  of more  than 1/2 percentage  point would establish  a lower 

limit  that  might  not  be  consistent  with adequate  economic growth, at  least 

insofar as  could be  foreseen at  this  time.  In  light of  the  uncertainties 

that  were involved some members  also  indicated  that  they could  support  a 

proposal  to widen the  tentative  range  for M2  in  the expectation  that  it 

might be  narrowed  later.  Others  objected  to  a wider range  on  the ground 

that, because  of  the  Committee's  focus  on  the broader aggregates,  such a

7/7/87 

-16

range might  be  viewed as  weakening the  importance of  the  Committee's 

monetary  targets.  

At  the  conclusion of  the  Committee's discussion, all  but  one  of 

the members  indicated that  they  could accept  a reduction of  1/2  percentage 

point  in  the  tentative  ranges  for M2  and M3  and  in  the monitoring  range  for 

nonfinancial debt  in  1988.  It  was understood  that all  these ranges were 

provisional  and  that  they,  along with the  possibility of  establishing  a 

numerical  range for Ml,  would be reviewed  in early  1988 in  the light  of 

intervening  developments.  

The following  paragraph relating  to  the  ranges for  1988 was 

approved  for inclusion  in  the domestic policy directive: 

For 1988,  the  Committee  agreed on  tentative  ranges  of 

monetary growth, measured  from the  fourth quarter  of  1987 
to  the  fourth quarter of  1988, of  5 to  8 percent  for both 
M2  and M3.  The  Committee provisionally set  the  associated 
range  for growth in  total  domestic nonfinancial debt  at 
7-1/2  to  10-1/2 percent.  

Votes for this  action:  Messrs. Volcker, 

Corrigan, Angell, Boehne,  Boykin, Heller, 
Johnson, Keehn, Kelley, and  Stern.  Vote 
against  this  action:  Ms.  Seger.  

Ms.  Seger dissented  because she  did not want  to  reduce  at  this  time 

the  tentative M2 and M3 ranges  for 1988 below those established for this  year 

In her view  the performance  of  key sectors  of  the domestic  economy implied 

a relatively weak business  expansion, and  she did not  anticipate  enough 

offsetting  support  from gains  in  foreign trade.  In  the  circumstances 

inflationary pressures  seemed likely  to  remain  subdued, and  she  concluded 

that  a policy consistent  with monetary growth within  this  year's  ranges 

would probably be  needed to  sustain  the  expansion in  1988.  She  recognized

7/7/87 

-17

that  the economic outlook was surrounded by a great deal of  uncertainty, 

and she would be  prepared to  lower the  M2 and  M3 ranges  early next  year 

if  intervening developments  seemed  to warrant such a reduction.  

In  the  Committee's discussion of  policy  implementation for  the 

weeks immediately ahead,  all of  the members indicated  that  they were in 

favor  of  continuing to direct  open market operations  toward maintaining 

the existing degree of  reserve  availability.  Recent financial developments, 

including indications  of  some  easing in  inflationary sentiment and  the 

emergence of a more stable dollar in  foreign exchange markets,  along with 

evidence of  continued moderate  expansion in business activity did not  point 

to  the  need  for any change  in reserve  conditions at  this  time.  The  outlook 

for monetary expansion  also seemed  consistent with such a stance since 

unchanged  reserve conditions and  relatively stable  market rates  were 

thought likely  to  be  associated with some  strengthening  in money  growth 

over the  third quarter.  Even so, the  cumulative expansion of M2  through 

September might still be  somewhat  below the Committee's  target  range  for 

the year;  growth  in M3 might move  this aggregate  closer to  the middle  of 

the Committee's 1987  range  by September.  The  outlook for  growth in Ml 

remained uncertain, but a relatively moderate rate  of  expansion  in this 

aggregate over  the third quarter appeared  consistent with stable  reserve 

conditions  and  the  Committee's expectations  for  the  broader  aggregates.  

Most members  felt  that  there  should be no  presumption about  the 

likely direction of  any intermeeting adjustment in  policy  implementation.  

The market  concerns  about  inflation and downward pressures  on the dollar 

that  had argued  for  a relatively prompt  firming of  reserve  conditions at

7/7/87 

-18

the  time of  the May meeting had eased somewhat, and growth in the monetary 

aggregates had  been quite  restrained in  recent months.  One member felt 

that  policy implementation  should be  especially alert  to  developments that 

might  call  for  some easing, given  the risks  in  this view that  indicators 

of  business  activity might  prove to  be weaker  than expected  and a related 

belief  that  the  risks  of  greater inflation were  limited.  The members 

generally indicated that  attention  should  continue  to  be  given to develop

ments bearing  on  the outlook for inflation  and  the performance  of  the  dol

lar in  foreign exchange markets,  but  in keeping with the  Committee's  usual 

approach to  policy implementation, any decision  to  alter  reserve  objectives 

during the  intermeeting period would take  account of  the  behavior  of  the 

monetary  aggregates and the overall  performance of  the  economy.  

At  the  conclusion of  the  Committee's  discussion, all of  the 

members  agreed on  the desirability of  a directive  that  called  for no  change 

in  the degree  of  pressure  on reserve  positions.  Some  firming or  some 

easing  of  reserve conditions  would be  acceptable depending  especially on 

developments  relating  to  inflation and  the performance  of  the  dollar  in 

foreign  exchange markets, while  also  taking  account  of  the  behavior  of  the 

monetary aggregates and  the  strength  of  the business  expansion.  This 

approach to  policy implementation was expected  to  be  consistent with growth 

of  M2 and M3 at  annual  rates  of  around 5 percent  and 7-1/2 percent, respec

tively,  over the  three-month period  from June  to  September.  Over the  same 

period, growth in Ml was  expected  to  resume after  declining on balance in 

May  and June but  to  remain well below its  pace in  1986.  Because  the  be

havior of  Ml was  still  subject to  unusual  uncertainty and  in keeping with 

its decision regarding  the  longer-run target,  the  Committee decided  to

7/7/87

-19-

continue  its practice of  not  specifying a numerical expectation for  its 

short-run growth.  The members  agreed  that  the  intermeeting  range for the 

federal  funds rate, which provides a mechanism for  initiating  consultation 

of  the  Committee when its boundaries  are  persistently exceeded, should  be 

left unchanged  at  4 to 8 percent.  

At  the conclusion  of  the meeting  the following domestic  policy 

directive was  issued to  the  Federal Reserve Bank of  New York: 

The  information reviewed at  this meeting suggests 

on  balance that .economic activity expanded at  a moderate 
pace in  the second quarter.  In May and June,  total non
farm payroll employment  rose modestly  further, with most 
of  the gains  continuing to  be  in  the  service-producing 
sectors.  The civilian unemployment rate  fell  to  6.1 
percent  in  June and was  down appreciably  from its  average 
level  in  the first  quarter.  Industrial production 
increased  substantially in May after  rising moderately 
on balance  in  earlier months of  the  year.  Consumer 
spending  appears  to  have  increased  in the second  quarter, 
but  housing starts  were down somewhat  further in May  to 
a level considerably below their  first-quarter average.  
Recent  indicators  of  business  capital  spending point  to 
some  recovery, particularly in equipment  outlays,  from 
a depressed  level  in  the first  quarter.  In April  the 
merchandise trade  deficit was smaller  than in March and 
below the monthly average  for  the  first  quarter.  The 
rise in consumer  and producer prices moderated in May 
but  for  the  year  to date prices  have  risen more rapidly 
than in  1986,  primarily reflecting  sizable increases in 
prices  of  energy and non-oil  imports.  Wage increases 
have remained  relatively moderate  in  recent months.  

M2  increased  slightly in  May and June while growth 

of M3 remained  moderate.  For  1987  through June,  ex
pansion of M2 has  been below  the lower  end of  the  range 
established by  the  Committee  for  the year, and  growth 
of  M3 around  the  lower end of  its  range.  Following  a 
surge  in April, Ml  contracted on  balance in May and  June.  
Expansion  in  total domestic nonfinancial debt has 
moderated this year.

7/7/87

-20-

Most  interest  rates have  declined somewhat  on  balance 

since  the May 19 meeting  of  the  Committee.  In  foreign 
exchange markets,  the  trade-weighted value of  the  dollar 
against  the other  G-10  currencies  has  risen  on  balance 
since  the  May meeting.  

The Federal Open Market  Committee seeks monetary 

and financial  conditions  that will  foster  reasonable 
price  stability over  time,  promote growth in  output  on 
a sustainable basis, and contribute to  an  improved  pattern 
of  international  transactions.  In  furtherance  of  these 
objectives  the  Committee agreed at  this  meeting  to  re
affirm the ranges  established  in February for growth of 
5-1/2  to  8-1/2  percent  for  both M2  and M3,  measured from 
the  fourth quarter  of  1986  to  the  fourth quarter of  1987.  
The  Committee agreed  that growth in these  aggregates 
around  the  lower  ends  of  their ranges may be  appropriate 
in light of  developments  with respect  to velocity and 
signs  of  the  potential for  some  strengthening in underlying 
inflationary pressures, provided  that  economic activity 
is  expanding  at  an acceptable pace.  The monitoring  range 
for growth  in  total domestic nonfinancial debt  set  in 
February for the  year was left  unchanged at  8 to  11 
percent.  

For 1988,  the Committee  agreed on  tentative  ranges  of 

monetary growth, measured  from  the  fourth quarter of  1987 
to  the  fourth quarter of 1988, of  5 to  8 percent  for both 
M2  and M3.  The  Committee provisionally set  the associated 
range  for growth in  total  domestic nonfinancial  debt  at 
7-1/2  to  10-1/2  percent.  

With respect  to  Ml,  the  Committee  recognized that, 

based  on experience, the behavior of  that  aggregate must 
be judged  in  the light  of  other evidence relating  to 
economic activity and  prices;  fluctuations  in Ml  have 
become  much more sensitive  in recent years  to  changes 
in  interest  rates,  among other  factors.  Because  of  this 
sensitivity, which has  been reflected  in a sharp  slowing 
of  the  decline  in  M1 velocity over  the first  half of  the 
year,  the  Committee  again  decided not  to  establish a 
specific  target  for growth in Ml  over  the  remainder 
of  1987 and  no tentative  range has  been  set  for  1988.  
The  appropriateness of  changes  in  Ml  this  year will 
continue  to  be  evaluated  in  the  light of  the behavior 
of  its velocity, developments  in  the  economy and 
financial markets,  and  the nature  of  emerging price 
pressures.  The  Committee  welcomes substantially

7/7/87

-21-

slower  growth of  Ml  in  1987  than in  1986 in  the  context 
of  continuing economic  expansion and  some  evidence 
of greater  inflationary pressures.  The Committee  in 
reaching  operational  decisions  over  the  balance of 
the year will  take  account of  growth in Ml  in  the  light 
of  circumstances  then prevailing.  The  issues  involved 
with establishing a target  for  Ml will be  carefully 
reappraised  at  the  beginning of  1988.  

In  the  implementation of  policy for  the  immediate 

future, the  Committee seeks  to maintain  the  existing 
degree  of pressure  on reserve  positions.  Somewhat 
greater  reserve restraint  or  somewhat  lesser  reserve 
restraint would  be acceptable depending  on  indications 
of  inflationary pressures  and  on developments  in 
foreign  exchange markets,  as  well  as  the  behavior  of 
the aggregates  and  the  strength  of  the business  ex
pansion.  This  approach  is  expected  to be  consistent 
with growth in M2  and  M3 over  the period from  June 
through September at  annual  rates  of around  5 and 
7-1/2  percent,  respectively.  Growth in Ml, while 
picking up  from  recent  levels,  is  expected to  remain 
well below its  pace during  1986.  The  Chairman may 
call  for Committee  consultation  if  it  appears  to  the 
Manager for  Domestic  Operations  that  reserve  conditions 
during  the  period  before  the  next meeting are likely 
to  be  associated with a federal  funds  rate  persistently 
outside  a range  of  4 to  8 percent.  

Votes  for  the  short-run operational  paragraph: 

Messrs.  Volcker,  Corrigan, Angell,  Boehne, Boykin, 
Heller, Johnson, Keehn, Kelley, Ms.  Seger, and 
Mr.  Stern.  Votes  against  this  action:  None.

