FEDERAL  RESERVE  press  release 

For Use  at  4:30  p.m. 

November 6, 1987 

The  Federal Reserve Board  and  the Federal  Open Market 

Committee  today released  the attached  record of  policy actions 

taken  by  the Federal  Open Market  Committee at  its  meeting on 

September  22, 1987.  

Such records  for each meeting of  the  Committee are made 

available  a few days  after  the  next  regularly  scheduled meeting 

and  are  published in  the Federal Reserve Bulletin  and  the Board's 

Annual Report.  The summary descriptions  of economic  and  financial 

conditions  they contain are based  solely  on  the  information  that 

was available  to  the  Committee at  the  time of  the meeting.

Attachment

RECORD OF  POLICY ACTIONS  OF THE 
FEDERAL OPEN MARKET  COMMITTEE 

Meeting Held  on  September  22,  1987 

Domestic  policy directive 

The  information reviewed  at  this  meeting suggested  that  economic 

activity was  expanding  in  the  current  quarter at  a pace  similar  to  that in 

the  first half  of  the  year.  Output  and  employment appeared  to  have  registered 

solid gains  in  the  third  quarter, with particular  strength in  the  industrial 

sector  of  the  economy.  On  the  spending side,  outlays  for  consumption and 

business  equipment  have  risen noticeably  this  quarter,  but  construction has 

been weak.  Price  advances  have  eased  in  recent months after  a sharp  rise 

earlier in  the  year, and wage  increases have  remained subdued.  

Industrial  production rose  further  in August  after  large  gains  in 

other  recent  months;  the August  level was  more  than 7 percent  (annual rate) 

above  the  second-quarter  average.  Business  equipment  and  materials have  been 

the  strongest  components  of  industrial output  in  recent months,  but  advances 

have  been widespread among major market groupings.  

Nonfarm payroll employment  increased  again in August;  although  the 

gain was  half  the  size of  the  July increase,  the  average change  in  the  two 

months  was  close  to  the pace  of  the  first  half  of  the  year.  The  average 

workweek also rose in August  and, coupled  with the employment  gains,  pushed 

up  aggregate  hours  of production and nonsupervisory workers significantly.  

Hiring remained  strong in services,  but  employment  leveled off  in manufac

turing  after  a large gain  in July. 

The unemployment rate  was unchanged

9/22/87 

- 2 

at  6.0  percent  in August, about  three  quarters  of  a percentage  point  lower 

than  at  the beginning  of  the  year.  

Retail sales  have  increased  considerably in  recent  months.  Auto 

sales  have been  boosted  by  end-of-model-year discounts and  financing  incen

tives.  However, a considerable decrease  in  domestic  car  sales  in  the  first 

ten  days  of  September suggested  that  the  effectiveness of  the  incentive 

programs  might  be waning.  Retail  spending  on consumer goods  excluding autos 

and  gasoline continued  to  advance  at  a moderate  pace  in  July and August  to 

a level  slightly above  the  second-quarter  average.  

Housing starts  edged  down to  an annual  rate  of  1.58 million units, 

as  a decline in  single-family starts  more  than offset  some  increase  in multi

family construction.  The  run-up  in mortgage  interest  rates  during April and 

May has damped housing demand,  as  reflected  in  the  reduced pace  of  housing 

starts and  sales  in recent months.  Multifamily starts have  remained close 

to  the average  rate in  the  second quarter but  substantially below that 

recorded  during  the  first  three  months of  the  year.  

Business fixed  investment appeared  to  be strengthening,  particularly 

for  equipment.  In  July, shipments of nondefense  capital  goods were  2-1/2 

percent above  the  second-quarter average, and  orders  for these  goods  rose 

substantially in recent months.  Spending for  nonresidential  structures has 

continued  to trend  lower, albeit  at  a slower  rate  than  over  the  past  couple 

of  years,  partly because of  renewed  strength in  petroleum drilling.  

Inventories  in midsummer  appeared  to  be moderate  in most  segments 

of  the  nonfarm business  sector.  At auto  dealers,  the  quickened  selling  pace 

in August, combined with  scaled-back production, reduced  inventories  to  more

9/22/87 

- 3 

comfortable  levels.  For  retailers other  than auto  dealers,  stocks  increased 

at  a relatively  slow rate,  and  the  inventory-sales  ratio edged  down  in 

August.  As  a result  of  the  apparently  conservative inventory  stance  in 

manufacturing,  factory stocks  have  remained generally lean, with  the July 

inventory-shipments  ratio near its  lowest  point  in  the  current  cycle.  

Preliminary data suggested  that  the nominal U.S.  merchandise  trade 

deficit was essentially unchanged in  July from its  June  level despite sub

stantial  increases  in the  quantity and prices of  oil  imports.  However, the 

July deficit was larger  than  the  second-quarter average.  In  real  terms,  the 

second-quarter deficit on goods  in the  GNP accounts narrowed  only slightly 

further because a rebound  in  the  quantity of oil  and non-oil  imports  largely 

offset  a substantial  rise  in the  quantity of  exports.  The  surplus  on services 

in  the  GNP accounts narrowed  in real  terms.  The  average  pace of  economic 

growth in the major foreign  industrial  economies  increased  in the  second 

quarter after  a very weak first  quarter.  A rebound in German GNP  in  the 

second  quarter reversed a first-quarter decline  but  left GNP no higher  than 

its  third-quarter 1986 level.  Real GNP also  resumed growing in  the  second 

quarter  in France and  Italy,  while real  GNP  in Canada  and the United Kingdom 

showed  continued  strength.  In  Japan, real GNP did  not  grow in  the  second 

quarter  on average as  a more  rapid rise  in domestic demand was  offset by 

the  negative contribution of  the  external  sector;  however, industrial 

production picked up in June and July.  While  cumulative  surpluses  in the 

trade  and current  accounts of  Japan and Germany for  the  year to date  remained 

at  or near a record  rate, data  for  recent months  indicate  some adjustment, 

especially for Japan.

9/22/87

- 4  -

Price  increases  have  eased  in  recent months;  the  CPI and  PPI  for 

finished  goods  both rose  0.2  percent in  July, and  the August PPI  was unchanged.  

The deceleration in  these  price measures  from the  pace  in  the  first  half  of 

the  year  largely  reflected a downturn  in  food  prices  and  smaller  energy price 

increases.  Producer prices  for  finished  foods  fell  sharply  in August,  and 

although the effect  of  rising  oil  prices  continued  to  be  evident,  declines 

in  both  spot and  contract  prices  were likely  to  damp retail  energy  prices by 

early autumn.  Excluding food  and energy, the  CPI  rose  in  July at  around the 

reduced  pace  of  the  second  quarter and  the  comparable  PPI increased moderately 

over  the  first  two months  of  the  current quarter.  

At  its meeting  on August 18,  the Committee adopted  a directive  that 

called  for  maintaining  the existing degree  of  pressure  on reserve positions.  

The  members decided that  somewhat greater  reserve  restraint would, or  slightly 

lesser  reserve restraint might, be  acceptable depending on indications  of 

inflationary  pressures,  the  strength of  the business  expansion, developments 

in  foreign exchange  markets, as  well as  the  behavior of  the monetary aggre

gates.  M2  and M3 were expected  to grow at  annual rates  of  around  5 percent 

from June  through September, while growth in  Ml  was expected  to  pick up from 

the  much reduced pace of  recent  months.  The intermeeting range  for federal 

funds  was  left unchanged at  4 to  8 percent.  

Total and nonborrowed reserves  resumed expansion in August,  pri

marily because  of higher levels  of  excess  reserves.  In the  maintenance period 

after the August meeting,  federal funds generally traded  in a 6-1/2  to  6-3/4 

percent  range, though  the  rate moved a bit  higher around  the  end of August 

when markets  began to  expect  that  the  System would tighten policy.  In  light

9/22/87 

- 5 

of  the  potential  for  greater inflation, associated in  part  with weakness 

in  the  dollar, a decision was made  in  early  September  to  reduce margin

ally the  availability of  reserves  through open market operations.  On 

September  4 the discount  rate was  raised  from 5-1/2  percent  to  6 percent.  

After  the discount  rate  increase, federal funds  traded  mainly in  the  7 to 

7-1/4 percent  area.  In  the  two  maintenance periods  completed  since  the 

August meeting, adjustment  plus  seasonal  borrowings  averaged  about  $530 

million.  

Other interest  rates  rose  substantially over  the  intermeeting 

period.  Market  interest  rates  moved up  early in  the  period  amid  pressures 

on the  dollar, concerns  about  inflation,  and  expectations of  policy-firming 

actions  by  the  Federal Reserve.  Rates  rose  further after  the  increase  in 

the  discount rate,  particularly short-term rates;  also,  commercial  banks 

raised  the  prime  rate  by  1/2  percentage point.  On  balance, market  rates 

were  up  1/2  to  3/4 percentage point  over  the  intermeeting period.  Most 

stock price  indexes  reached new highs in  late August  but  subsequently re

treated  to  levels  2-1/2 to  6 percent below those at  the  time  of  the  August 

meeting.  

The weighted-average foreign exchange value of  the  dollar  in  terms 

of  the  other G-10 currencies  declined  about 2-1/2  percent in  the weeks imme

diately following  the August meeting.  The main  factor  in  the dollar's  de

preciation appeared to  be  greater  pessimism about  the pace  of  adjustment  of 

external imbalances,  following  the release of  U.S. merchandise  trade  data 

that were  worse  than market participants  had expected.  Moreover, prospects 

for  growth abroad relative  to  that  in  the  United States  suggested only a

9/22/87 

-

6 

limited  contribution from this  source  to  external  adjustment.  The  dollar 

rose  somewhat  later in  the  period after  the  increase  in  the discount  rate, 

reducing  its net decline  over the  intermeeting  period to  about  1-1/2 percent.  

Growth in  the monetary aggregates  increased  in August from the 

sluggish pace  of  previous months.  The  acceleration of  M2  in August  partly 

reflected  faster  growth in its  Ml  component as  the  run  off  in  demand deposits 

ended  and  the growth of  other  checkable deposits  accelerated slightly.  The 

strongest  growth among  nontransactions  components  of  M2  occurred  in  RP li

abilities  at  banks, which rose sharply  in  association with a surge  in  acquisi

tions of  Treasury  securities  for  trading accounts, and  in money market mutual 

funds.  Bolstered  by the  expansion in  M2 and  by  faster growth  in managed 

liabilities, M3  expanded at  a 7-1/2  percent annual  rate  in August.  Over July 

and August  the  broader monetary aggregates increased  at  annual rates  of  4 to 

5 percent, and  for  the year  through August  their  cumulative  growth remained 

below the  low ends  of  their  target  ranges for 1987,  with M2  substantially 

below its  range.  

The staff economic projections had  changed only marginally since  the 

August FOMC meeting.  Somewhat  stronger growth was  anticipated over  the  near 

term, but  real  GNP still was  expected to  expand  at  a moderate  rate  through 

the  end of  1988.  Improvement  in the  external  sector was  projected  to provide 

substantial impetus for  real  growth as  changes  in  the  foreign exchange value 

of  the  dollar  boosted U.S.  exports  and damped  import  growth.  In  contrast, 

growth  in domestic spending would probably be relatively subdued.  Rising 

import  prices  associated with the  fall  in  the value  of  the  dollar were 

likely to  limit  increases  in real  income  and  consumer  spending;  budgetary

9/22/87 

- 7 

pressures  probably would constrain government  purchases;  and  rising mortgage 

rates  and  high vacancy rates  were  expected  to  damp  construction activity.  

As  in  previous  forecasts,  inflation was  projected  to  moderate  in  the  second 

half  of  1987,  but  to  move  back up  in  1988,  reflecting  pressures  from rising 

import  prices.  Moreover, with the  civilian unemployment  rate  projected  to 

edge  lower,  the  pickup in prices  was expected  to  push up  labor  costs  and 

compensation gains next  year.  

In  the  Committee's discussion of  the economic  situation and outlook, 

members  commented  that  current  indicators  of  business activity were generally 

favorable  and  pointed on balance to  continuing  expansion at  a moderate pace.  

A number of  members  believed that  any deviation from current expectations was 

likely  to  be  in the direction of  faster  growth.  However, some  saw factors 

in  the  outlook that would  be likely to  restrain any potential  for a sub

stantially  stronger expansion, and  one  view stressed  the vulnerability of  the 

expansion  to a slowdown.  With regard  to  the  outlook for  inflation, members 

noted  that developments  in financial  markets suggested  some  buildup  in infla

tionary expectations,  but  they also  stressed that  there was  no  current  evidence 

of  an upturn  in broad measures  of  inflation.  Nonetheless,  several expressed 

concern about  the risks of  some  intensification in price and wage pressures.  

Others  saw greater prospects  that  the  rate  of  inflation might hold around 

current  levels  or possibly decline.  

In their discussion of  specific developments bearing  on the outlook 

for  domestic business activity, members  observed that  key economic indicators 

provided evidence of appreciable momentum in the  business expansion.  Indi

vidual members  also  reported  that  local  business conditions  appeared  to  be

9/22/87 

- 8 

strengthening in many  parts  of  the  country, although  recovery  in  some  pre

viously  depressed areas  or  sectors  of  the  economy was  still quite modest 

or  tentative, with current  activity still  well  below earlier  peaks.  It 

was  suggested that  the expansion could  be  characterized  currently as  better 

balanced  than  earlier, with favorable implications  for  its  sustainability.  

At  the  same  time,  some  members believed  that the  risks  of  appreciably more 

rapid expansion were  relatively  limited in  the  context of  considerable pro

gress  in  reducing the  federal budget  deficit,  restrained monetary expansion, 

and  an  increased level  of  interest  rates.  Some members  also  noted that 

increasing  domestic demands and  the prospects  for  improvement  in  the  foreign 

trade balance  had greatly reduced  the  odds  of  a shortfall in  the  expansion 

from current expectations.  

The  members  continued  to  view the very large  deficits in  the  federal 

budget and  in  the  foreign trade  balance  as  issues  of  fundamental concern.  

Although a great deal  of  progess  had been made  in reducing  the  federal  deficit 

in  the  current  fiscal year, the outlook for needed  further progress was un

certain.  The  trade  deficit also  had improved  in real  terms,  though not  in 

nominal  terms,  over  the  course  of  recent  quarters.  The members  generally 

expected  at  least  some  progress  to  be made  on the  latter basis  as  foreign 

trade patterns  and  prices  were adjusted  over  time  to  the  reduced  value of 

the  dollar in  foreign exchange markets.  However, the  timing and  extent  of 

such  improvement remained subject  to  considerable uncertainty and differing 

views were expressed regarding  the most  likely prospects  for  net exports 

and the  underlying pressures  on  the  dollar.  The members  agreed that  the 

vigor of  the  domestic expansion would depend  to  a substantial extent on

9/22/87 

- 9 

foreign trade  developments.  Some  members noted  that with  shrinking margins 

of  excess  capacity in  labor  markets, overall domestic demands  would need  to 

remain  relatively moderate  to  provide  room for  growth in  export  production; 

in  that  regard  continuing  progress in  reducing  the  federal  budget  deficit 

was  essential.  

Turning  to  the  outlook for  inflation,  members  commented  that  the 

sharp decline  in unemployment  this year  together with anecdotal  evidence of 

labor  shortages  in many areas  of  the  country had not  triggered any  general 

increases  in wage  rates  thus  far. 

Additionally, the  members did not  see  in 

recent  indicators any evidence  of  an upturn in  the general  level of  prices.  

However, several  expressed  concern that  the  economy might  have  reached  the 

point  where employment  and  production  levels would tend  to  be  associated with 

stronger pressures  on wages and prices,  particularly if  the business expansion 

proved  to  be  more vigorous  than was generally anticipated.  Of  particular 

concern was  the prospect  that  rising  prices  of  internationally traded  goods 

could foster  a more general  increase in domestic prices and  lead  to  higher 

wages.  Because such developments would  reflect broader and  more permanent 

cost  factors,  the  inflation problem would become much more  difficult  for 

policymakers.  A number of  other members  saw a lesser  risk  that inflation 

would intensify  over the  period ahead.  Highly competitive conditions 

continued  to  characterize many markets,  both domestic and international, 

and  businessmen were persisting in  their efforts to  curb their  costs  of 

production.  It  also was noted that  a portion of  the  gains  in output  and 

employment  was occurring in previously depressed  industries  where  the 

availability of  labor and other production resources was  concentrated.

9/22/87 

- 10 

In  this  view monetary policy had been  sufficiently  tight,  with relatively 

low monetary growth, and  in  the  context of  a less  expansionary fiscal  policy, 

the  economy was not  seen as  likely  to  generate excessive  demand  pressures 

over the  next  several quarters.  

At  its meeting in  July  the Committee  reviewed  the  basic  policy 

objectives  that  it  had  set  in  February  for growth of  the monetary and debt 

aggregates  in  1987  and established tentative objectives  for  expansion of 

those  aggregates  in  1988.  For  the  period  from  the  fourth quarter of  1986  to 

the  fourth quarter of  1987,  the  Committee  reaffirmed the  ranges  established 

in  February  involving growth of  5-1/2  to  8-1/2  percent  for  both M2 and M3.  

Given developments  through mid-year,  the Committee  agreed  that  growth in 

these  aggregates  around  the  lower ends  of  their  ranges  might  be  appropriate, 

depending  on  the  circumstances.  The monitoring range  for expansion in  total 

domestic nonfinancial debt also was  left  unchanged at  8 to  11  percent for 

1987.  For 1988  the  Committee  agreed on  tentative  reductions  of  1/2 percentage 

point  to  growth ranges  of  5 to  8 percent for  both M2 and M3.  The Committee 

also  reduced  the  associated range  for  growth in total  domestic nonfinancial 

debt  by  1/2  percentage  point  to  7-1/2  to  10-1/2 percent  for  1988.  With 

respect  to  Ml,  the  Committee decided at  the  July meeting not  to  set  a specific 

target  for  the  remainder of  1987  or  to  establish a tentative  range for  1988.  

It  was  understood that  all  the  ranges  for  1988 were provisional and  that  they 

would be  reviewed  early next year  in  the  light  of  intervening developments.  

The  issues  involved with establishing  a target  for Ml would  be  carefully 

reappraised at  the  beginning of  1988.  

In  the  Committee's discussion  of  policy  implementation for  the 

weeks  immediately ahead, most of  the  members  indicated  that  they were  in

9/22/87 

- 11 

favor  of  directing open market  operations,  at  least  initially,  toward 

achieving  the increased  degree  of  reserve pressure  that had  been sought  in 

recent  weeks.  No  change  in policy would  be  involved,  given  the decision in 

early  September to  reduce  the availability  of  reserves;  however,  because  imple

mentation of  that  decision had not  yet  been reflected  in  actual  pressures  on 

reserves  or  in money markets,  an unchanged policy at  this  meeting would imply 

some  slight  firming from the  actual  reserve conditions  that had prevailed 

recently.  A few members  expressed a preference  for maintaining the  existing 

degree of  reserve pressure.  The  members agreed  that  the  differences in question 

were  slight  and  that,  against  the background  of  earlier policy firming  actions, 

significant  further  changes  in  policy were not desirable  at  this  time.  In 

the latter  connection, some members  urged  that  particular caution be  exercised 

in  implementing policy following  today's meeting in  order not  to  convey a 

misleading impression of  the  System's  policy intentions.  

In  reaching  their decisions the members  took account  of  a staff 

analysis  that  suggested  that even without any  increase  in  reserve  pressures 

money growth was  likely to  remain fairly  subdued over  the months ahead.  This 

outlook  reflected in large measure  the  expected  effects  on money demand  of 

the  increase  in market  interest  rates  associated in part  with the decisions 

in early  September  to achieve slightly  firmer  reserve  conditions  and  to  raise 

the  discount  rate.  In  the  circumstances growth of M2  might  continue  at  about 

its  average pace  of  recent months and on  a cumulative  basis  remain appreciably 

below the  Committee's  range  for the  year.  Growth  in M3 might  pick up margin

ally  from its  recent  pace,  ending the  year  around  the  lower limit  of  its  range 

for  1987.  Given its  particular  sensitivity to  interest rates,  growth in M1

9/22/87 

- 12 

for  the  balance of  the year was  expected to  slow  further  from its  considerably 

reduced  pace  thus  far  in  1987.  The members  recognized  that  projections of 

monetary  growth necessarily involved a wide range  of  uncertainty.  In  particular, 

developments  in  the months  ahead would  depend  importantly  on  the unknown  extent 

to  which  holders of money assets  would  respond  to  the  higher  market  interest  rates 

that  had emerged and  also  on  the  extent  to  which depository institutions would 

adjust  their  offering  rates  on  interest-bearing deposits.  In  light of  the  un

certainties  that  were  involved, judgments  about  appropriate  rates  of monetary 

growth would need  to  rely on accompanying economic and  financial developments.  

With regard  to  possible  adjustments  in  policy implementation during 

the  intermeeting period,  the members  generally felt  that  there  should be  no 

presumptions  about  the likely direction of  such adjustments,  if  any.  A 

number of  members commented  that,  taking  account of  earlier  policy firming 

decisions,  monetary policy was now appropriately positioned under the cir

cumstances  that were most  likely  to prevail.  While a few members  felt  that 

the Committee  should remain  especially alert  to  developments  that might  call 

for somewhat  firmer reserve  conditions,  others did not  want  the directive  to 

lean  in  the direction of  still  further firming, given  the  slight  initial firming 

that  was already contemplated.  The members  generally agreed  that  in addition 

to developments relating to  the outlook for  inflation, any reserve  adjustments 

during  the  intermeeting period  should give weight  to  ongoing business  develop

ments and  the  performance of  the dollar  in foreign  exchange markets.  In 

keeping with the Committee's  usual approach,  it also  was  understood that  any 

decision  to alter reserve objectives  during  the  intermeeting period would 

take  account of  the  behavior of  monetary aggregates.

9/22/87 

-

13 

The members  generally supported  a proposal  to  raise  the  existing 

intermeeting range  for  the  federal  funds  rate  by  one  percentage  point  to 

5 to  9 percent.  One member  expressed  concern that  the higher range  might 

be  misinterpreted as  signaling  future firming  action.  Others  pointed out, 

however, that  the  increase was  a technical  adjustment  intended  to  take  account 

of  the  rise  in the  federal  funds rate  over  the course  of  recent  weeks  and to 

provide  a more  symmetrical  range around  the  current  rate.  By itself  the 

increase would  have no  significance for  policy.  The federal  funds range 

provides a mechanism for  initiating  consultation of  the  Committee when its 

boundaries  are  persistently exceeded.  

At  the  conclusion of  the Committee's  discussion, all of  the members 

indicated  that  they preferred or  could accept  a directive that  called  for 

maintaining  the  slightly firmer  degree  of  reserve pressure that  had  been 

sought  in recent weeks.  With  regard  to  possible  adjustments  during  the 

intermeeting period,  the members  indicated  that  somewhat greater  reserve 

restraint  or  somewhat  lesser reserve  restraint  would be  acceptable depending 

on developments  relating to  inflation, the  strength of  the  business  expansion, 

the performance  of  the dollar in  foreign exchange markets, while also  taking 

account  of the  behavior  of  the monetary aggregates.  The contemplated pro

vision of  reserves  was expected  to be  consistent with growth in M2 and M3 

at  annual  rates  of around  4 percent  and  around  6 percent,  respectively, for 

the  four-month period from August  to December.  Growth in M1 was  expected  to 

remain relatively slow over  the  same  period.  Because  of  the  unusual uncertainty 

relating to  the  behavior of  M1  and  in keeping with the  decision not  to  set  a 

longer-run target for  this  aggregate, the Committee decided  to  continue the

9/22/87

- 14  -

practice of not  specifying a numerical  expectation for its  short-run growth.  

The  members agreed  that  the  intermeeting  range  for  the  federal  funds  rate 

should  be  raised  from 4 to  8 percent to  5 to  9 percent.  

At  the  conclusion of  the meeting the  following  domestic  policy 

directive was  issued  to  the  Federal Reserve  Bank of New York: 

The information reviewed at  this meeting  suggests 
on balance  that economic  activity  is  expanding in  the 
current  quarter  at  a pace  similar  to  that in  the  first 
half  of  the year.  Total nonfarm payroll employment 
rose  further  in August  after a large increase  in July.  
The  civilian unemployment  rate  remained  at  6.0 percent, 
well below  its  level at  the  start of  the year.  Indus
trial  production increased  further  in August  following 
large  gains  in other recent months.  Consumer spending, 
bolstered by a rise  in auto  sales,  posted a large 
increase in August.  Recent  indicators  of  business 
capital spending  point  to  some  strength, particularly 
in equipment  outlays.  Housing  starts fell  in August 
to  a level a little  below their average  in other 
recent  months.  Preliminary data  suggest  that  the 
nominal  U.S. merchandise  trade  deficit  was unchanged 
in July  from its  June level  but  larger than  the  second
quarter average.  The  rise  in  consumer and producer 
prices  has  slowed in  recent months, reflecting  favor
able price developments  in food  and energy.  

Growth of  the monetary  aggregates  strengthened in 
August, but  for 1987  through August, expansion of  both 
M2 and M3 remained below the  lower ends  of  the  ranges 
established by the Committee  for the  year;  growth in 
Ml has  been  at  a much reduced  pace  in 1987.  Expansion 
in  total domestic nonfinancial  debt has moderated  this 
year.  Interest  rates  have  risen considerably since  the 
meeting on August  18.  On September 4, the  Federal 
Reserve Board approved an  increase  in the  discount rate 
from 5-1/2 to 6 percent.  In  foreign exchange markets, 
the  trade-weighted value of  the  dollar  in terms  of 
the other  G-10 currencies  has  depreciated  on balance 
since  the  latest meeting;  some  of  the decline  in the 
dollar early  in the  intermeeting period was  later 
reversed.

9/22/87

- 15  -

The Federal Open  Market  Committee  seeks  monetary 

and  financial  conditions  that  will foster  reasonable 
price  stability over  time,  promote growth in  output 
on  a sustainable  basis,  and  contribute  to  an  improved 
pattern of  international  transactions.  In  furtherance 
of  these  objectives  the  Committee agreed  at  its  meeting 
in July  to  reaffirm the  ranges  established in  February 
for growth of  5-1/2  to  8-1/2  percent  for  both M2 and M3 
measured from  the  fourth quarter  of  1986  to  the  fourth 
quarter of  1987.  The  Committee agreed that  growth in 
these aggregates  around  the  lower  ends  of  their  ranges 
may be appropriate  in  light  of  developments with re
spect  to  velocity and  signs of  the  potential  for  some 
strengthening in underlying  inflationary pressures, 
provided that  economic activity  is  expanding at  an 
acceptable  pace.  The monitoring range  for  growth in 
total  domestic nonfinancial debt  set  in February for 
the  year was  left  unchanged at  8 to  11  percent.  

For  1988,  the  Committee agreed  on tentative  ranges 
of monetary growth, measured from the  fourth  quarter of 
1987  to  the  fourth quarter of  1988, of  5 to  8 percent 
for both M2  and  M3.  The  Committee provisionally set 
the  associated range  for  growth in  total  domestic non
financial  debt  at  7-1/2  to  10-1/2  percent.  

With respect to  Ml, the Committee  recognized that, 

based on  experience,  the behavior  of  that  aggregate 
must be  judged  in the  light  of  other evidence  relating 
to economic  activity and  prices;  fluctuations  in Ml have 
become much more sensitive  in  recent years  to  changes in 
interest rates,  among  other factors.  Because of this 
sensitivity, which has been  reflected in a sharp  slowing 
of  the decline  in Ml velocity over the  first  half  of  the 
year, the  Committee  again  decided at  the July meeting 
not  to  establish a specific  target  for growth in M1 over 
the  remainder  of  1987 and no  tentative  range was  set  for 
1988.  The appropriateness  of  changes  in Ml  this  year 
will continue to  be  evaluated  in  the  light  of  the  be
havior of  its  velocity, developments in the  economy and 
financial markets, and  the nature  of  emerging price 
pressures.  The Committee welcomes substantially slower 
growth of  Ml  in  1987  than  in  1986  in  the  context of 
continuing economic expansion and some  evidence of 
greater  inflationary pressures.  The  Committee  in 
reaching operational decisions  over  the balance of  the 
year will  take account of growth in M1 in  the light  of 
circumstances  then prevailing.  The issues  involved with 
establishing a target  for Ml will be  carefully  reappraised 
at  the  beginning of  1988.

9/22/87

- 16  -

In  the  implementation of  policy  for the  immediate 
future,  the Committee  seeks  to  maintain the  degree of 
pressure  on reserve  positions  sought  in  recent  weeks.  
Somewhat  greater reserve  restraint  or  somewhat  lesser 
reserve  restraint  would be  acceptable depending  on 
indications  of  inflationary pressures,  the  strength of 
the  business  expansion, developments  in  foreign exchange 
markets,  as  well as  the  behavior of  the  aggregates.  This 
approach  is  expected  to  be  consistent  with growth in M2 
and M3  over  the period from August  through December at 
annual  rates  of  around 4 percent and  around  6 percent, 
respectively.  M1 is  expected  to  continue  to  grow 
relatively slowly.  The  Chairman may call for  Committee 
consultation if  it  appears  to  the  Manager for Domestic 
Operations  that  reserve  conditions  during  the period 
before  the  next meeting  are likely  to  be  associated 
with a federal funds  rate  persistently outside a range 
of  5 to  9 percent.  

Votes  for this  action:  Messrs.  Greenspan, 

Corrigan, Angell, Boehne, Boykin, Heller, Kelley, 
Keehn, Johnson, Ms.  Seger,  and Mr.  Stern.  Votes 
against  this  action:  None.  

On  every business day from October  19  to  30,  1987,  the Committee 

conferred  by  telephone and  reviewed  the  extremely volatile  conditions  that 

had developed  in  financial markets.  The members  agreed  on  the need  for 

special flexibility in  open market  operations during  this  period for meeting 

the  liquidity requirements of  the  economic and financial  system.  Such  an 

approach to  policy implementation was  deemed to  be  consistent  with the 

directive adopted  at  the meeting on  September 22,  but  it  was understood 

that  policy would have to  be kept  under particularly close review.

