SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT  ECONOMIC CONDITIONS

BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICT

October  1987

TABLE OF  CONTENTS

SUMMARY......................  ........................  ..........  i

First  District--Boston...........................................I-

Second District--New  York....................................II-1

Third District--Philadelphia...............................III-1

Fourth District--Cleveland......................................IV-1

Fifth District--Richmond.......................................V-1

Sixth District--Atlanta...................  ................ VI-1

Seventh  District--Chicago..................................VII-1

Eighth  District--St. Louis.................................VIII-1

Ninth  District--Minneapolis...................................IX-1

Tenth District--Kansas  City...................................X-1

Eleventh District--Dallas...................................XI-1

Twelfth District--San  Francisco.............................XII-1

SUMMARY*

Business  conditions  continue  to  improve  in  most  districts,  with

particular  strength  in the  manufacturing  sector. 

Reports  from  Boston,  New

York, Cleveland, and  San  Francisco are  particularly upbeat, whereas  growth  in

the Kansas  City  and  Dallas  districts  has  been  less  robust.  St.  Louis contin-

ues  to  report  generally  less  satisfactory  economic  performance. 

Even  the

three  relatively  weaker  districts have  enjoyed  recent  strength  in  manufactur-

ing,  however. 

Retail  sales  are  showing  modest  gains  in  many  regions,  with

particular  strength  in  the  Boston  and  Atlanta  areas,  but  sluggishness  in  the

Cleveland, Kansas City, and Dallas  areas.  Auto sales are  flat,  or  even  down a

bit,  according  to  most  district  reports.  Construction  activity  is  mixed,  as

it  was  last  month,  with commercial  building  a bit  better  than residential  in

many  parts of  the  country.  Mining  is  strong,  and  all districts commenting on

oil  drilling  report  some  increases  in  rig  counts.  Crops  and  harvest  condi-

tions  have  been  favorable  almost  everywhere. 

Only  the  Richmond  district

reports  reduced  corn yields,  due  primarily  to  adverse  weather.  Two  districts

report  continued  improvement  in  the  financial  condition  of farmers  and  ranch-

ers.

Reports  indicate  demand/supply imbalances  in  some markets.  There  is

continued  mention  of  tightness  in  certain  labor  markets,  particularly  in

retail  and  service  industries.  And  many  districts  report  rising  prices  for

some  raw  materials  and  imported  inputs.  Several  note  price  hikes  and  even

spot  shortages  for  certain  types  of steel.

*Prepared  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of Minneapolis  and  based  on  information
gathered before October  9, 1987.

Manufacturing

Almost  all  districts  report  strength  in  manufacturing,  continuing

the  trend  noted  last  month.  Even  St.  Louis,  with  weaker  overall  economic

activity,  reports  a  recent  upturn  in  the  manufacturing  sector. 

Richmond's

survey  of  manufacturers  shows  increases  in  shipments,  new  orders,  unfilled

orders,  employment,  and  the  workweek.  Results  of  a  Philadelphia  survey  are

much the same.  The San  Francisco district  emphasizes strength  in  manufactured

exports,  due  to  the  dollar's  decline  and  "buy  American"  campaigns  in  some

Asian  countries.  As  San  Francisco says,  "Manufacturers of commodities such  as

chemicals  and  paper  were  affected  first,  but  gains  now  are  spreading  to  a

whole  range  of  light  manufactured  products,  including  medical  equipment  and

industrial  valves."  Of course,  weakness  in  auto  sales  does  not  bode well  for

manufacturing  activity  in  that  important  industry.  Chicago reports an  indefi-

nite  layoff  of  2,000  workers  at  a  truck  assembly  plant  in  September  and

planned  closings  of  two  more  motor  vehicle  plants  by  year-end.  Heavy  truck

sales  have been  quite good,  reflecting  in  part  the strength of manufacturing.

Consumer  Spending

Retail  sales  are mixed. Boston,  New  York,  and Atlanta  report  consid-

erable  strength,  with  sales  generally  above  plan  for  the month  of  September.

More  modest  results  are  noted  in  the  Philadelphia,  Chicago,  and  Minneapolis

districts.  But  retail  sales  in  the  Cleveland,  Kansas  City,  and  Dallas  dis-

tricts  are  sluggish or  flat.  In  general,  retailers  appear  guardedly  optimis-

tic  about  the  coming  fall  and  Christmas  seasons. 

Auto  sales  were  weak  in

almost  all  districts  in  September  and  early  October,  and  most  industry  repre-

sentatives  are  pessimistic  about  a  quick  turnaround. 

Minneapolis  seems  to

buck the  trend,  reporting  fairly good auto  sales  in  recent weeks.

Construction

Construction  activity  is  mixed,  with  some  evidence  that  commercial

building  is  stronger  than  residential.  Richmond  reports  "firm  demand  for new

nonresidential  construction  but  weakening  demand  for  residential  construc-

tion."  The  situation  is  similar  in  the  Atlanta  district.  St.  Louis,  Minne-

apolis,  Kansas  City,  and  Dallas  note  some  weakness  in  construction  gener-

ally.  But  there  are  numerous  bright  spots. 

The  demand  for  New  York  City

office space has  been good  in  recent weeks,  and  upstate  New York  builders are

busy. 

Homebuilders  in  the  Philadelphia  district  have  a  backlog  of  sales

commitments.  And  residential  construction  is  still  quite  healthy  in  several

western  states,  including  California,  Hawaii,  Nevada,  Oregon,  and  Washing-

ton. 

Also,  southern  California  has  an  abundance  of  real  estate  buyers  from

foreign countries,  especially Japan.

Mining

Strength is  apparent in  the mining  sector.  Mining  operations in  the

Minneapolis  district  are  generally  active,  particularly  the  four  gold  mines

which  are  running  at  capacity.  U.  S. copper  has  become  more  competitive  in

world  markets,  stimulating  output  in  Montana. 

Increases  in  rig  counts  are

noted  by  all  districts reporting on  petroleum drilling,  including  Minneapolis,

Kansas  City,  and  Dallas.  Analysts  in  Texas,  however,  believe  that  drilling

activity has  nearly  completed  its  shift upward,  as  long as  oil  prices  stay  in

their  present range.

Agriculture

Reports  from  the  agricultural  sector  are  generally  quite  strong.

Crops  and  harvest  conditions  have  been  good  in  most  parts  of the  nation, with

only  the  Richmond district  reporting  weakness.  There  "corn  yields are  running

20  to  40  percent  below  normal  and  even  less  in  areas  severely  affected  by

drought."  Nationally,  livestock  farms  are  generally profitable  due  to  favor-

able  price structures.  Both Minneapolis  and Kansas  City note  that  farm  finan-

cial  problems  have  eased  somewhat and  that  ranchers  are  using  recent  profits

to pay down  loans.

Tightening Markets

Demand  is  outstripping  supply  in  some  markets.  There  is  continued

and  even  increasing mention  of tightness  in  specific  labor  markets,  including

reports  from  Boston,  Richmond,  Minneapolis,  and  San  Francisco. 

Retail  and

service  industries  are generally the most affected, and  several  districts note

recent wage  increases  in  those  sectors.  Rising  prices are  noted  for  some  raw

materials and  imported  inputs,  and  several  districts  mention higher  prices  for

imported  apparel. 

Cleveland,  Chicago,  and  Dallas  note  price  hikes  and  even

spot  shortages  for  certain  types  of steel.  Both  the  Boston  and  Philadelphia

districts  observe  that  most  manufacturers  are,  so  far,  holding  the  line  on

their  own  prices.  However,  nearly  half  the  manufacturers  queried  in  a Phila-

delphia  district  survey  indicate  that  they  plan  to  raise  prices  during  the

next  six months.

FIRST  DISTRICT - BOSTON

Economic activity appears to  be picking up in the First District.

Retailers are quite upbeat about their  recent  sales  results.  Most of those

contacted show double-digit percentage increases  in September compared to  a

year earlier.  However, the  tight  labor market  in New England  is  creating

cost pressures for retailers as  wages rise and hiring difficulties cause

delays.  In manufacturing, most respondents have also experienced  recent

gains  in orders  and sales.  Despite  rising  costs  for  some  raw materials  and

imported  inputs, most manufacturers are holding the line on their  own sales

prices.  Manufacturers and retailers are both moderately optimistic about

the  remainder of the year and  1988.  Many  foresee continuing cost pressures

but no  real upsurge in  inflation.

Retail

Sales  in comparable  stores posted increases  over  the year  ranging

from 0 to 22  percent,  with all  but  one contact  reporting increases  of  10

percent  or more.  Sales growth was quite widespread  across product  lines,

with seasonal  items  and heavily promoted products  showing better  than

average gains.  The one chain showing no  growth, a building materials

supplier, had budgeted accordingly since new construction has  leveled off

in the limited geographic area  it  serves, after booming  for four years.

Inventories  are generally in  line with plans, mostly higher  than

last year to  support  increased  sales.  One chain  reported selected

inventories below plan because of difficulties obtaining consumer

electronics merchandise  from "over-cautious" manufacturers who were  stung

by slow sales  in the  spring.

Hiring difficulties are an  important source  of concern among First

District retailers.  High-quality applicants to  fill  all job  categories are

in short supply despite wage increases.  Some convenience stores have

intermittently curtailed hours for lack of help, and  some  chains have had

to postpone  opening new stores because of hiring delays.

Sales  for  the remainder of  1987  are expected to  continue  as they

have during the year to  date, including a "good but not outstanding"

Christmas selling  season.  Next year's sales are  expected  to be  5 to  10

percent ahead  of 1987.

Manufacturing

Most First District manufacturers report  a recent pick-up  in

orders.  Respondents representing the machinery, fabricated metals and

instruments  industries cite gains  ranging from  10  to 25  percent or more

above their  1986 levels;  however, some of these  increases  reflect defense

and other  large contracts  that have been under negotiation for  a long

time.  At many firms sales  are also up  10  to  15  percent above  1986

figures.  Medical and  electronic testing  instruments and  fabricated metal

products  and plastics  for the  auto  industry are especially buoyant, while

textiles  and other  consumer and housing-related goods  show little

strength.  Exports have played only  a minor role  in these  increases.

Respondents say that  their major exports  are too  specialized  to be very

price-sensitive and  that  foreign producers have  too much excess  capacity to

buy many U.S.  capital goods  right now.

I-3

Manufacturers' sales  prices generally remain stable  in the  First

District.  Contacts mention that  foreign  competitors have raised prices  far

less  than exchange  rate changes would suggest;  thus,  despite  rising costs

for  raw materials  (such as  pulp, paper,  copper and  chemical  feedstocks  for

plastics) and  for  imports from  their off-shore affiliates, most  respondents

are holding their  own prices steady.  Textile prices have  even eroded

slightly.  Respondents also  cite price  resistance from the U.S.  auto

industry and the U.S.  Department of Defense.

The employment report  is mixed although the situation is muddled by

some major  restructurings and  the first  reported  strike  in many months.

Declining  employment - at about  one-third of  the firms  - generally  reflects

restructuring efforts.  Hiring is occurring at  another third of the

companies, primarily those producing tools,  parts  and other materials  for

the aerospace and auto  industries.

Capital spending  is generally running at  or above  last year's

levels.  By  contrast with the  recent  past, when almost all  capital spending

was devoted to  raising productivity,  four  firms  indicate  that some

expenditures reflect expansions, including  five new plants (two  in New

England).

First District manufacturers anticipate ending  the year with good

increases  in sales and profits.  In 1988  they expect  sales  to  "chug along"

at or slightly above the pace  of GNP.  Only one was  concerned about  a

resurgence  of inflation.  Several believe raw materials prices will

continue  to  rise faster  than their own, however.

II-1

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

In  general,  the  Second  District  economy  registered  some  improvement  since

the  last  report.  The  latest  purchasing managers'  surveys  showed  a  sizable  increase

in  firms  reporting  better  business  conditions,  and  retailers  experienced

satisfactory  sales  in  recent weeks.  Office  leasing  activity was also  good,  but  the

residential  construction  market  remains  mixed.  On  the  financial  side,  most  small

and  mid-sized  banks  have  raised  their  lending  rates  in  response  to  prime  rate

increases  at money center banks.

Consumer Spending

In  part reflecting  the  lateness  of  Labor  Day  this  year,  sales  at  District

department  stores  registered  stronger  over-the-year  gains  in  September  than  in

August. 

Promotionals  and  back-to-school  buying  which  typically  occur  in  late

August  were  postponed  to  early  September  this  year.  However,  the  remainder  of

September was  also  relatively  strong.  Our  respondents  reported  year-to-year  gains

of  11  to  13  percent  in  September,  up  from  a  range  of  2  to  8  percent  in  August.

September  sales  were generally above  plan  whereas  August  sales  at  some  stores  were

on  or  slightly below target.

Items  in  strong  demand  during  recent  weeks  were  most  kinds  of  apparel,

accessories,  and  home  furnishings.  One  retailer,  however,  noted  a  weakness  in

women's  apparel  throughout  his  chain,  possibly  reflecting  disenchantment  with  some

of  the  more  extreme  new  fashions.  Inventories  were  reported  from  4 percent  below

to  4 percent above plan,  levels which respondents  found tolerable.

II-2

Business Activity

The  improved  tone  in  the  District's  economy  continued  in  recent  weeks.

The  latest  purchasing managers' surveys  from Buffalo and Rochester showed a sizable

increase  in  the  percentage  of  firms  reporting  an  improvement  in  general  business

conditions. 

Inventories  were  also  somewhat  higher,  but  the  level  was  not

burdensome.

Plans  were  announced  for  several  major  new  projects  in  the  District.

These include  a proposal  for  a new residential  community of some  1200  condominiums

on  a  waterfront  site  in  New  Jersey  where  an  auto  assembly  plant  was  formerly

located and a project  in  Brooklyn  to  build  2500  middle-income apartments  along  the

waterfront  together with  a  public  park,  promenade,  and  space  for  light  industrial

use.  On  Long  Island  work  is  scheduled  to  begin  in  November  on  a  362-room  hotel,

resort, and  conference center,  the first  phase  of  a $150 million mixed-use develop-

ment which will also  include town houses and  an office  building.  In addition,  the

lifting  of  a  7-month  building  ban  elsewhere  on  Long  Island  is  expected  to  result

in the  construction  of  several  residential  and  commercial  projects  that  have  been

on hold.

Unemployment rates  in  the  District  showed little  change  in  September  when

both New  York  and  New Jersey  posted  rates  of  4.5%.  New  York  City's  unemployment

rate  also  fell  to  4.5%,  its  lowest  level  in  17  years.  While  unemployment  rates

have  dropped  substantially  throughout  the  District  in  recent  years,  analysts  in

some  labor  markets  such  as  Buffalo  view the  decline  with  caution.  They attribute

much  of  the  improvement  to  substantial  outmigration  and  the  substitution  of

low-paying service  jobs  for  the  high-paying manufacturing positions which  once were

prevalent.

Construction and Real Estate

The  pattern  of  District  residential  construction activity was again  mixed

in recent weeks.  Builders  in  upstate communities  remain  quite  busy, and  starts  in

II-3

some of  these areas  are expected to  equal last year's high levels.  In the  downstate

and  New  Jersey  markets,  however,  builders  continued  to  experience  a  slowdown  and

little  traffic  from  potential  buyers.  High  prices  resulting  from  a  shortage  of

suitable  land  are  cited  as  the  major  deterrent.  The  high  cost  of  new  homes  is

reportedly  stimulating  a  boom  in  the  remodeling  and  expansion  of  existing  homes.

In the District as  a whole 1987  starts are  expected to  trail  the year-earlier pace.

Observers were generally reluctant to  speculate about  the  longer term outlook.

The  demand  for  office  space  in  the  District  during  recent  weeks  was

generally  good.  A  large  number  of  modest-sized  leasings  strengthened  Manhattan's

midtown  market  while  the  downtown  market  was  bolstered  by  steady  demand  and  the

withdrawal of  a large  block of  space  for  subleasing.  In  their  continuing battle  to

induce  firms  not  to  relocate, New York  City  officials  were  recently  heartened  by a

survey showing  that  manufacturing firms more than doubled  the amount  of office  space

which  they  leased  in  Manhattan  during  the  first  half  of  this  year  compared  with a

year  earlier.  City  officials  are  particularly  concerned  by  the  abundance  of  new,

less  expensive  quarters  across  the  Hudson  River  in  New  Jersey,  fearing  that  a

decline in New Jersey's high vacancy rates will come at  the City's  expense.

Financial  Developments

Most  small  and  mid-sized  banks  in  the  Second  District  have  raised  their

lending  rates  in response  to  the  recent increases in the prime rate  charged by money

center  banks.  Despite  the  rise  in  interest  rates,  demand  for  commercial  loans

remains  strong, according  to  senior  officers  who  cited  the  robust  regional  economy

as  responsible for  the  steady demand for business  loans.  On  the  retail side,  demand

for  consumer  installment  and  home  mortgage  loans  also  has  not  been  dampened  by

rising  rates.  However,  one  conspicuously  weak  segment  of  the  market  is  the  demand

for  bank  auto  loans.  Respondents  stated  that  the  generous  promotional  offers  by

the  auto  finance  companies have drastically reduced  the market  for  bank auto  loans.

III-1

THIRD  DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Business conditions, overall, are improving modestly in  the Third District

in October.  Manufacturing  continues to  expand, maintaining  the trend that  began

in  the  second quarter.  Industrial employment has  been moving up  in recent

months  and the October  increase, as  reported in  the Third District survey,

represents a new high for the  current expansion.  The retail  and financial

sectors also  show improvement,  although slowdown  in their  growth is  evident.

Retailers  say sales  in  early September met planned year-over-year  increases  of

5-10 percent, although growth has  eased somewhat  since then.  Third District

bankers report  increases  in most  categories of  lending, but  say only real estate

loan demand  is  heavy.  The volume of business and  personal loans,  while still

moving up,  is not  advancing as  strongly as  in the  first half  of  the year.

Views of the  future are mixed, but mostly positive.  Manufacturers

generally expect growth to continue at  its  current  pace, but  they plan only

small  increases  in  capital spending  and no changes  in  employment levels.

Retailers believe sales this fall will be slightly ahead of  last  year,  but

concern is  growing that  Christmas sales  may show  little  improvement over  1986.

Bankers  expect real  estate loan demand to  remain  strong through next  spring, and

they believe business  lending will grow moderately if  interest  rates  stabilize,

but  they say consumer  loan volume will only edge up  in  the months ahead.

MANUFACTURING

Industrial activity in  the region  is  continuing the upward trend that  began

last  spring, according  to the  latest Business  Outlook Survey.  Thirty-five

percent  of  the area manufacturers participating  in  the October survey report  an

increased rate of  production compared  to  last month, while only  3 percent

III-2

indicate  their business  is  slower;  60  percent  are operating at a steady pace.

Conditions  are similar  in  the durable and nondurable goods  sectors.

All measures of manufacturing activity  indicate growth this  month.  New

orders and  shipments are increasing, order  backlogs  are rising  fractionally, and

inventories  are being trimmed.  Employment indicators  are giving  their highest

readings  since the early months of the  current business expansion.  Although

most survey respondents  report steady payrolls and working hours,  23  percent are

adding workers  and  30 percent are  increasing hours.

Industrial prices  in the area  continue to drift upward, with half of  the

October survey respondents noting higher input costs  compared to  last month,

none reporting lower costs,  and about half  indicating no  change.  For  their own

products,  80 percent are  holding the  line, and 20  percent  are raising prices.

Looking  ahead, area manufacturers have mostly  positive views.  Forty-one

percent foresee continued growth during  the next six months, 44 percent

anticipate steady business,  and only 12 percent expect a slowdown.  On balance,

survey respondents  forecast further gains  in  new orders  and  shipments,  but  they

expect  order backlogs  to  decline somewhat.  Local  firms project virtually no

change  in  employment or working hours  during the next two quarters, although

they plan modest  increases  in capital  spending.  On the price front,  72 percent

of  the survey participants expect to pay more for purchased goods  over  the next

six months, and nearly half plan to hike charges  for their own products.

RETAIL

Third District retailers generally report that  sales were good during the

early September back-to-school shopping  period, with most stores meeting  their

sales targets.  However,  some store  officials noted that  gains  slackened  in  the

latter half of  the month.  Year-over-year increases  for  September  as  a whole

averaged 5-10 percent,  in  dollar  terms.  Upscale  stores  are experiencing  better

III-3

sales growth than other outlets,  a trend  that has  characterized Third District

retailing for much of  the year.

Merchants  contacted in early October think  sales  for the rest of  the  fall

will probably run about  10 percent higher than  last  year.  However, some  believe

that the  colder than normal weather  in early October will boost sales  of  fall

clothing, possibly driving total  sales above expectations.  Although most

retailers say it  is  too soon  to  forecast  the Christmas shopping season, one

store executive reports that  current opinion  in  the  industry  is  that the

year-over-year gain will be  slight.

FINANCE

Most categories of  lending at major Third District  banks are growing,  but

the rate  of  increase  is  slackening, continuing a trend to  slower growth that set

in at the  beginning of the year.  Local bankers  say commercial and  industrial

loan volume is  increasing moderately and that home equity lending  is expanding,

although the volume of other  types of consumer  credit  is virtually  flat.  Only

real estate  lending  is  increasing at  a strong, steady rate.

Commercial bank credit  officers believe  current  trends  in  loan demand will

continue  for at least  another quarter.  While growth  in  commercial and

industrial  loan demand is  slowing,  bankers  say good business conditions  in  the

region should sustain volume in  this credit category.  However,  lending officers

say business  loan  demand will drop substantially  if rates move much higher.

Bankers  do not believe consumers will add  significantly to present  indebtedness

unless  economic growth accelerates.  They say real estate  lending  should grow

strongly through next spring  because home builders  in  the region have a backlog

of sales  commitments for new houses yet  to  be built.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary

The  Fourth  District's  economy  has  picked  up  since  the  last  report.

Employment  has 

increased  in  nearly  every  sector,  pushing  area

unemployment  rates  to  their  lowest  levels  during  the  current  expansion.

The  manufacturing  sector  appears  to  be  heating  up; 

new  orders  and

backlog  orders  continue  to  rise,  inventories  are  lower,  and  overall

capacity  is  reportedly  above  80  percent.  The  increase  in  production  has

put  upward  pressure  on  commodity  and  service  prices  and  has  left  some

commodities,  including  steel and  paper  products,  in  short  supply.  Weekly

earnings  of  factory  workers  have  also  increased,  but much  of  this  is  due

to  overtime pay.

Retail  Sales

Retail  sales  continue  to  fall  below expectations.  Sales  of  household

durables  have  been  sluggish,  partly  because  of  the  slowdown  in  housing

construction.  Area  merchants  report  that  higher-than-expected  import

prices  of  many  apparel  lines  during  the  past  few  months  have  dampened

sales  in  soft  goods.  Both  domestic  and  foreign  automobile  sales  in  the

area  are  flat  despite  recent  incentive  programs.  Some  dealers  report

that  the  recent  incentive  programs  have  helped  to  clear  out  remaining

1987  models,  but  many  dealers  feel  that  last  year's  incentive  programs

have  drained  the  local  demand  for autos.

Labor  Markets

IV-2

Unemployment  rates  in  the  Fourth  District  continue  to  edge  downward.

In  Ohio,  the  unemployment  rate  fell  to  7.0  percent  in  August  from  7.1

percent  in  July  as  the  number  of  unemployed workers  declined by  8,000 and

employment  increased  in  nearly  every  division. 

Similar  declines  in

unemployment  rates  were  experienced  in  western  Pennsylvania  and  eastern

Kentucky.  The Pittsburgh area's  unemployment  rate  fell  below  7.0  percent

after  hovering  around  8.0  percent  for  most  of  the  year.  The  decline was

due  principally  to  a  combination  of  recalls  of  laid-off  manufacturing

workers  and  industrial  growth  in  nonmanufacturing sectors.  The Lexington

area,  bolstered by  a  protracted building  boom,  once  again  registered  one

of  the  lowest  unemployment  rates  in  the  District  at  4.4  percent  in

August.

Factory  employment  rebounded  slightly  in  August  in  many  parts, of  the

District.  Manufacturing  employment  in  Ohio  was  up  11,000  from  July,

signaling  the  first  solid  gains  in  the  state's  manufacturing  employment

since  February. 

Most  of  the  increase  came  in  the  durable-goods

industries.  For  instance,  the  Youngstown-Warren  area,  which  over  the

last  year  lost  4,000  manufacturing  jobs,  saw  a  healthy  increase  of  2,000

factory  workers,  as  a  substantial  number  of  transportation  equipment

workers were  recalled.

Employment  prospects  for  the  fourth  quarter  are  generally  favorable

throughout  the  District.  Employment  gains  in  wholesale  and  retail  are

expected  to  exceed  those  of  other  industries.  However,  both  durable  and

nondurable  manufacturers  appear  much  more 

positive  about  hiring

additional  workers  than  in  comparable  periods  of  the  past  two  years.

IV-3

Average  weekly  earnings  also  increased  in  August  primarily  due  to  an

increase  in  the  workweek.  In  Ohio  and  Pittsburgh,  the  average  workweek

lengthened  by one-half hour  to  42.5 hours.

Manufacturing

The  Ohio  Manufacturing  Index  rose  in August  by  a seasonally  adjusted

rate  of  1.4  percent.  All  major  sectors  registered  monthly  gains,  except

for  clay  and  glass  products.  Primary  metals  showed  the  largest  increase

(3.2%),  with  instruments  (2.2%) and  nonelectrical  machinery  (1.8%) close

behind.  August  marks  the  third  straight  month  that  the  index  has

increased, after  falling throughout  the  first half  of  1987.

The  Purchasing  Managers  survey  supports  this  outlook by  reporting  an

increase  in  production  and  new  orders.  In  addition, a backlog  of  orders

and  a  reduction  in  inventories  has  put  upward  pressure  on  commodity

prices.  The  Cincinnati  survey  reports  that  increases  in  commodity prices

are  the  highest  since  the  survey began  in  1982.  Purchasers  in  the  area

report  problems  with  late  deliveries  and  a  shortage  of  some  paper  and

steel  products.  A similar,  though  less  dramatic,  situation  is  reported

for  Northeast Ohio.

Steel  shipments  from Ohio's  mills  increased by  less  than  1 percent  in

August  over  July,  compared  with  a  2.3  percent  increase  nationwide.

However, shipments  in the  Pittsburgh  area increased 15  percent between July

and  September  as  USX  continued  to  increase  output  after  its  six-month

work stoppage.

Banking

IV-4

District  loan  demand  has  improved  in  recent  weeks. 

Total  loans

outstanding  at  large  banks  rose  at  an  annual  pace  of  8  percent  from

mid-August  to  the  end  of  September.  The  recent  pickup  in  lending  has

been  broadbased,  with  real  estate  loans  and  business  and  consumer

installment  loans  increasing  at  an  annual  rate  of  7  percent  and  14

percent.  Home-equity lending  also  continues  to  rise.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview

Growth remains  the  predominant  trend  in  the  Fifth District.  Manufacturing

is  leading  the  way, but retail  sales  continue  to  edge  upward and  loan  demand

is  strong. 

Labor  markets  have  tightened  further  in  some  areas,  and  an

increased  number of  reports  of  rising  wages  attests  to  labor  shortages.

Agriculture  faces  lower  fall yields due  to  the  summer  drought,  but  late rains

have helped some  crops. 

Although  commercial  construction  remains  strong,

residential  construction has weakened.

Consumer Spending

According  to  our  regular  survey of  retailers,  total  retail  sales  in  the

District  during the  last  ten business days  in  September were  lifted  slightly

by  higher  sales  at  department  stores,  where business had been poor earlier  in

the  month. 

Sales  of  big  ticket  items  were  mostly  unchanged. 

Retail

inventories  showed  little  change  except  at  department  stores where  they were

reported  to  be  higher  and were  expected  to  rise  further  in  the  next  six

months.

As  compared with respondents to  our previous  survey, more  retailers  this

month reported  they had  job  openings  that  they  were unable  to  fill,  and  well

over  half  indicated  that  they  had raised wages in  the  last month.  While  they

remain  optimistic  that  their  sales will  increase  in  the next  six months,  most

retailers  do  not  plan  to  increase  employment.

Manufacturing and  Mining

Our  October  survey  of manufacturers  indicates  that  activity  in  this  sector

continued  to  grow  through September.  Respondents  reported  increases  in

V-2

shipments,  new orders,  unfilled  orders,  employment,  and the workweek.

Inventories of  materials rose  slightly while  inventories  of  finished  goods

fell. 

Over  half  of  the  respondents indicated  that  raw materials prices had

risen from the month before, while almost  one-fourth  reported  higher  prices

received  for  finished products.

Manufacturers  look  for  increases  over the  remainder of  the year  in  all

measures  of  their activity  except  employment  and  the  workweek. 

It  appears

that  the  slower  expected  growth in  employment  is  due  primarily  to  tight  labor

markets.  In  our  survey  this month, more  respondents  than  in  our  previous

survey  indicated  they  had  unfilled  job openings for  skilled and  unskilled

labor,  and  39  percent  reported  they had  raised wages  recently.

The  nondurable goods  sector  showed  a slightly  stronger  performance  than

the  durable goods  sector. 

Within the  nondurable sector,  textile  and  apparel

respondents reported capacity utilization rates  averaging 94  percent.  Further

increases  in  shipments  and new orders  are expected  in  these  industries  in  the

next  six months.

In  the mining  sector,  last  month's data  on  coal  production and  comments  by

our 

directors  indicated  that  electric  utilities  in  the  District  were

stockpiling  coal, possibly in  anticipation of  a labor dispute  involving  coal

miners  early  next  year. 

Coal  production rose  in  late  September,  and coal

stocks  at  utilities also  rose  in  recent  weeks.

Agriculture

Crop  harvesting  in  the District  is  generally progressing at  the  same  pace

as  last  fall,  although  some  areas  report  lower  than normal  activity.  Corn

yields  are  running  20  to  40  percent  below normal and  even  less  in  areas

severely  affected  by drought.  Late  crops  show improvement  due  to  September

V-3

rains.  Some recent  strength in  grain prices was noted by  directors, but  crop

prices  remain weak by  historical standards.  Livestock prices are  generally

strong, but recent  dips  in  poultry prices  have decreased  producer margins.

A good crab  catch and strong  prices  helped Chesapeake  Bay  watermen  this

summer, but a parasite  in oyster beds  threatens  to  cut  this  year's oyster

harvest  in half.  This  reduction is  likely  to  place  severe  financial  stress  on

watermen and  on small  shucking houses.

Tourism

A telephone  survey of  hotels and motels  in District  resort areas  indicated

more  empty  rooms  this  summer  than  last.  Fall bookings  are  running  ahead of

last  year and  the majority of  respondents  expect  stronger activity this  fall.

Finance

A special survey of  our banking  directors  and  advisors  showed  rising

demand  for  commercial  and  industrial  loans,  home  equity  lines  and home

mortgages.  Respondents expect demand  to  strengthen further  in  the  next  six

months.  They also  noted that  the use  of  consumer  credit  cards  remains  strong.

Construction

Several  District  building contractors were contacted by telephone.  They

indicated  firm demand for  new nonresidential  construction but weakening demand

for  residential  construction. 

Stable  regional  growth was  the reason most

often cited  for the  strength  in  commercial construction, and  rising  interest

rates  was  the  reason  most  often cited  for  the weakness  in the  residential

market.  Contractors were cautious about  the  outlook  for  the  next  several

months.  In  general  they expect  little  change from current  activity.

VI-1

SIXTH  DISTRICT  - ATLANTA

Employment  continues  to  expand  in  the  District.  The  oil  and chemical  industries

are  increasing  output  and  adding  workers.  Retail  sales  are  mixed,  with  consumer

durables  and  autos  showing  some  weakness.  Housing  construction  has  slowed,  although

commercial  construction  shows  some  strength.  Exports  are increasing;  the  weaker  dollar

is in  part responsible.

Employment  and  Industry.  Most  labor  market  indicators  suggest  continuing

healthy  employment  growth.  The  region's  unemployment  rate  has  ranged  between  6.5

and  6.9  percent  since  April.  Employment  continues  to  improve  in  the  energy-producing

regions,  with  Louisiana's  unemployment  rate  having  fallen  4  percentage  points  since the

first  of  the year  to  10.4 percent.

Demand  for  drilling  machinery  has  strengthened,  expanding  employment  rolls.

The  chemical  industry  is  posting  rapid  productivity  growth  and  high  capacity  utilization

rates  as  a  result of  efficiency  measures  and  strong  product  demand.  The  pulp  and  kraft

components  of  the  paper  industry  also  continue  to  benefit  from  the  drop  in  the value  of

the  dollar.  The  weakening  of  the  dollar  has  helped  to  curb  tire  imports  to  the  point

where  some  domestic  producers  have  been  able  to  raise  prices.  Prospects  are  bright  for

the  region's  aluminum  producers,  and  prices  are  strengthening  as  a  result  of  strong

demand.  Recent  government  contracts  are  helping  aerospace  firms  in  the  region.

Electronic  components  continues  to  benefit  from  defense  spending  and  a  resurgence  in

computer  sales.

Consumer  Spending.  Retailers  throughout  the  District  report  strong  sales  during

the  month  of  September.  However,  sales  of  appliances  remain  lackluster  in  spite  of

heavy  promotions.  Prices  on  foreign  apparel  are  increasing,  but  foreign  electronics

producers  are  holding  the  line  on  them.  Domestic  car  sales  in  the  District  have  been

disappointing  in  the  last  month  of  the  model  year.  New  vehicle  registrations  through

July  continued  to  reflect  the  sluggish  car  market,  particularly  for  domestic  autos.

VI-2

Registrations  in  the  Southeast  rose  2 percent,  with  the  rise accounted  for  by light  trucks

and  vans.  By  July,  imported  cars accounted  for  38  percent  of sales,  up from  31.7  percent

a  year  earlier.

Construction.  August  home  prices  increased  8  percent  over  the  same  period last

year.  Experts  say  the  uptick  has  been  the  biggest  leap  in  home  prices  in  the  past

decade.  New  starts,  however,  continue  to  decline  throughout  the  District.  Housing

starts  seem  to  have  bottomed  out  in  Louisiana,  and  sales of  existing  homes  had  the  best

second  quarter  performance  since  1981.  Apartment,  condominium,  and  retirement

construction  remains  firm  in  Florida,  the  only state  in  the  District  to  show  no  decline  in

multifamily  permits.

Commercial  construction  markets  are  mixed.  The  value,  square  footage,  and

number  of  commercial  projects  in  the  Southeast  increased  in  August  over  year-ago

figures  and  are  now  expanding  at  rates  similar  to  the  nation's.  Office  construction  is

strong  in  Nashville,  central Florida,  and  metro Atlanta.  Commercial  construction  slowed

in  Mississippi  from  year-ago  levels,  and  commercial  property  values  declined.  After

weakness  in  nonresidential  construction  earlier  in  the  year,  new  highways,  streets,  and

bridges  helped  boost  each  state's  August  total  nonresidential  construction  figures  over

those  of  August  1986.

Financial  Services.  Total  loans  at  large  commercial  banks  have  turned  up

following  a  first-  and  second-quarter  decline.  A  large  jump  in real  estate loans seems  to

be  fueling  the  growth  while  consumer  loans  are  close  behind. 

Consumer  loans  have

grown  more  slowly  at  large  commercial  banks  because  of  competition  from  nonbank

sources.  Business  loans  have  slowed  as  corporations  turn  to  increased  issuance  of

commercial  paper.

Atlanta,  Birmingham,  Miami,  and  Nashville  report  improvements  in  mortgage

collections.  Consumer  foreclosures  are  decreasing,  although  commercial  foreclosures

are  increasing.  Mobile,  New  Orleans,  Jackson,  and  most  of  south  Georgia  report

VI-3

increases  in  delinquency  rates.  Mississippi  thrifts  note  that  an  increased  number  of

bankruptcies  are being  filed.

Tourism.  Tourism  ranged  from  relatively  flat  to  moderately  increasing over  last

year.  In  Miami  and  Jacksonville,  two  festival  malls  that  opened  during  the  summer  are

exceeding  expectations.  Orlando  is  projecting  a  17  percent  increase  in  convention

activity  over  last  year,  and its civic  center  expansion  is  expected  to  be  completed  late  in

1988.  Georgia,  Tennessee,  and  Alabama  have  had  moderate  increases  in  tourist  activity.

Port  Activity.  Except  for  New  Orleans,  total  shipments  from  all  District  ports

exceeded  the  nation's  6.8  percent  gain  for  the  12  months  ending  in  July  1987  over  the

previous  12  months.  Georgia's  exports of forest  products,  kaolin  and  manufactured  goods

are  growing  rapidly,  and  the state  is  becoming  a  major  entry  point  for imported  cars.  In

Miami,  exports  are  growing  faster  than  imports  for  the  first  time  since  early  1987

because  of growing  shipments  to  Latin  America.

Mining.  District  coal  production  for  the  first  three  quarters  of  1987  was

approximately  8  percent  less  than  during  the  same  period  in  1986.  The  cost  of  coal  to

electric  utilities  in the region  has  also  fallen  about  8 percent.

There  are  one-third  more  exploratory  drilling  rigs  in  operation  in  the  District

than  a  year  ago,  but  this  is still  only  40  percent  of  the  number  operating in  1985.  Crude

oil  production  in  the  District  continues  a  slow  decline  begun  in  early summer,  reaching  a

level  6  percent  below  1986  average  daily  production.  There  is  considerable  interest  in

the  natural  gas  reserves  at  Mobile  Bay  because  Florida's  gas  consumption  is  expected  to

increase  42  percent over  the  next  decade.

Agriculture.  Although  drier  weather  has  lowered  crop  yields,  they  remain above

1986  levels.  Except  for  feed  grains  and  rice,  total  crop  output  is  up  from  last  year.

Reductions  in  acreage,  higher  yields,  and stable  or  higher  prices,  are  expected  to  improve

net  revenue  substantially.

VII-1

SEVENTH  DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.  Business  activity  continues  to  expand  in  the  Seventh  District,  restrained

by  the  slowdown  in  the  auto  industry.  Chicago  purchasing  managers  report  vigorous  growth

in  September,  accompanied  by  further  price  increases,  and  are  optimistic  about  the

outlook  for  business  activity  over  the  next  six  months.  Milwaukee  purchasers  see  further

strengthening,  particularly  in  orders  and  backlogs,  with  some  hedge  buying  thought  to  be

taking  place  to  beat  rising  raw  materials  prices.  The  impact  of  auto  production  cuts,  in

response  to  slow  sales,  has  been  particularly  sharp  in  southeast  Michigan,  and  further

cutbacks  are  planned  by  year-end.  Nonresidential  construction  has  remained  relatively

strong  in  the  District.  Residential  building  in  the  District  is  also  outpacing  the

nation.  Demand  for  steel  has  shown  the  most  broadly  based  strength  since  1981.  Consumer

spending  reports  are  mixed.  The  District's  corn  and  soybean  harvests  are  ahead  of  the

usual  pace.  Pork  production  is  expected  to  rise  through  1988.

Motor  Vehicles.  The  strike  at  Chrysler  Canada,  settled  after  6  days,  halted

production  at  one  District  plant  and  reduced  output  at  another  for  one  to  two  weeks.

However,  agreements  were  reached  on  contracts  at  Ford  in  the  U.S.  and  Canada  and  at  GM  in

the  U.S.  with  no  interruption  of  output.  Although  third  quarter  sales  incentives  and

production  cuts  brought  car  inventories  down  substantially,  the  restrained  response  of

buyers  to  the  incentives  is  a  source  of  concern  for  the  fourth  quarter.  Truck  sales

continue  strong,  but  the  District's  share  of  U.S.  truck  assemblies  is  considerably

smaller  than  its  share  of  cars.  In  September,  a  southeast  Michigan  truck  assembly  plant

eliminated  its  second  shift,  indefinitely  laying  off  2,000.  Closings  of  two  motor

vehicle  plants  in  southeast  Michigan  are  planned  by  year-end.  In  contrast,  a  Japanese

car  assembly  plant  began  production  in  September  in  that  area.  Two  more  assembly  plants

are  being  constructed  in  Illinois  and  Indiana.  Heavy  truck  sales  remain  well  above  last

year's  pace,  and  also  well  above  long-run  replacement  needs  according  to  an  industry

analyst.  Further  small  increases  in  sales  of  medium  and  heavy  trucks  are  projected  for

1988.

VII-2

Nonresidential  Construction.  The  pace  of  nonresidential  construction  continues

relatively  vigorous  in  the  District.  Contracts  for  nonresidential  buildings,  in  square

feet,  were  10  percent  above  a  year  earlier  in  the  District  states  during  this  year's

first  8 months.  Contracts  for  construction  projects  other  than  buildings,  in  dollars,

were  15  percent  higher.  Construction  activity  continues  at  a  high  level  in  downtown

Chicago.  Additional  large  office  buildings  have  recently  been  announced.  Office

construction  has  slowed  in  Chicago  suburbs  but  remains  at  a  high  level,  and  light

industrial  building  has  picked  up.  Plans  for  auto  parts  plants  have  been  announced  for

Illinois  and  Michigan  to  supply  new  Japanese  assembly  plants.  Paving  activity  is

expected  to  be  strong  in  parts  of  the  District  this  fall.  Sections  of  the  large

construction  project  at  O'Hare  Airport  are  being  pushed  to  completion.

Steel.  The  strength  in  steel  demand  is  described  as  the  most  broadly  based,  in

terms  of  product  types,  since  1981.  Steel  buyers  and  service  centers  reportedly  are

trying  without  success  to  add  to  stocks,  reflecting  demand  for  some  types  of  steel  near

production  capacity,  and  uneconomic  mills  not  reopened  or  being  renovated.  Prices  have

been  raised  for  most  types  of  finished  steel.  Sharply  higher  prices  for  steel  scrap

reflect  shortages  at  Chicago-area  mills  which  have  been  buying  scrap  from  other  steel

districts.  Steel  imports  are  expected  to  decline.  Mills  producing  for  the  auto  industry

are  booked  to  year-end  and  running  behind  schedule.

Other  Manufacturing.  Markets  have  improved  considerably  for  abrasives  and  other

"low-tech"  products  widely  used  in  industry.  Demand  in  the  Midwest  continues  strong  for

paperboard.  A  box  price  increase  went  into  effect  in  September  with  little  resistance.

Reflecting  relatively  good  construction  markets  in  the  Midwest,  cement  shipments  to

District  states  have  shown  stronger  gains  from  a  year  ago  than  the  nation.  Shipments  of

electrical  equipment  for  installation  in  nonresidential  buildings  are  expected  to  be

strong  in  the  fourth  quarter.  Export  markets  for  large  construction  equipment  remain

restrained  by  the  limited  number  of  big  projects  around  the  world.  A  home  appliance

maker  and  a  producer  of  ball  bearings  are  shifting  production  out  of  the  District  to

plants  in  other  states  with  lower  labor  costs.

VII-3

Residential  Sales  and  Construction.  Residential  building  permits  in  District

states  during  the  first  8  months  of  1987  were  about  even  with  a  year  earlier,  but  have

been  below  last  year  since  April.  Contacts  reported  an  upturn  in  Chicago-area  home

buying  and  loan  applications  in  August,  prior  to  the  September  round  of  mortgage  interest

rate  increases  which  appears  to  have  pushed  activity  down  again.  The  August  rise  was

attributed  to  action  by  former  "fence  sitters" who  had  delayed  buying  and  financing

decisions  following  the  spring  upturn  in  mortgage  interest  rates.  Mortgage  interest  rate

volatility  is  viewed  as  more  of  a  problem  than  somewhat  higher  but  stable  interest  rates,

because  interest  rate  uncertainty  causes  would-be  buyers  and  sellers  to  wait.

Chicago-area  mortgage  interest  rates  have  risen  further  over  the  past  month,  with  30-year

fixed-rate  loans  commonly  quoted  at  rates  of  11%  or  higher.  Sources  also  report  an

upturn  in  the  number  of  Chicago-area  mortgage  bankers  looking  for  jobs.

Consumer  Spending.  A  large  retail  chain  reports  that  sales  in  Illinois  and

Michigan  remain  fairly  high,  up  from  earlier  this  year.  Iowa,  which  had  been  weak,

continues  to  show  improvement.  Another  large  retailer  located  in  the  District  indicated

sizable  sales  gains  from  low  year-ago  levels,  but  not  much  strength  in  the  seasonally

adjusted  trend  in  recent  months.  Gains  from  a  year  ago  in  apparel  sales  reflect  in  part

the  sharp  rise  in  prices  of  imported  clothing.  Appliance  sales  were  reported  strong  in

September  at  this  retailer,  after  showing  less  strength  in  July  and  August,  but  have

tailed  off  in  early  October.

Agriculture.  The  fall  harvest  continues  at  a  rapid  pace  in  District  states.  Some

63  percent  of  the  soybean  acreage  and  43  percent  of  the  corn  acreage  had  been  harvested

as  of  October  4,  two  to  three  times  the  normal  progress  for  that  date.  Pork  production,

which  turned  above  year-earlier  levels  in  the  third  quarter,  will  likely  record  sizable

gains  throughout  1988.  Hog  numbers  in  the  ten  major  producing  states  are  up  9  percent

from  a  year  ago  and  producer  intentions  point  to  an  8  percent  rise  in  farrowings  over  the

next  six  months.  Somewhat  larger  increases  are  reported  for  Iowa,  but  the  gains  for

Illinois  and  Indiana  are  smaller  than  elsewhere.

VIII-1

EIGHTH  DISTRICT - ST.  LOUIS

Summary

District  economic activity has  been uneven and generally weak.

Despite a recent upturn in manufacturing, District employment  has

stagnated  in recent months.  Construction activity has declined as

nonresidential building decreased.  District lending activity  slowed

during  the  third quarter as  consumer and commercial loan growth

slackened.  Agricultural  conditions have  been generally favorable for

both crop and livestock producers.

Employment

The District unemployment rate dropped to  7.2 percent  in August

from 7.4  percent in July.  The August jobless  rate was below 7.0  percent

in Missouri and Tennessee, but above 8.0  in Arkansas and Kentucky.

District payroll employment was virtually unchanged between March and

August, after growing  at a 3.4  percent annual pace  since the  end of

1982.  Employment  in mining,  construction, manufacturing and  services has

declined  since the  first quarter while growth  in  the remainder of  the

economy has been  sluggish.  Growth of services has been inhibited by a

slowdown in health services.

Despite  the decline since  the  first quarter, District

manufacturing employment has picked up in the most recent months,  growing

at  a 2.4  percent rate  in the  three months  through August.  The recent

growth was  due to  the  continued expansion of  food  processing and

turnarounds in the electrical equipment  and  textile/apparel industries.

VIII-2

The number of  transportation equipment  jobs  also  increased as  auto

assembly workers returned  from layoffs.  Planned layoffs of  auto workers

in the  St.  Louis area in mid-October were  postponed due  to  increased car

sales.  Regional production of  shoes,  concentrated in Missouri, has been

growing steadily in recent months.  The  increase was  attributed by some

local analysts  to  the declining exchange value of  the  dollar.

Construction

Although District  residential construction has advanced slightly

compared with a year earlier, recent  evidence is  not encouraging.  The

value  of residential contracts fell 4.5  percent  in the June-August

period.  Contacts anticipate continued declines in residential

construction due  to recent and expected future interest rate  increases.

Multi-family housing construction has exhibited particular weakness  over

the past year  as  well as  over more  recent periods.  Multi-family permits

issued  in  the  June-August period were 63.7  percent lower  than a year

earlier.

The pace of  District nonresidential building has slowed recently

due to weakness  in Arkansas and Kentucky.  District nonresidential

contracts  expanded by only 2.4  percent in  the three months  through August

following a 20.9 percent gain in the  previous three-month period.

Banking

Total loans  outstanding at  large weekly reporting District banks

grew at  a 2.8  percent annual  rate for the  third  quarter.  For  the  same

period  in 1986,  total loans  expanded at  a 13.3  percent annual rate.  A

slowing in consumer and  commercial lending contributed to  the recent

VIII-3

quarter's  slow growth.  Consumer  loans  grew at  a 9.1 percent rate  during

the quarter  compared to  18.7  percent for  the  same period last year.

Commercial lending  in the District has  also slackened,  declining at  a 2.4

percent annual rate.  In  particular, the  St. Louis and Little Rock

markets experienced notable declines  in commercial lending during the

third quarter.  Real estate  lending, however,  picked up during  the most

recent period,  rising at a 27.5  percent rate  compared to  a 19.3  percent

rate  for third quarter 1986.

Agriculture

The 1987  crop year has  been generally favorable for  District

farmers.  Harvests  are far ahead  of average  due to  early planting and

ideal harvest conditions..  Early harvested crops such as corn and cotton

have  recorded near-record yields due  to favorable  early summer

conditions.  Cotton prices have risen  due  to  strong domestic and

international demand.  Yields  of  later crops  such as  soybeans  have been

reduced  due to  extremely dry  conditions  since mid-summer.  The condition

of  pastures has also deteriorated for  lack of  rain.

Livestock producers have enjoyed a profitable year due to  low

feed  costs  and favorable meat prices.  Beef  prices  remain high and prices

for  feeder  cattle are the highest since 1979.  Pork prices also remain

high but are  expected to  fall because  increased production is  anticipated.

IX-1

NINTH  DISTRICT - MINNEAPOLIS

Recent  economic  news  from  the  Ninth  District  has  been  generally

quite  positive. 

In  many  areas,  labor  markets  are  actually  tight.  Consumer

spending  has  been  mainly  favorable,  although  housing  and  construction,  not

surprisingly,  have  weakened. 

Among  resource-related  industries,  mining  has

been  exceptionally  strong  and  oil  drilling  has  even  perked  up  a  bit. 

And

reports  from  the  region's  important  ag  sector  are  the  most  positive  in  some

time.

Employment

District  labor  markets  have  remained  exceptionally  strong  in  recent

months. 

In  most  states,  unemployment  rates  (not  seasonally  adjusted)  were

lower  in  August  than  they  were  a month  or  year  ago.  In  Montana,  the  prelim-

inary  unemployment  rate  was  5.8  percent,  down  from  6.8  percent  in  August

1986. 

In  North  Dakota,  the  unemployment  rate  was  3.8 percent,  down  from  4.1

percent  in  July  and  5.2  percent  in  August  1986.  In South  Dakota, unemployment

was  also  3.8  percent,  and  nonfarm  employment  rose  slightly  over  a year  ago,

reaching  its  highest  August  level  on  record.  And  in  Michigan's  Upper  Penin-

sula,  the  July  unemployment  rate  was  8.3  percent,  its  lowest  since  October

1979. 

Minnesota's  labor  markets  proved  an  exception  to  the  rule.  In  the

Minneapolis-St.  Paul  metro  area, 

the  unemployment  rate  increased  slightly  in

August,  to  4 percent  from  3.9  percent  in  July  and  3.5  percent  a year  earlier;

the  Twin  Cities'  labor  force  and  total  employment  also  declined  modestly  in

August.  Labor  market  developments statewide were  similar.

Consumer  Spending

Reports on  retail  merchandise sales have  generally  been good,  except

for  essentially  flat  sales  in  North  Dakota.  Throughout  South Dakota,  retail

sales  were  up.  In  Montana,  retail  markets  also  showed  signs  of  recent  im-

IX-2

provement,  especially  in  the  state's  western  part.  One  large  Upper  Midwest

retail  chain  reports  that  back-to-school  sales  didn't  meet  its  expectations,

but  the  chain  expects  much  better  October  sales  and  is  optimistic about  the

fourth quarter.  Another  large  retailer  says September  sales were  quite good,

with fall  fashions moving  well.  For  the most part, goods  have been  selling  at

regular  prices,  with  few  markdowns,  and  some  price  increases  may  be  expected

in  the months ahead.

District  sales of motor vehicles  have been  quite  good.  One  domestic

auto  manufacturer  indicates  that  September  sales  were  good,  even  compared  to

an  excellent  August.  The  new  1988  vehicles  have  been  selling  well,  and  more

equipment  is  being  included  as  standard  features  on  these  models.  Another

domestic  manufacturer  reports  that  sales  are  strong,  up  slightly  over  the

brisk  business  at  this  time  last  year.  The  manufacturer  says  consumers  can

expect about a 4 percent  increase  in  car  and light  truck prices.

In  general,  reports  on  tourist  spending  have  been  favorable. 

In

Montana,  North Dakota,  and  western  South  Dakota,  tourist  traffic  has  been  up

slightly  over  last  year's  respectable  levels.  In  the  Upper  Peninsula, obser-

vers  say  the  weather has  been  perfect.  Motel  business  there  has been  from 20

to  40 percent higher  than  last year's.

Although  reports  are  mixed,  recent  developments  in  housing  and

construction  run  counter  to  the  favorable  conditions  of most district  sectors

by  showing  considerable signs  of  weakness.  In  Montana,  the housing  market  has

been poor,  and  new  construction  there  is  virtually  nonexistent, except  in  the

Great Falls  area.  In  Minnesota,  August  housing  permits  fell  about  11  percent

from  a year  ago,  and  in  Minneapolis-St.  Paul,  August  permits  were  down  about

22  percent  from  last  year.  Multifamily  permits  have  been  hit  most  severely.

In  North  Dakota,  housing  markets  seem  a  bit  stronger  than  elsewhere  in  the

IX-3

district.  There,  sales have  bottomed out and  prices have  firmed, although new

construction  is  low  in  most  of the state.

Resource-Related  Industries

The  news  is  good  in  the  district's resource-related  industries.  In

North  Dakota,  17  oil  rigs  are  now  drilling,  and  there  is  renewed  interest  in

oil  exploration  in  the  Williston  Basin.  In  Montana,  11  oil  rigs  are  running

with  14  total  expected  to  be  operating  by  year-end.  Land-lease  payments,  an

important  source  of  extra  income  to  some  farmers  and  ranchers,  have  risen.

Mining  operations  in  the  district  are  also  picking  up.  In  South  Dakota,  two

gold mines  are expanding output and hiring additional  miners.  In  Montana,  two

other  gold  mines  are  running around  the  clock,  seven days  a week, and  a third

is  beginning  operations.  Elsewhere  in  Montana,  an  aluminum plant  at  Columbia

Falls  is  operating  near  capacity, and  the  Butte  copper pit  mine, closed  for  a

number of years,  is  back in production and profitable.

Agriculture

Reports  from  the  district's  agricultural  sector  are  as  strong  as

they've  been  in  some  time.  Crops  and  harvest  conditions  look  good  to  excel-

lent  throughout  the  district--from  the  trefoil  crop  in  the  Upper  Peninsula  to

cherries  in  Montana.  There  have  been  some  complaints  about  cash  small  grain

prices  and,  as  always,  scattered  problems  with  the  weather  and  insects.  But

the  general  ag  picture  has  surely  improved  and  the  tone  of  reports  received

has been  upbeat.  From Montana:  "The  small  grain  crop  is  excellent.  Farmers'

financial  situation  is  improving."  From  North  Dakota:  "The harvest  is  going

fast  and  well.  Weather  has  cooperated."  From  South  Dakota:  "Farmers  are  no

longer  going  out  of  business  because  of  economic  stress.  Livestock producers

are  'out of the  hole'  and  are from 20  to  40  percent ahead  of our  projections."

X-1

TENTH  DISTRICT  - KANSAS  CITY

Overview. 

Economic  activity  in 

the  Tenth  District  is  mixed,  with  some

sluggishness  in  retailing  and  housing,  some  improvement  in  agriculture  and  the

energy  sector,  and  some evidence  of  strength  in  the  industrial  sector.  Retail

sales  have  been  flat  in  recent  months,  and  are  expected  to  continue  so.

Manufacturers' 

input  prices  are  increasing  significantly  and  sane  inventory

accumulation  is  occurring.  Limited  improvement  continues  in  oil  exploration

and  development  activity.  Housing  starts  are  flat  and  are  expected  to  slow  in

the  near  future,  developments  that  are  paralleled  in 

the  demand  for  mortgage

funds.  Loan  demand  at  commercial  banks  continues  weak.  Crop  conditions  and

harvests  are  generally  good,  and  farm  loan  paydowns  are  expected  to  be  above

normal  in  the  fourth  quarter.

Retail  Sales.  While  district  retailers  generally  report  sales  above

year-ago  levels,  sales  over  the  past  three  months  have  been  mostly  flat.

Soft  goods  appear  to  be  selling  somewhat  better  than  hard  goods.  Prices  are

reported  as  generally  stable  with  this  trend  expected  to  continue  into  the

near  future. 

Inventories  are  considered  to  be  at  satisfactory  levels  with  a

few  respondents  trimming  their  inventories.  Most  retailers  expect  sales  to

show  little 

growth  in 

the  near  future.

Automobile  Sales.  Automobile  dealers  report  that  September  sales  were

steady  to  slightly  weaker  compared  with  August  and  a  year  earlier. 

Inven-

tories  are  expanding  as  dealers  receive  1988  models.  Overall,  dealers  are

hopeful  that  sales  will  be  stable  or  up  slightly  during  the  remainder  of  1987.

Purchasing  Agents.  Purchasing  agents report  that  prices have  generally

increased  significantly  over  year-earlier  levels.  Most  agents  report

increases  in  the  past  three  months  and  all  agents  surveyed  expect  general

price  increases  for  the  next  three  months.  Most  materials  are  readily

X-2

available,  but  some  agents  report  longer  lead  times.  Though  inventory  levels

are  satisfactory  overall,  some  increases  are  being  made  in  response  to

seasonal  factors  and  general  market  conditions.

Energy.  Although a strong rebound in  the district's energy  industry  is

not  likely  to  occur  soon,  some  significant  improvement  in  exploration  and

development  activity  has  been  observed  in  recent  weeks. 

The  average  weekly

number  of  operating  drilling  rigs  in  the  Tenth  District  increased  from  311  in

August  to  351  in  the  first  three  weeks  of  September,  63  percent  above  the

average  weekly  level  recorded  in  September  1986.  Nevertheless, 

the  rig  count

in  the  district  remains  less  than  one-fourth  its  1982  peak.

Housing  Activity  and  Finance.  District  homebuilders  report  that  housing

starts  are  at  or  below  last  year's  levels  and  are  generally  down  from  a  month

ago.  Single-family  home  construction  remains  flat  while  multi-family  unit

construction  has  decreased.  Looking  ahead,  homebuilders  expect  housing  starts

to  slow  further.  Most  homebuilders  report  that  new  home  sales  are  down  and

inventories  are  steady.  Builders  report  that  materials  prices  remain  gen-

erally  unchanged  or  lower  due  to  competition  among  suppliers  and  they  expect

no  problems  with  material  availability,  delivery,  or  price  increases.

Deposit  growth  at  Tenth  District  savings  institutions  is  reported  down

from  a  year  ago,  although  respondents  believe  that  aggressive  rate  increases

could  attract deposits.  Any changes  in deposit growth would depend on

different  pricing.  Demand  for  mortgage  funds  has  fallen  sharply  and  is

expected  to  be  sluggish  during  the  remainder  of  1987.  Mortgage  rates,  which

have  risen  substantially,  are  generally  expected  to  increase  slightly  during

the rest  of  1987.

Banking.  Respondents  at  Tenth  District  banks  report  total  loan  demand

as either  down slightly  or  unchanged during  the month.  Demand weakened for

X-3

consumer,  commercial  and  industrial,  and  residential  real  estate  loans.

Respondents  reporting  reduced  demand  for  commercial  real  estate  loans  were

about  balanced  by  respondents  reporting  increased  demand  for  these  loans.

Demand  for  agricultural  loans  held  steady.  Most  respondents  report  having

raised  prime  rates  and  expect  to  increase  them  further  in 

the  coming  months.

Responses  concerning  recent  changes  in  consumer  loan  rates  were  split  evenly

between  no  change  and  slight  increases.  Most  respondents  expect  to  make  no

change  in  consumer  loan  rates  in  the  coming  months.  Balances  in  all  types  of

deposit  accounts  except  large  CD's  generally  remained  constant,  while  a  number

of  respondents  report  growth  in  large  CD's.

Agriculture.  The  fall  harvest  and  winter  wheat  seeding  are  progressing

well  across  most  of  the  Tenth  District.  The  corn  and  soybean  harvests  are

nearing  completion  in 

the  southern  parts  of  the  district  with  a  few  excep-

tions.  Good  conditions  have  prevailed  in  the  northern  areas  of  the  district

as  the  harvests  reach  the  half-way  mark.  Corn  and  soybean  yields  appear  to  be

close  to  normal  or  a  little 

above  normal. 

The  milo  harvest  is  also  under  way,

and  excellent  yields  are  expected.  Winter  wheat  seeding  is  almost  complete

in  district  states.  Good  moisture  and  warm  weather  have  prevailed  throughout

most  of  the  district  and  good  stands  of  wheat  are  appearing.

Bankers  expect  farm  loan  paydowns  in  the  fourth  quarter  to  be  above

normal.  Strong  crop  yield  prospects  contribute  to  this  expectation,  but  the

increased  paydown  levels  are  primarily  attributed  to  livestock  producers.

Increased  profits  and  fears  that  livestock  prices  may  soon  weaken  have

encouraged  ranchers  to  pay  down  debt. 

In  addition,  continued  high  feeder

cattle  prices  have  discouraged  operators  from  buying  replacement  cattle.

XI-1

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

The  District  economy continues  to  grow very  slowly.  The

manufacturing  sector  is  rebounding.  Drilling  continues  to  recover, but

some  analysts  believe  the  end  of  growth  is  in  sight.  Although  new

construction  activity  has  fallen  slightly,  it  remains  above  its  trough  of

the  end of  last  year.  Retail  sales  are  sluggish  and  auto  sales  have

declined.  Deteriorating  conditions  predominate  at  the  District's  financial

institutions.  The  income  outlook  is  favorable  for  District  livestock and

cotton  producers.

Manufacturers  indicate  that,  overall,  demand for  their  products

continues  to  improve.  Orders  to  apparel  producers  have  increased and

output  is  up.  Chemical  manufacturers  and  refiners  cite  strong  orders  and

they  say that  sales  prospects  for  the  coming months  are  favorable.  Recent

high  demand  for  steel  has  led  to  shortages  of  some  products  and  to  rising

prices.  Producers  of  electrical  and  electronic  equipment  report  that  sales

have been  fairly  stable  in  recent  months  and  remain  above  year-earlier

levels.  Defense contractors  say  that  output  and  prospects  for  new orders

remain  strong.  Orders  are  unchanged  overall  in  the  energy-related durable

goods  industries  and  respondents  expect  no  significant  increases  in  demand

for  the  remainder  of  this year.  Some  manufacturers of  durable  goods tied

to  the  construction  industry  note  that  orders  are  stabilizing  at  very  low

levels,  but  others  report continued  declines.

The  District drilling  rig  count  continues  to  climb, but  analysts

believe  that  it  has  nearly completed  its  upward adjustment  to  oil  prices  in

the $19-20  per barrel  range.  The  rig  count  rose  in  both  August and

XI-2

September but well  permit  applications  and  the  seismic  crew count,  both  of

which are  leading  indicators of  drilling  activity, have  remained nearly

constant over  the  past  few months.

Overall,  new construction activity  has  fallen  slightly  in recent

months,  but  remains  above  its  trough  of  the  end  of  last year.  The  monthly

average  value  of  total  construction  contracts was  lower  for July and  August

than  for the  second  quarter, owing to  reductions  in both  nonbuilding  and

residential  contracts.  The value  of  nonresidential  contracts  held  fairly

steady.  The  modest weakness  in new nonbuilding  construction  is especially

noteworthy  because recent  growth  in total  new construction  had  been  focused

in that  category.  The decline  in new  residential  construction  reflected

substantial  declines  in both  the  single-family  and multifamily  sectors.

Declines  in construction  employment  have  slowed  in recent  months.

Retailers  report  sluggish  sales  that,  in real  terms,  are  about

unchanged  from  a year  earlier.  Respondents  say  that  inventories  are

slightly  above  their desired  levels  and that  they  do  not expect much  sales

growth  in upcoming  months.

Auto  sales  are  showing  renewed weakness.  Dealers  say  that,  after

receiving  a boost  from  interest  rate  incentive programs  in August,  sales

fell  in September and weakened  further  in the  first week of October.

Because the  decline  in sales  was  unexpectedly  large,  inventories  are

slightly  above  their desired  levels.  Demand  for  some  foreign autos  has

fallen  because  of  price  increases  linked  to  the diminished value of  the

dollar.  All  respondents  expect  sluggish  sales  in the  foreseeable  future.

The  District's  financial  institutions  continue to  show weakness  in

the wake  of the  regional  economic downturn.  In August,  deposits at  a

XI-3

sample  of  all  District financial  institutions  fell  0.9  percent  below a year

earlier.  This decline occurred despite continued,  but  slowing,  growth  in

deposits at  thrifts.  The delinquency  rate on  mortgage  loans  at  the Texas

thrifts  rose  in July to 24.4 percent, compared with  a 16.8  percent  rate  in

December and 12.8 percent  in September 1986.  Regulatory  net worth at these

institutions  fell  further into the  red,  hitting  negative $3.25  billion  in

July  compared with  a positive value  of $289  million  last December.  At the

District's  large  commercial  banks, deposits,  total  liabilities,  and loans

all  continue to  decline.  In August,  total  deposits at  the District's

commercial  banks  fell  2.7  percent below their year-earlier level.

In District agriculture, prices  paid  to  crop and  livestock  farmers

are  up  substantially over a year earlier.  Earnings  are  particularly high

for  District livestock  producers  because  of  increases  in beef  prices  and

declines in feed  costs.  Although  the  number of Texas cattle and  calf

operations  has dropped  by  4 percent  since  1985,  producers who  have  remained

in business  are  receiving  feeder  cattle  prices  almost 29  percent higher

than  a year  earlier.  The  increases  in feeder cattle  prices,  although

favorable to  the  cow-calf operations  that  predominate  in the  District,  have

cut  profit margins  for  cattle  feeders.  Last June, Texas High  Plains cotton

farmers  replanted their  fields  after earlier plantings  were damaged  by  hail

and  heavy  rains.  A warm September was  required to  protect  this  late crop

and  favorable weather did materialize.  Further warm weather is needed  in

order to ensure  full  maturation  of the cotton  crop.

XII-1

TWELFTH  DISTRICT  - SAN  FRANCISCO

Summary

Economic  conditions  in  the  West  generally  continue  to  be  positive.  Growth  in

some  sectors  and  regions  is  creating  shortages  of  some  types  of  labor,  and  putting

upward  pressure  on  wages.  Manufacturing,  agriculture,  and  forest  products  are  seeing

further  improvements  in  their  competitiveness  on  world  markets.  Construction  activity

continues  to  vary  widely  across  regions,  with  the  coastal  states  generally  strong.  The

rate  of  growth  in  loan  demand  has  declined  considerably  during  the  past  year,  so  many

financial  institutions  are  attempting  to  increase  their  loan  portfolios  rather  than  sell

assets.

Consumer  Spending

The  market  for  automobiles  currently  is weak.  Purchases  of  new  mid-priced  cars

reportedly  are  weakening,  and  used  cars  are  expected  to  claim  a  greater  share  of  the

market  next  year.

In  some  regions,  trade  and  service  firms  are  experiencing  difficulty  recruiting

qualified  workers,  which  in  some  cases  is  creating  upward  pressure  on  wages  and

salaries.  Among  unskilled  workers,  the  new  immigration  law  and  possible  increases  in

state  minimum  wages  also  may  push  wages  up.  In  the  Seattle  area,  employment  service

professionals  report  that  it  is  an "applicant's  market",  with  many  job  openings  but  high

quality  workers  increasingly  difficult  to  find.  Workers  either  are  staying  with  their

current  jobs,  or  are  requiring  more  money  to  be  induced  to  move. 

In  contrast,  wage

pressures  appear  to  be  absent  for  the  most  part  in  Arizona,  Utah,  and  eastern

Washington,  while Oregon's  general  economic  health  appears  to  have  had  little  effect  on

wages  thus  far.

XII-2

Manufacturing

The  dollar's  decline,  together  with  campaigns  in  some  Asian  countries  to  "buy

American"  in  order  to  ease  the  threat  of  trade  restrictions,  has  opened  up  significant

opportunities  for  makers  of  computers,  semiconductors  and  aircraft.  Manufacturers  of

commodities  such  as  chemicals  and  paper  were  affected  first,  but  gains  now  are

spreading  to a  whole  range  of  light  manufactured  products,  including  medical  equipment

and  industrial  valves.  Export-financing  companies  in  California  reportedly  are  being

inundated  with  requests  from  trading  companies  in  Hong  Kong  and  Singapore,  which just

recently  have  begun  seeking  US  products  to sell  in various Asian  countries.

One  respondent  notes  that  his paint  manufacturing  company  is turning  increasingly

to  domestic  suppliers  for  titanium  dioxide,  a  raw  material  supplied  both  domestically

and  abroad.  The  price  of  this  material,  which  is  a  key  ingredient  of  paper  and  plastics

as  well  as of paint  and  coatings,  has  increased  substantially  due  to the  dollar's slide.

In  Utah,  a previously  closed  steel plant  has  been  reopened,  largely  becaue  its new

owner  has  contracted  with  a  large  German  firm,  which  reportedly  will  purchase  about

40  percent  of the  tonnage  the mill  produces  during  the  next five  years.

Throughout  the  District,  reports  indicate  that  manufacturing  industries  have

adequate  labor  available  at  current  wages,  contrasting  in  some  regions  with  labor

market  conditions  in  trade  and  the  services.  In  California,  despite  a  substantial  pickup

in  orders,  computer,  electronics,  and  semiconductor  firms  only  now  are  beginning  to

increase  hiring.  Aerospace  firms,  anticipating  a  slowdown  in  future  defense  orders,  also

are  maintaining  relatively  cautious  hiring  policies  unless  they  have  major  contract

deadlines  to  meet.  Nevertheless,  pressure  probably  is building  for larger  wage  increases

in a  number  of sectors,  including  a potential  increase  for  apparel  workers  due  to  the new

immigration  law.

Agriculture  and  Resource  Related Industries

XII-3

Western  forest  products  companies  have  seen  dramatic  improvements  in  exports

during  the past year.  Volumes generally  are  greater  than  they were  last  year,  and prices

have  increased  as  well.  An  Oregon  respondent  reports  that  the  volume  of  lumber

exported  rose  20  percent,  to  well  over  a  billion  board-feet,  between  the  first  half  of

1986  and  the  first half  of  1987.  Log  exports  rose  13  percent  to  1.7  billion  board-feet.

During  the same  period,  the  value  of  exports  of  logs,  lumber,  and  plywood  rose  by  $1.73

million,  a  24  percent  increase.  One  Alaska  timber  company's  exports  decreased  from

114  million board-feet  to 102  million,  but  the  value  of  that  timber  posted  a  dramatic  75

percent  increase.

Conditions  also  have  improved  for  other  agriculture  and  resource  products.

Cotton  exports,  for  example,  are  up  sharply  from  last  year.  Moreover,  the  weakened

dollar  has  made  domestically  produced  copper  more  competitive,  lowering  copper

imports  and improving  US  competitiveness  in western  Europe and  Asia.

Construction  and  Real  Estate

Construction  activity  continues  to be  mixed  in the  Twelfth  District.  Geographical

differences  are  reflected  in  sharp  differences  in  construction  labor  market  conditions.

For  example,  in  California,  Hawaii,  Nevada,  Oregon,  and  Washington,  where  overall

construction  activity  is  healthy,  construction  employment  grew  by  5  to  10  percent

during  the past  year.  In  contrast,  construction  employment  has  declined  by  close  to  ten

percent  during  the past  year  in Alaska,  Arizona,  and  Utah.

In  southern  California,  demand  for  real  estate  continues  strong,  due  in  part  to  an

abundance  of foreign  buyers,  particularly  from Japan.

Financial  Sector

Loan  demand  in  many  parts  of  the  District  currently  is  slow,  leading  many  banks

to  seek  additional  assets  rather  than  sell  loans  on  the  secondary  market.  A  Seattle

banker  reports  that  installment  loan  volumes  are  increasing  at  a  3  or  4  percent  pace

XII-4

compared  to  1986,  whereas  last year  at  this time  they  were  growing  at  about  a  13  per-

cent  rate.  Likewise,  commercial  loan  volume  at  the  same  bank  is  off  about  3  percent

(year-to-date  through  August)  compared  with  last  year.  A  Kern  County  banker  reports

that  the  demand  for  both  consumer  and  business  credit  has  been  slack.  Banks  in  Idaho

and  southern Oregon  also  report  slow  asset  growth,  with  most  institutions  attempting  to

add  to  their loan portfolios.

