AGENDA

FEDERAL OPEN MARKET  COMMITTEE

Tuesday, March  31,  1987  at  9:00 a.m.

Advices of  the  election of  the  following  members and  alternate  members of
the  Federal  Open Market  Committee  for the  year  commencing March 1, 1987,
have  been  received  by  the  Secretariat  and  these  individuals  have  executed
their  oaths  of  office:

Member 

Alternate Member

E. Gerald Corrigan 
Edward  G. Boehne 
Silas Keehn 
Robert  H. Boykin 
Gary H. Stern 

Thomas M. Timlen
Robert  P. Black
Vacancy*
Robert  P. Forrestal
Robert  T. Parry

*  Mrs.  Karen N. Horn was  elected Alternate Member  by the  Federal Reserve

Banks  of  Cleveland  and Chicago.  In  light  of her  resignation as  President
of  the  Cleveland Bank effective  April  8, Mrs.  Horn  has not  executed  an
oath of  office.

1.  Election of  officers  to  serve until  the  election  of  their  successors

at  the  first meeting of  the Committee  after February 29,  1988.

A.  Chairman
B.  Vice Chairman
C.  Staff  officers

2.  Selection  of a Federal Reserve Bank  to  execute  transactions  for  the

System Open Market Account.

3.  Selection of  (a) Manager for  Domestic Operations  and  (b) Manager for

Foreign Operations,  System Open Market  Account.

4.  Review of  authorization for  domestic open market operations.

(See  attachment.)

5.  Review of  (a) foreign currency  authorization,  (b) foreign currency

directive and  (c) procedural  instructions with respect to  foreign
currency operations.  (See  attachment.)

6.  Approval  of  minutes  of  actions  taken  at  the meeting of  the  Federal

Open Market  Committee  on  February 10-11,  1987.

7.  Foreign currency operations.

A.  Report  on operations  since February meeting.

B.  Action  to ratify transactions  since  February meeting.

8.  Domestic open market operations.

A.  Report  on operations  since  February meeting.

B.  Action  to  ratify  transactions  since February meeting.

9.  Staff  report  on economic  situation.

10.  Committee  discussion of  economic situation.

11.  Current monetary policy  and  domestic policy  directive.

A.  Staff  comments.

B.  Committee discussion.

C.  Action  to  adopt  directive.

12.  Confirmation of  date for next  meeting  (Tuesday, May  19,  1987).

