SUMMARY  OF  COMMENTARY  ON  CURRENT  ECONOMIC  CONDITIONS

BY  FEDERAL  RESERVE  DISTRICTS

September  1987

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS

SUMMARY  ..... 

.. 

....... 

............................................ 

First  District  - Boston  ................................................ 

Second  District  - New  York..............................................-1

Third  District  - Philadelphia .......................................... 

. i

I-1

II-1

Fourth  District  - Cleveland ................................... 

........ 

IV-1

Fifth  District  - Richmond  ..... 

... 

.....................................

Sixth  District - Atlanta  ............................... 

........... 

Seventh  District - Chicago  .......... 

................................. 

Eighth  District  - St.  Louis  ............................................. 

Ninth  District  - Minneapolis 

............................................

Tenth  District  - Kansas  City............................................ 

Eleventh  District  - Dallas  ..............................................

Twelfth  District  - San  Francisco  ............ 

...................... 

V-1

VI-1

VII-1

VIII-1

IX-1

X-1

XI-1

XII-1

SUMMARY*

Business  conditions  improved  in  recent  weeks  for  most  regions  of  the  country

although  weakness  persists  in  some  areas.  Chicago,  New  York,  Philadelphia,  Minneapolis,

and  Boston  report  moderate  economic  expansion  while  Atlanta  and  San  Francisco  note

brisk  growth.  Cleveland  and  St.  Louis,  in  contrast,  indicate  weakening  business  activity.

A  resurgence 

in 

industrial  activity  has  boosted  many  regional  economies

recently.  Orders  and  production  for  electronic  equipment,  lumber,  steel,  and  textiles  are

increasing.  Contracting  domestic  auto  production,  however, 

is  blunting  economic

expansion  in  some  areas.  Construction  activity  is  generally  mixed;  residential  building

has  slowed  in  most  regions,  but  commercial  construction  continues  to  grow,  especially

the  nonbuilding  component.  Consumer  spending  has  been  moderate,  and  retailers  are

cautious  but  positive  about  the  outlook  for  fall sales.  Several  Districts  report  moderate

merchandise  price  increases.  Auto  sales  have  been  stimulated  by  manufacturers'

incentives.  Favorable  crop  conditions  have  led  to  greater-than-average  yields  in  some

regions,  and  farm  credit  problems  are  declining.

Industry

Most  Districts  report  improvement  in  industrial  activity  and  point  to  continued

expansion,  at  least  for  the  near  term.  Factory  orders,  production,  and  shipments  are

generally  above  June-July  levels  and  are  trending  upward.  Inventories  are  for  the  most

part  at  desired  levels.  Although  input  costs  are  expected  to  rise  modestly,  most

producers  do  not plan  to  increase  prices  at  the  present  time.

Chicago  notes  that  demand  for  steel  is  strong.  Cleveland  reports  that  firm

prices  have  helped  specialty  steels,  and  Atlanta  sees  increasing  activity  for  small  steel

*Prepared  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Atlanta  based  on  information  gathered  prior
to  August  28,  1987.

producers.  Boston  reports  increased  demand  for  computer  equipment,  and  San  Francisco

notes  that  orders  and  shipments  are  strong  for  electronic  equipment  producers.

Philadelphia,  Richmond,  and  Atlanta  report  increasing  tightness  in  certain  labor

markets.  Philadelphia  notes  that  housing  construction  has  slowed  because  of  a  lack  of

skilled  carpenters,  while  Atlanta  reports  that carpet  shipments  are  being delayed  because

producers  have  not  been  able  to hire  enough  workers  to keep  up  with orders.  Minneapolis

bank  directors  are  concerned  that  tight  labor  markets  may  deter  firms  from  locating  in

parts  of  the  region.  Although  total  manufacturing  employment  continues  to  decline  in

St.  Louis,  textile  plants  are  operating  near  capacity;  apparel  orders  are  growing,  as  they

are  in  Atlanta  and  Dallas.  Less  positively,  Chicago  and  Cleveland  suggest  that  weak

domestic  auto  sales  could  result  in  further  production  cuts  and  layoffs  in  assembly  plants

in  their regions.

Consumer  Spending

Retail  activity  in  July  and  August  was  up  moderately  compared  both  to  previous

months'  and  year-ago  levels  in  Boston,  New  York,  Cleveland,  Atlanta,  and  Kansas  City;

sales  growth  was  somewhat  lackluster  in  other  Districts.  Boston  reported  that  fine

summer  weather  boosted  sales  of  seasonal  items,  and  Cleveland,  Atlanta,  and  San

Francisco  noted  that  soft  goods  sales  were  outperforming  hard  goods  sales.  A  pick-up  in

appliance  sales  in  Dallas,  following  a  prolonged  period of  weakness,  is  attributed  to a  rise

in  first-time  home  purchases;  sales  of  big-ticket  items  accelerated  in  mid-August  in

Richmond.  Philadelphia  and  Chicago  report  that  the late  Labor  Day  this year  is delaying

back-to-school  purchases,  while  sales  of  these  items  are  strong  in  Atlanta,  where  school

starts  early.  Hardly  any  Districts  reported  unusual  imbalances  in  inventory  levels.

Retailers  typically  are  reported  to  be  "cautious  or  moderately  optimistic"  about  the  sales

outlook  for  this  fall compared  to  fall  1986.

Boston,  Cleveland,  and  Richmond  noted  moderately  rising  prices  or  expectations

of  moderate  price  hikes  ahead.  In  Boston,  prices  are  expected  to  rise  significantly  more

by  next  spring  because  of  imports;  prices  of  electronics  and  apparel  items  are  already

rising  across  the  nation  because  of  import  quotas  and  the  falling  dollar.  The  tight  New

England  labor  market  is  making  it  difficult  for  retailers  to attract  and  retain  employees.

Manufacturers'  financing  and  rebate  incentives  apparently  have  sparked  auto

sales  and  reduced  inventory  levels  to  more  manageable  levels  although  Chicago  received

reports  that  consumer  response  has  been  restrained.  The  outlook  for sales  apparently  has

generated  dealer  concern  in  much  of  the  country.

Construction

Construction  activity  is  mixed  across  the  country.  Residential  construction  is

slowing  in  a  majority  of  Districts  although  conditions  vary  within  many  areas.  While

single-family  construction 

is  generally  increasing,  Chicago,  Kansas  City,  and  San

Francisco  mention  a  continuing  decline  in  multifamily  construction.  Sales  of  existing

homes  soared  above  last  year's  levels  in  Atlanta.  Kansas  City  and  upstate  New  York  also

report  an  active  residential  market.

Commercial  construction  continues  to  show  a  mixed  pattern  of  strength  and

weakness,  but  it  remains  relatively  strong.  Nonbuilding  construction  is  strengthening  in

Dallas,  and  Philadelphia  notes  that  recent  and  prospective  completions  of  major  highway

links  in  the  suburbs  will  boost  all  types  of commercial  real estate  in  these  areas.

Financial  Services

Loan  growth  in  the  nation's  larger  commercial  banks  is  slowing.  Philadelphia,

Cleveland,  and  Atlanta  report  a  slackening  in  commercial  and  industrial  lending,  but

Philadelphia  expects  business  lending  to  increase  moderately  over  the  next  few  months.

This  uptick  may  be  enhanced  by  improving  conditions  for  the  region's  manufacturers.

Passbook  savings  account  balances  are  growing  rapidly  in  several  western  locations.

Dallas  notes  a  further  slowing  of deposit  growth  at  both banks  and thrift  institutions.  An

increasing  rate  of  decline  in  large  time  deposits  is  being  offset  partially  by  increases  in

small  time deposits.

Agriculture,  Forestry,  and  Mining

Livestock  producers  are  experiencing  more  favorable  returns  with  St.  Louis,

Minneapolis,  and  Dallas  reporting  a  profitable  year  as  the  result  of  lower  feeding  costs

and  higher  product  prices.  Crop  conditions  have  been  favorable  in  most  Districts  this

growing  season;  Atlanta,  St.  Louis,  Minneapolis,  and  Kansas  City  expect  above-average

yields.  Excessive  heat  and  dry  weather  have  damaged  crops  in  the  Richmond  District.

St.  Louis  notes  that  the  volume  of  farm  loans  outstanding  in  their  District  is

down  over  15  percent  from  last  year.  Farm  loan  delinquencies  and  losses  at agricultural

banks  have  also  dropped.  Dallas  notes  that  farm  credit  problems  are  diminishing  in  the

Eleventh  District  as  well.

More  volatile  crude  oil  prices  have  characterized  the  petroleum  industry  in

recent  weeks,  but  drilling  rates  have  continued  to  rise.  Kansas  City  suggests  that  such

volatility  will  likely  prevent  a  strong  rebound  in  the  energy  industry  in  the near  future.

San  Francisco  and  Atlanta  note  an  increase  in  lumber  exports. 

In  addition,

imports  of  Canadian  lumber  have  fallen  slightly,  while  demand  for  southern  pine  remains

strong.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

The First District  economy  continues  to  expand, according  to

reports  from area merchants  and manufacturers.  Retail  sales  increased

modestly as  fine  summer weather  reduced  the  frequency of shopping  trips

while boosting  sales  of  seasonal  items.  For manufacturing contacts,  orders

have been running at  an  improved rate  for  the  past  three  to  six months.  A

number of manufacturers expect  increases in profits  in the  near term

because  of  increased sales  volumes,  cost-cutting efforts  and  tax changes.

While manufacturers generally do  not  see evidence  of rising  prices,

retailers  expect  prices to  rise  sharply in  the  spring because  of higher

import  prices.

Retail

Retail  sales  in  the  First  District  expanded modestly in  July and

the  first half of August.  Excellent summer weather has  boosted sales  of

seasonal  items  but reduced  the  frequency of shopping  trips.  Among the

merchants  contacted,  recent sales  changes  relative  to  a year ago  ranged

from minus 5 percent  to  plus  12  percent on a comparable stores  basis.  The

one store  with lower  sales  is  still well ahead of  last year on a

year-to-date basis.  A few  stores  reported  that  extensive markdowns

(accompanied by  a drop  in margins)  had contributed  to  their  sales

increases.  Inventories  are up  somewhat  in  several  stores.  Retailers are

having difficulty attracting  and retaining  employees because  of the  tight

New England  labor market.

Prices  are  said  to be  rising moderately, but  are  expected to  climb

more significantly next  spring because  of  imports.  The  decline of  the

dollar, quotas  for apparel  items,  and  political  disruptions  in some

supplier countries  have  combined to  raise  prices and reduce  the

availability of  foreign goods.  Retailers continue  to seek domestic

alternatives.

Plans  for new store  openings next year are  similar  to  this year.

Budgets  for next year, however, project smaller sales  increases  than have

been realized  to  date  this year.

Manufacturing

For most First District manufacturers,  orders have been running at

an improved  rate  for the  last  three  to  six months.  Computer and fabricated

metals firms  cite  the strongest  gains  relative  to  a year ago.  Only a

minority - in electrical  equipment and machine  tools - report orders below

1986  levels.  Exports  are  said  to  have played  little  role  in  the  improved

situation;  several respondents noted  that  foreign markets  are served from

overseas  subsidiaries.

Inventories continue  to  be carefully  managed and  are  generally

satisfactory.  Employment  appears  to  be stabilizing.  Where employment

levels  were falling through attrition, the pace has  slowed, and at  several

firms  employment has  risen.  Contacts  granting  recent wage increases  report

that  these pay  raises were  at  or below last year's  levels.

For most  respondents,  capital  spending  is  at  least  equal  to  its

1986  level,  and  in several cases  is  at  its highest  level  in years.  Much

capital  spending continues  to  be driven by  technical  innovation, but  some

firms  are building  new plants.

Input  prices  are generally  steady, although one  respondent

mentioned that  prices  of  imports  from the Far East have been rising  at  an

accelerating pace  for  the  last  six to nine months.  Other  firms noted

rising energy and steel  prices.  Sales  prices of  First District  respondents

have been stable.  While  a couple  of  firms were  able  to  increase  prices

modestly  (3 percent)  early  in  the year,  others  continue  to  sell  some

products below list.

A number  of  First District manufacturers expect  improved  profits  in

the near  term.  They cite  increased sales  volumes,  productivity gains,  cost-

cutting programs  and tax  changes.  None of the  contacts  expressed concern

about  inflation or  the possibility of  a downturn  in  the near future.

First  District  Economic  Indicators Through June

The most  recent  economic  indicators  for  the First District were

mixed.  Nonagricultural  employment  in  the New England region, which closely

overlaps  the  First  District,  declined in April, May and June.  Although the

most  recent  reports  from manufacturing  respondents  indicate  that  employment

levels  are  stabilizing, the manufacturing sector was  responsible  for most

of  the  decline  in nonagricultural employment.  Construction employment  also

fell  in  the second  quarter;  however, housing permits  and  the value  of

nonresidential contract  awards  remained  at high levels.

Despite the  sluggish employment  performance, the  New England

unemployment rate  fell  to  3.3 percent  in June.  Help-wanted advertising  in

June was  far  above  the  levels  in June  1986  and earlier  in  1987.

Advertising picked up  in  the  Providence area,  in particular.

II-1

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Economic  activity  in the  Second  District  continued to vary among

sectors  in  recent weeks.  General  business  conditions improved  somewhat  further,

and  office leasing was  fairly good.  Homebuilding activity displayed a mixed

pattern, however,  and  July  spending  at  some  retailers was below plan.  On the

financial  side,  small and mid-sized banks  expect  only a mild increase  in

inflation over  the near term.

Consumer  Spending

District  retailers  reported  some  slowing in  sales  during  July.  Our

respondents  registered  over-the-year gains of  2 to  8 percent compared with

increases  of  3 to  13 percent  in  June.  As  a result, July sales  generally were

somewhat  below plan.  However,  one  chain with overall sales  below target

reported  that  results in  the District were  2 percent higher than  expected.

Retailers were optimistic  about  the  fall and  back to school  season, noting that

the  softening in  July was  the  first  in  several months.  One  firm  attributed its

July  slowdown in part  to  a shortage  of  summer merchandise  that  resulted  from a

successful promotional held at  the start  of  the  season.

Due  to  the  somewhat disappointing sales  gains  in July, retailers

reported  inventories  at  higher  levels  than planned.  An  exception was the  firm

with a shortage  of  summer merchandise.  None of  the respondents  reported

inventories  at uncomfortable  levels,  however.

II-2

Business  Activity

General  business  conditions in the  Second  District improved somewhat

further  in recent  weeks.  The  percentage of Buffalo purchasing agents  reporting

improved  or  stable  conditions  rose  in July while  in Rochester,  for the  third

consecutive  month,  there were no  reports of worsened business conditions.

Inventories were  down somewhat  but  remain at  comfortable levels.

Unemployment  rates moved lower in both New York and New Jersey during

July to  4.4  percent and  4.0 percent,  respectively.  Rates in most  of the

District's  labor market  areas  are below the national average and  in several

instances  have  declined sharply since  last  year.  In Elmira, for  example, where

some  new plants  have  opened, the  unemployment rate dropped from  6.1  percent to

3.6 percent  over  the  year ended in June  (latest data),  while in Buffalo, the

rate  fell from  6.9  percent  to  5.0 percent  over the  same period  as 20,000 new

jobs  were added.  The  rebuilding of  the  Fort  Drum military post now underway in

northern New York State  is  providing a stimulus to Syracuse and several

depressed economies  in the  upstate area.

Construction and  Real Estate

District  residential  construction  activity presented  a mixed  pattern

in  recent weeks.  In  the downstate and  New Jersey markets some  further slowing

has occurred,  and homebuilders  report  little  traffic by prospective  buyers  in

their  areas.  Most  pent-up demand has already been satisfied, and high land and

home  prices  tend to  be  deterrents.  Upstate, however, builders remain  quite busy

completing existing contracts,  and some  areas report  strong  interest in future

contracts.  Home  prices in  these  areas  have  either held  steady  or  risen only

moderately.  Overall,  starts  in the  District in 1987  are now expected to be

down somewhat  from last  year's  level.

II-3

Office leasing activity has  been fairly good in much of  the District,

and  in New York City, where  the vacancy rate is  already relatively low, a

pickup has  recently occurred in commitments  for space in some new buildings.

However, vacancy rates  remain at  20 percent  or above in areas such  as

Westchester and  Fairfield  counties  and northern New Jersey.  While office

construction has  virtually halted in Westchester, new buildings continue  to

come  on line  in Fairfield and New Jersey.

Financial  Developments

Senior  officers at small and mid-sized banks in the  Second District

reported expectations of only a mild  increase in inflation in the near future.

Rising oil  prices,  due to political  unrest  in the Middle East, and  the  falling

dollar were  the  factors most  commonly cited as likely to lead to an accelera-

tion  of  the inflation rate.  Expectations  of higher  inflation were  tempered,

however, by a widespread belief that  Chairman Greenspan would pursue a strong,

anti-inflationary, monetary policy.  Reflecting their anticipation  of a modest

increase  in inflation,  the  officers believe that  interest rates will show only

a slight  rise,  if  any, by the  end of  the year.  Most  of  these bankers  expressed

hesitancy to  raise  their interest rates any higher this  year unless  the money

center banks  initiate such a move.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT  - PHILADELPHIA

The Third District economy  is  showing  signs  of moderate  expansion  in

August.  Manufacturing activity expanded  and factory employment has  increased

for  the  second month  in a row.  While reports  from retailers vary, most are

satisfied with  the year-over-year gains  they have achieved this  summer, and auto

sales,  although down  from last year,  have picked up  in recent weeks.  Commercial

bankers  indicate  that  business  and real estate  lending  is  growing,  but  consumer

lending has  slowed  recently.  Realtors  say commercial markets are generally

healthy but  residential  sales have  declined as  fewer houses  are coming  on  the

market.  Both residential  and nonresidential construction are  slowing from the

substantial pace set  in  the  last few  years.

The  outlook  in  the  Third District business  community is  for  further modest

growth.  Manufacturers expect  expanding  activity, although they are not planning

major  increases  in  payrolls.  Retailers  are cautiously optimistic  for fall.

Commercial  bank  credit officers  foresee steady growth  in business  lending  but

expect consumer  loan volume  to  remain  relatively flat.  Commercial  realtors

believe the  new office  space  coming on  line  in  the  next  few years will be

absorbed  without seriously weakening  the market.

MANUFACTURING

The region's  industrial sector  is  making  gains,  according  to  the  latest

Business  Outlook Survey.  Nearly 39  percent of  the local manufacturers polled  in

August  reported that  business  picked up from July,  only 7 percent noted  a

slowdown,  and 55  percent  said they were operating  at  a steady pace.  Durable

goods producers  and nondurables  goods makers  reported  similar business

conditions.

III-2

Most measures  of  industrial activity were giving  positive readings  in

August.  New orders  and shipments rose,  and delivery times  increased

fractionally for  the  first time this  year.  Employment posted another  gain in

August, building on  July's  increase.  Although  79  percent of the companies

reported  steady payrolls,  17  percent  added workers, while only 4 percent made

cuts.  Local manufacturers' order  backlogs  did not  share in the general

improvement,  however,  remaining virtually unchanged  from July, overall.  On  the

price  front,  most of  the August  survey participants are holding the  line for

their own products;  and,  although 37  percent say prices for purchased goods have

gone up  since  July, 61  percent reported no change.

Looking ahead,  local manufacturers have mostly positive views.  Forty-two

percent of  the August survey  respondents  predict  improvement  over the next  six

months,  39  percent expect  steady conditions,  and 20  percent anticipate a

slowdown.  On balance, area  industrial companies foresee  increases  in  orders and

shipments,  but they do  not expect  order  backlogs to grow;  and,  despite recent

gains  in employment, survey respondents  are not planning for  further  significant

changes  in  payrolls.  With regard  to  prices,  nearly two-thirds  of  the

respondents  predict a further rise  in  input  costs  over the next six months,

while only  about  one-third plan to  raise the prices  of the goods  they make.

RETAIL

Sales  reports  from Third District retailers  in  late August varied  from

"extraordinarily good" to  "below plan,"  although few merchants expressed

disappointment with  results for  the summer  as  a whole.  Most  product  lines  are

performing well,  but  store officials say the late  date for  Labor Day this year

appears  to be  delaying back-to-school purchases.  Store officials  say they  are

guardedly optimistic for  the balance  of the year, and most will enter the  fall

III-3

with relatively  lean inventories.  They expect consumers  to put off  Christmas

shopping until  late,  a practice that has  taken  hold  in recent years.

Automobile dealers  say sales  for the year so  far  are below last  year's

pace, with the  exception  of  a few popular models;  but  increases  in  gross  revenue

(total sales  less  cost  of  cars)  have helped  to  keep  dealer net profits  from

slipping  as much  as  unit sales.  Sales have picked up  in recent weeks  in

response to  the  latest  round  of manufacturers'  financing  incentives.

FINANCE

Loan growth  at major Third District banks  continues to moderate.  Growth

has been slowing  since February, and in  early August total volume outstanding

was approximately 7 percent above the  year-ago  level.  Real estate  lending

remains  strong,  but growth  in  commercial  and industrial  lending has been

moderating, and  consumer  lending has  actually  declined.  Personal  loan volume

outstanding in  the  first week of  August was nearly 2 percent  below the  peak

level  in May.  Bank  lending officers  say  consumer  installment  lending,  in

particular, has  been declining.

Commercial  bank  credit officers  expect  business  lending  to grow moderately

over  the  next  few months,  and some  believe faster  growth is  likely with

improving conditions  for  the  region's manufacturers.  All  are  in agreement,

however,  that  competition  in  middle market  lending  is  strong  and  that net

interest margins will  remain under pressure  as more  regional  banks  focus  on this

market and  reduce  their  participation in  loans  to  larger borrowers  in  the

national market.  For  consumer  lending, there  is  a consensus  that  little  growth

can be expected;  bankers  generally believe consumers will bring their  spending

into  line with personal  income and make  fewer  credit purchases  in  the near

future.

REAL ESTATE AND  CONSTRUCTION

III-4

Although commercial  construction  in Delaware is  declining  sharply as  the

state's  recent  office  building boom passes  its  peak, commercial  construction and

leasing  is  healthy in  most parts  of  the Third District.  Several new office

buildings  have been  completed  in the Philadelphia central  business district  this

year and more are  scheduled  for  completion over the next three  years.  Realtors

say the  new buildings  are being leased  relatively easily.  Older buildings,

however, are  losing  tenants  at  a rate that slightly more than  offsets  increases

in occupancy of  new buildings,  resulting  in a small  increase in  the total office

vacancy rate.  Nevertheless, most  realtors believe the new space  coming on  the

market  in  the  next three years  will be  readily absorbed  and that  overall vacancy

rates will not rise to  glut proportions.

In  Third  District  suburban areas office  vacancy rates  are  stable  or

declining  as  leasing  activity picks  up and construction slows  down.  Following

on  office and  residential development  in the suburbs,  hotel  and retail  space is

now in  demand.  Realtors  say recent  and prospective completions  of major highway

links  in the  suburbs  are  boosting  interest  in  all types  of  commercial  real

estate  in  these  areas.

Contractors  in  some  parts of  the Third District  say housing  starts  have

fallen due  to  labor  shortages, with  the number of  skilled  framers, carpenters,

and construction  superintendents in particular  falling short  of  demand.

Residential building  permits have  been declining  in Pennsylvania and New Jersey,

but  have risen substantially  in Delaware.  Residential realtors  say sales  of

both new and  existing  homes  are tapering off as  fewer houses  in both  categories

are being  put  on  the market.  They report  that selling prices  continue  to  rise.

IV  - 1

FOURTH DISTRICT  - CLEVELAND

Summary

Economic  activity in  the  Fourth District has  slowed slightly  from

the  last  report.  The  annual  employment  growth rate  in  Ohio has  tapered

off,  although the unemployment  rate  is  lower  due  to  a reduction in the

labor  force  estimates.  The  Ohio Manufacturing Index  is  lower  in June

than a year ago,  reflecting primarily a decline  in  durable manufacturing

employment.  Retail  sales  are up  as  factory  financing incentives have

stimulated  automobile  sales.

Retail  Sales

District retailers  reported  slightly  stronger sales  in July  and

August than  in previous months.  Sales  increases  occurred in  a broad

range  of  items  with increases  in  the  sale  of  soft  goods,  such  as  apparel,

outpacing hard goods,  such  as  appliances.  However, both categories  of

sales  are  reported to  be  weaker  than sales  a year  ago.  Retailers expect

price  increases  to  remain modest  over  the  near term.

The  latest  factory financing  incentives have helped  to  reduce  local

domestic  automobile  inventories  in order  to  make  room for  next year's

models.  Import  dealers have  also  resorted to  financing  incentives  in

order to  reduce  inventories.

Labor Markets

Ohio's  unemployment rate  dropped  from  7.9  percent  in May to  7.2

percent  in June.  Much  of  this  reduction  is  attributable  to  a 1.1  percent

decrease  in  labor  force  participation during this  period.  Total

IV  - 2

employment also  fell  slightly, with 19,000  fewer jobholders  in June.

Most of the job  loss  occurred  in manufacturing, primarily durables.

Employment in  nonmanufacturing divisions  rose  slightly from May to  June,

with  services  leading  the  increase.

Annual employment changes  continue  to  differ  significantly  among

the major  metropolitan areas  in  the Fourth District:  Cincinnati,

Cleveland, Columbus,  and  Pittsburgh.  Columbus  registered the  largest

annual  percentage  increase  in  total  employment  in June with a 4.2  percent

increase.  Pittsburgh  experienced the  smallest  increase  at  1.6  percent.

Furthermore, Pittsburgh has continually  lost  total  employment  since  the

last  business cycle  peak, while Cincinnati  and Columbus  have  increased

employment by 13  percent and  18  percent, respectively.  Cleveland's  total

employment  is  virtually the  same  as  it was  at  the  peak.

Manufacturing

The  Ohio Manufacturing  Index fell  in June  to  an annual  percentage

decrease  of  0.2  percent.  Transportation equipment  and primary metals

registered the  largest  declines  among  the major  2-digit  industries.

Further declines  in  these  sectors  are  expected as General Motors  is

scheduled to  close  several  large  assembly plants  in  the  area.  On  the

other hand, electrical  and nonelectrical machinery posted modest  gains

over  this  same period.  Nondurable manufacturing also  exhibited slight

increases.

The  steel  industry has been helped recently by  firm  steel prices,

particularly in  speciality  steels.  LTV has  recently announced plans  to

increase  prices  for hot  rolled  carbon bar and wire  products.  However,

IV  - 3

regional  output  and employment has  remained steady  over the  last  few

months.

Housing

Contracting  for new  construction rose  slightly  in July.  Increases

were  reported  in  single-family homes and commercial  and  industrial

building  in many areas  across  the  district.  Although mortgage  rates  have

inched up  in  recent months,  they remain among  the  lowest  in  the nation.

For example,  in  the  Cleveland area, average  rates  for  30-year  fixed-rate

mortgages  stand at  10.09  percent.

Banking

District  loan demand continues  to  be  soft.  Total  loans  outstanding

at  large  banks  fell  at  an annual  rate  of  7 percent  from the beginning of

July  to  mid-August.  Commercial  and  industrial loans,  which declined at

an  annual pace  of  over  20  percent,  accounted for  nearly  all of  the  loan

reduction.  Real  estate  lending has  been flat  as  mortgage rates  have

generally  drifted upwards.  In contrast, home  equity lending continued  to

increase  at  a rapid pace  and traditional  consumer  installment  lending has

picked up  somewhat,  after being essentially flat  during June.

FIFTH DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Overview

The  District  economy  continued  to  expand  in  August,  although

agriculture suffered  from the  weather and  growth  was  sluggish  in  some

service-related  sectors. 

Employment  rose  and  labor markets  remained

tight  in much  of  the  region. 

Manufacturing  activity  accelerated  in

August,  but  retail  sales  and  port  activity  were generally  unchanged.

Bankers  report  that  the  demand  for  nonresidential  construction  loans

declined  over  the  summer. 

Respondents  to  our  regular  surveys  of

business  and  financial conditions  remain  optimistic  that  the  economy

will  improve  in  the  months ahead.

Consumer  Spending

Retail  activity  in August  was generally  flat  according  to  our  most

recent mail  survey.  Retailers  report  little  change  in  their  total

sales,  but  an  increase  in  sales  of big  ticket  items  in mid-August as

compared  with  late  July.

Retailers  continue  to  expect higher  sales  in  the  next  six  months,

but  the  proportion  of  those  expecting rising  sales  declined  since our

previous  survey.  Forty-two percent  of  the  respondents predict  increased

sales  in  the  next  six  months, while  the  remainder are  evenly divided

between  those  predicting  lower  sales  and  no  change  in  sales. 

By

comparison,  60  percent  of  the  July  respondents had  expected  increases  in

sales.  Thirty-five percent  of  the  respondents  described  their  inventory

levels  as  "too  high"  and  48  percent  said  they were  "just  right."  Nearly

60 percent of  the  respondents  believe that  prices for  the  items  they buy

will  rise  in  the  next  six months.

Manufacturing

The  pace  of manufacturing activity increased  in  August according  to

our  survey. 

Half  of  the  respondents  reported  increased  shipments  in

August,  as  compared with  37  percent who  cited upturns  in  July.  Stronger

growth  was  also  indicated  by  reports  of  increases  in new orders,

backlogs  of  orders,  and  the  workweek.  Manufacturers  continue  to

indicate  increases  in  the  prices  of both raw materials  and  finished

products.  Inventories  of materials  rose  slightly, while  finished  goods

inventories 

were 

generally  unchanged. 

About  two-fifths 

of  the

respondents  described  their  inventory  levels  as  "too  high,"  while

another  two-fifths considered  theirs  to  be  "just  right."

The  proportion  of  manufacturing  respondents  expecting  growth in

activity  increased since  our  July survey.  Fifty-seven  percent  of  the

August  respondents  expect  shipments  to  rise  in  the  next  six months,

compared with 46  percent of  the  July  respondents.  Also,  38  percent  of

the  August  respondents  predict  increases  in  their capital  expenditures

in  coming months,  as  compared with 31  percent of  the  July respondents.

Labor Markets

Manufacturers  and  retailers  responding  to  our  surveys  report

tightness  in  their  labor  markets.  Employment  rose  in both manufacturing

and  retailing  in August,  but  thirty-nine  percent  of  the  manufacturing

respondents  and  52  percent  of  the  retail  respondents  say  they have  job

openings  that  remain unfilled.

Port Activity

Import  and  export  volumes at  the major ports  in the  District  were

generally  unchanged  in  August  from July.  However, port  representatives

expect  shipping  activity to  increase in  the next  six months.

Agriculture

The  summer's  hot,  dry weather  caused  substantial  damage  to  some

District  crops.  Corn yields  were hardest hit,  tobacco and  peanut  yields

were marginally affected,  and  the  soybean crop remains  at  risk. 

There

have  also  been  several  reports  of  heat  stress on  poultry  flocks and

dairy herds.  Recent  scattered rainfall  and  cooler  temperatures  should

limit  further losses.

Two  District  states have  asked  the  federal  government  to  designate

some  of  their  drought-stricken counties as  disaster  areas,  and  other

states  are  in  the  process  of  doing so.  Such  designations would  allow

some  farmers  to  be  eligible  for  federal disaster relief  payments.

Financial

A survey of  large  banks  across  the  District  indicates  that  the

demand  for  nonresidential construction loans  has  slackened  compared with

demand  earlier  in  the  summer.  Some  respondents  attribute  the  downturn

to  seasonal  factors,  and  they  are  optimistic  that  activity will  increase

after Labor  Day.

Large banks in  the  District  expect  interest  rates  to be  stable  on

intermediate-term  loans  through  the  next  90  days, but  they predict

higher rates  for  loans  of  longer duration, such  as mortgages.

VI-1

SIXTH  DISTRICT  - ATLANTA

The  pace  of  southeastern  economic  activity remains  brisk  in  most sectors  at  the

end  of  the  summer.  Employment 

in  key  regional  industries  continues  to  expand;

residential  construction  activity  has  picked  up,  and office  vacancy  rates  are  expected  to

drop  in  some  major  regional  markets.  Although  retailers'  sales  have  slowed  recently,

recent  dealer  incentives  have  boosted  auto  sales.  Port  activity  is  benefiting  from  the

weak  dollar,  and  tourism  has  been  strong  throughout  the  region.  Crop  yields  and  profits

are  expected  to outpace  last  year's  drought-reduced  levels.

Employment  and  Industry.  The  service  sector  continues  to  add  employment  in

the  Sixth  District.  Health  services  and  business  services  such  as  equipment  renting,

management  consulting,  and  computer  services  have  shown  strong  growth  lately.

Contacts  indicate  that  factory  employment  growth  is  likely  to  continue  to  increase.

Textile  employment  has  grown  briskly,  and  demand  remains  strong  for  the  region's  textile

products.  Shipments  of  carpet  from  some  mills  are  being delayed  because  producers  have

not  been  able  to  hire enough  workers  to keep  up  with the  large  number  of orders.

Concentration 

on  narrow, 

localized  market  niches  has 

reduced 

import

vulnerability  of  regional  steel  producers.  Small  mills  have  been  adding  to  capacity  and

boosting  productivity  with  improved 

technology. 

Lumber  industry  spokesmen  are

concerned  about  the  multifamily  building  slowdown  and  the  rise  in  mortgage  interest

rates;  however,  the  tariff  on  Canadian  lumber  has  helped  to  curb  the  tide  of  imports.

Also,  the  surge  in  lumber  use  for  home  remodeling  is helping  to support  the  market.

Consumer  Spending.  August's  retail  sales  showed  only  slight  gains  from  a  year

ago  in  spite  of  good  performance  a  month  earlier.  Retailers  are  heavily  promoting  back-

to-school  items.  They  say  that  apparel  sales  continue  strong;  however,  there  is  little

growth  in  other  items.  For  the  most  part,  inventories  remain  at  comfortable  levels

although  there  are  scattered  reports  that  the  stock  of summer  apparel  remains  heavy  for

VI-2

late  August.  Retailers  project  sales  for  the  coming  months  to  be  at  or  only  slightly

above  last  year's  level.

Early  August  car  sales  in  the  District  were  boosted  by  new  factory  incentives

featuring  finance  rates  as  low  as  1.9  percent  and  generous  cash  rebates  on  1987  models.

Industry  contacts  reported  a  strong  market  response,  particularly  for  some  GM  cars  and

trucks  for  which  sales  had  been  especially  weak.  Despite  the  sluggish  sales  of  domestic

autos,  the  District's  new  vehicle  registrations  in  the  first  half  of  1987  were  off only  0.7

percent  from  last year,  much  less than  the  7.9 percent  drop  nationally.

Construction.  Although  the  spring  uptick  in  interest  rates  caused  a  dip  in

existing  home sales  in  June,  sales  for  the  second quarter  finished well  ahead of  last year's

pace.  All  the  District  states  except  Alabama  bettered  the  national  average  of  5.7

percent  growth.  District  realtors  say  pockets  of  activity  in  the  region,  like  the  Florida

Gulf  Coast,  Jackson,  Mississippi,  and  middle  Tennessee,  are  fueling  the  growth.

The  Sixth  District  is  attracting  an  increasing  portion  of  foreign  investment  in

U.S.  commercial  real  estate. 

In  both  Atlanta  and  Miami,  18  percent  of  downtown

commercial  properties  are  owned  by  foreign  investors,  and  this  rate  is  expected  to

increase.  Although  no  upward  pressure  in  prices  has  yet  occurred,  the  slowdown  in

construction  in  these  overbuilt  markets,  coupled  with  the  rising  demand  of  foreign

investors,  is  expected  to  increase  prices,  say contacts  in  these  cities.  Contacts  in  almost

all  District  metropolitan  areas  expect  increased  foreign investment  in  the near  future.

Office  leasing  in  Miami  is  strong  although  vacancy  rates are  still high.  Contacts

there  say  they  expect  a  30  percent  increase  in  leasing  this  year  over  last.  Sales  and

leasing  of  industrial  property  in  Atlanta  remain  very  active,  and  the  vacancy  rate  in  the

second  quarter  was  again  below  the national  average.

Financial  Services.  Loan  growth  at  the  larger  commercial  banks  in  the  Sixth

District  continued  to  decline  in  July.  Business,  real  estate,  and  consumer  loans  are  all

VI-3

expanding  at  a  reduced  pace.  Many  banks,  searching  for  lending  alternatives,  have  begun

to  reemphasize  home  lending.

Tourism.  Tourism  continues  its  strong  summer  performance  throughout  the

District.  Florida  campgrounds  are  reporting  another  good  year.  Hotel  occupancy  along

the  Mississippi  Gulf  Coast  has  been  increasing,  a  sign  that  tourism  is  reviving  in  that

area.

Port  Activity.  The  share  of  exports  in  the  trade  mix  of  southeastern  ports  is

gradually  rising  in  response  to  the  lower  dollar.  The  value  of  exports  was up  3.3  percent

during  the  year  ending  in  June,  slightly  surpassing  the  rate  of  increase  for  imports.  All

District  ports  except  New  Orleans  posted  trade  gains  during  the  period. 

In  Savannah,

port  officials  expect  that  demand  for  Georgia  products  such  as  kaolin,  fertilizers,  and

pulp  and  paper  will  continue  to  grow 

in  the  year  ahead. 

In  Miami,  where  higher

shipments  to  Latin  America  have  revived  exports,  the  outlook  also  is  bright.  In  Mobile,

increased  forest  products  exports have  helped  to  offset  lower  coal  shipments.

Mining. 

In  August  the  number  of  operating  oil  rigs  declined  modestly  but  still

remained  one-third  higher  than a year  ago.  However,  production  of crude  oil remained  at

about  5  percent  less  than  in  August  1986.  District  refineries  report  falling  profit  margins

in  recent  weeks  as  crude  oil prices  rose  faster  than  product  prices.

Agriculture  and  Forestry.  Southern  pine  lumber,  which  accounts  for  10  percent

of  the  nation's  total  lumber  exports,  experienced  a  favorable  spring  with  exports over  10

percent  higher  than  last  year.  Demand  for  southern  pine  remains  strong  at  relatively

high  prices.

Yields  of  major  crops  in  the  region  are  expected  to  be  much  higher  than  last

year's  drought-reduced  harvests.  Production  will  be  up  despite  reduced  acreages  this

year.  With  prices  and  costs  near  those  of  a year  ago,  profit  per  acre  should  also improve

moderately.

VII-1

SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.  Business  activity  continues  to  rise  in  the  Seventh District,  and

further  expansion  is expected.  Total  employment  growth in  the  five  District

states,  seasonally adjusted,  about matched that  in  the  U.S. during  this  year's

first  half.  Chicago area  help-wanted ads  in the  first  half  were well  ahead  of

a year  earlier.  Reports  from this  bank's  directors  in  August, overall,  were

the  most optimistic  since  at  least  the  early  1980s.  District purchasing

managers  see  continued  strong  expansion.  In  contrast,  auto sales  have

remained  persistently below last  year,  and  resulting  production cuts and

layoffs  are  particularly  affecting  industrial  activity  in  southeast  Michigan.

Purchases  of  machinery  have  been  mixed.  Steel  demand  remains  vigorous.

Nonresidential  construction  activity, overall,  appears  about even  with  last

year  in the  District,  but  has  slowed  in  some  areas.  Residential  construction

and  resales  have  slowed.  Large  District retail  chain  stores  indicate  only

small  gains  in  July  sales  compared with  last  year.

Purchasing Managers.  Reports  from  Chicago and  Milwaukee  purchasing

managers  for  July  show  strong  gains  in production,  orders,  and  backlogs,

lengthening  lead  times,  and  rising  prices.  Suppliers  are  increasingly  able  to

make  announced  price  increases  "stick."  Reports  from Chicago purchasers  in

the  first  half  of  August  indicate another  strong  month, with  orders  up  sharply.

Motor  Vehicles.  Temporary and  indefinite auto production  cutbacks  and

layoffs,  in response  to  continued  slower  sales,  are having wider  effects  in

parts  of  the  District where  the  industry  is heavily concentrated,  particularly

southeast Michigan.  This  slowdown  is partly  offset  by  increased  demand  for

trucks,  including  both  light models  bought  partly  by  consumers  and  larger

trucks.  Although Michigan manufacturing  employment  in June was  3 percent

below a year  earlier,  the  only  District  state  to  show a decline  over  this

VII-2

period,  nonmanufacturing employment  there was  4 percent  higher,  a larger  gain

than  for  the  U.S.  or  the  District as  a whole.  Lower  Michigan  factory

employment  in the  latest  year  mainly  reflects  auto  industry and  related  cuts.

Sharply  lower  auto  production  in  July  reduced  high  inventory  levels  closer  to

normal  levels.  Model  year-end  cut-rate financing  and  rebates  are  expected  to

cut  stocks  further,  though  reports  indicate that  consumer  response  has  been

restrained.  A major  uncertainty  overhanging District auto  makers  is the

outcome of  labor  negotiations  currently  underway at GM and  Ford.

Machinery.  Markets  are  mixed  for types  of  machinery  with substantial

production  in the  District.  Demand  for diesel  engines  for  use  in  trucks  is

strong.  Shipments  of  truck trailers  have  increased.  Orders  have  risen  for

diesels  used  in some  other  industrial  applications.  Orders  for  railroad

engines,  however,  are  almost nil.  Buying  of  railcars  is up,  but  still  low.  A

steel  producer reports  higher demand  from makers  of  construction  equipment  and

pressure  vessels  used  in chemical  process  industries.  Machine tool  buying  is

weak,  but  an  industry  source  views  an  upturn  as  imminent.  Production  of

parts,  shifted  abroad when  the  dollar  strengthened  in the  first half  of  the

1980s,  is being brought back  to  the U.S.

Farm  Equipment.  Unit  sales  of  farm equipment  remain  sluggish,  although

concessional  terms  to  cut  inventories  strengthened  tractor  sales  this  summer.

Unit  sales  of  farm tractors  were 32  percent above  the  very  low year-earlier

level  in July,  mostly  reflecting  inventory  paring  efforts  by  a major District

manufacturer.  August  sales  are  also  expected  to  show a large  gain  as  another

manufacturer  introducing  a new  line  is offering discounts  of  up  to  50  percent

on  a large  inventory  of  old  models.

Steel.  District  sheet  steel  production  continues  strong.  A contact

expressed  concern  about possible  future  shortages  of  some  types  of  sheet

steel.  Demand  for  structurals  and  bars  remains  at  a high  level.  Plate is on

allocation,  reflecting  improved  demand  as  well  as  capacity  shut  down  when  the

VII-3

market  was  soft.  In response,  a large Chicago-area plate mill  is being

restarted.  Inventory  rebuilding  has  been  an  important  element in  the  strength

of  steel  markets  this  year,  following  the  six-month work  stoppage  at  USX.

However,  analysts  disagree  on  the  relative  importance  of  restocking  versus

improved  final  sales  in the  upturn  in steel.  Demand  has  improved  from various

steel  users.  The fall  in  the  dollar  has  made domestic  steel  competitive with

Japanese and  European  steel  not  only  in U.S.  markets  but  also  abroad,  though

American exports  of  steel  are  restrained  by  trade  barriers.

Nonresidential  Construction.  Work  on  new office  buildings  remains

vigorous  in downtown Chicago, and  more  announcements  of  new buildings  are

expected.  Several  hotels  are  underway or  planned.  Commercial  building

activity  in suburban  areas  has  slowed  considerably  over  the  past  year.  Heavy

August  rains  and  flooding delayed  projects.  A $225  million  steel  mill  will  be

built  in Indiana,  the  state's  second major  new mill  announced  in the  past

year.

Residential  Sales  and  Construction.  Markets  for  new homes  and  resales  in

the  District  slowed  in response  to  the  jump  in mortgage  interest  rates  in the

second  quarter.  Most  reports  indicate that  activity  continues  slower.

Construction  of  houses  is expected  to  be  at  a good  level  for  the  year,  but

below  1986.  Multifamily  construction  has  fallen  sharply  due  to  adverse

effects  of  last  year's  tax  law  changes.  The  inventory  of  houses  for  sale  is

low,  suggesting  that  resales  will  continue below  strong  1986.  Chicago  area

housing  prices  are  estimated  to  be  10-12  percent  higher  than  a year ago.

Consumer Spending.  Large  District  retailers  report  small  increases  in the

dollar  volume  of  sales  in  July,  compared with  a year  earlier.  Weakness

continued  in  early  August.  A survey  of  Illinois  department and  specialty

stores  showed  moderately higher  July  sales  than  a year  earlier,  but  smaller

gains  than  earlier  this  year.  The  late  Labor  Day  is expected to  shift  sales

from  August  to  September.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT  - ST. LOUIS

Summary

The District's  economy weakened in recent months as  employment

and  construction growth  slowed.  Agricultural conditions, however, have

been positive as  good weather has resulted in large yields  of major

crops.  Livestock  producers  have enjoyed  a profitable year with low feed

costs  and  favorable  prices.

Outlook

The outlook  of  small District businesses has improved.  Only 7

percent  of  211  businesses  surveyed  in July  expected a worsening of

national economic  conditions  in the  following 6 months.  This represents

a substantial  drop  from  the 17  percent anticipating deteriorating

conditions  in  an April  survey.

Employment

District nonfarm employment  declined at  a 1.0  percent rate  in

the  second quarter compared with a 2.3  percent national rate  of

increase.  The  second quarter  slowdown of District nonfarm employment was

due  to  declines  in  the mining, manufacturing and  construction sectors  and

sluggish  growth  of  the  service-producing  sectors.

Manufacturing

Manufacturing  employment dropped 3.5  percent in  the  second

quarter,  returning to  the  level  of a year  earlier.  Employment in most

major industries has  continued to  decline, with only producers  of

VIII-2

electrical equipment,  food  products  and textiles  and apparel posting job

increases compared with  a year earlier.  Regional  textile plants,

particularly  those producing cotton  products, are running at near full

capacity and have  a substantial backlog of  orders.  Textile  prices

reportedly have increased this  year due  to high consumer demand for

apparel and to  rising costs  of  inputs,  particularly petroleum products

and  cotton.  Plants  making footwear  in the  region are operating near

capacity.  The  permanent  closure of an aging truck  plant  in  St. Louis

recently eliminated over  2,000  jobs.  Due  to poor  car  sales,  2,700

workers will  be laid-off in October from an auto assembly plant  in  the

St.  Louis area.

Construction and Real Estate

Regional  construction activity slowed recently as  the

nonresidential sector weakened.  The  seasonally-adjusted value  of

District nonresidential building contracts grew by 3.5  percent  in the

three months  through July,  following a 15.3  percent gain in the  previous

three months.  Much of  the  slowdown was  in Arkansas.  Despite the  recent

deceleration, District nonresidential contracts were 35.8  percent above a

year  earlier.

Regional residential  building continued  to  decline.  The value

of  District residential  contracts  fell by 8.4  percent in the  three months

through July.  Losses were  concentrated in Missouri  and Tennessee.

Although weak recently,  District residential contracts were up 7.1

percent  in  the May-July period  compared with the  same  period a year

earlier  due  to  strong single-family building.  A slight decline in

residential building was  posted nationally during  the  same period.

VIII-3

The  office vacancy rate  in  the St. Louis metropolitan area

increased  to  16.4  percent  in June  from 13.6  percent a year before, but

remained  about 4 percentage  points below the national metropolitan

average.  Area vacancy rates  are  expected  to rise by the end of  1987  as a

large volume  of  office space  is  completed.  St. Louis'  industrial vacancy

rate  of  5.4  percent was  slightly below the 6.1 percent national average

in June  and  down  from 6.7  percent  in June 1986.

Agriculture

The  crop  year has been  extremely favorable  for most  District

farmers.  Harvests  of  major  crops  have begun amid predictions  of record

corn  and soybean yields.  The  cotton harvest began a month earlier  than

normal  due  to  early planting.  The only  potential hazard remaining is

overly wet harvest  conditions.  The  combination of  low-priced feed  and

favorable prices  for hogs  and cattle also has  allowed livestock  producers

to  enjoy  a profitable year.

Due  to  reduced  acreage, large  government  payments to  farmers,

and  lenders'  restraint,  the volume of  farm loans  outstanding at  District

commercial banks  in June  fell by over  15  percent  from last year.  The

largest  decline occurred  in Kentucky where  farm  loans were off by 30

percent.  Farm  loan delinquencies and farm loan losses at  agricultural

banks  improved  in District  states  with the exception of Mississippi.

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT  - MINNEAPOLIS

Economic  growth  in  the  Ninth District  continues apace.  Labor market

indicators  point  to  favorable  employment  conditions.  While  consumer  spending

didn't  strengthen generally,  tourist spending did.  Mining activity  has  picked

up,  and  improved  agricultural  conditions  are  likely  to  lead  to  higher  farm

income.

Employment

Ninth  District  labor  markets  have  continued  to  create  good

employment  opportunities.  In  Minnesota,  the  district's  most  populous  state,

employment  grew  strongly  in  July,  with  all  sectors  posting  growth,  including

manufacturing.  The  employment  growth  drove down  the  state's  unemployment rate

two-tenths  of  a  percent,  to  five  percent  in  July--its  first  decline  since

April.  Employment  conditions  were  particularly  favorable  in  the  Minneapolis-

St.Paul  metro  area,  where  the  help-wanted  advertising  index  rose  about  31

percent higher  this  June  than  last.  In  Montana  the  unemployment rate  has  been

projected  to  hold  steady  at  6 percent  in  July,  although  the  drop  in  seasonal

employment may  be  sharper  than  usual.  In  North  Dakota, construction  jobs  were

the  biggest  contributor  to  higher  employment,  according  to  recent  data.  A

Bank  director  reports  that  labor  markets  in  eastern South  Dakota  are so  tight

that  the  shortage  of  workers  may  deter  some  firms  from  locating  there.  And

another  director  notes  that  the  construction  and  operation  of  two  new  state

prisons  are  projected  to  markedly  increase  employment  in  the  Upper  Peninsula

of Michigan.

Consumer  Spending

Reports  on  retail  spending  for  general  merchandise  have  been

mixed. 

One  retail  chain  complained  of  high  markdowns  to  sell  off  summer

IX-2

merchandise;  as a result,  its  July  sales were  lower  than  planned.  But another

chain  reports  that  its  July  sales  were  stronger  than  a  year  earlier,

particularly  in  the  Minneapolis-St.Paul  area.  Elsewhere  in  the  district,  a

discount  chain  is  opening  a few  stores.  A Bank  director  notes  that  the  sales

volume  of  retailers  in  a  large  mall  in  La  Crosse,  Wisconsin,  were  over  7

percent higher  this  year  than  last.

Sales  incentives  have  increased  purchases  of  motor  vehicles

recently.  One  domestic manufacturer  reports  that  its  district  sales  have  been

strong,  with  both  car  and  truck  sales  up  over  15  percent  in  August  and  its

inventories  down. 

Another  domestic  manufacturer  reports  that  consumer

response  to  its  incentives  has  been  brisk,  and  that  increased  farm  income

should  help  rural  sales  this  fall.  A director  notes that  in  western Wisconsin

some  car  dealers, who  had  been  doing  poorly,  have recently  been  doing  better.

Scattered  reports  indicate  that  district  housing  activity  has  been

mixed.  Home  sales  in  Minneapolis  were  4.7  percent  lower  in  July  than  a year

earlier,  and  single-family  housing  permits  in  Minneapolis-St.Paul  were  off  a

bit  in  June. 

But  in  other  parts  of  the  district,  housing  activity  may  be

picking  up. 

In  North  Dakota  a  newspaper  editor  reports  that  new  home

construction  is  booming  in  Fargo,  while  a  business  representative  in  Will-

iston,  notes  that  a  glutted  housing  market  has  recently  improved  there. 

A

director  reports  that  orders  for  telephones  were  up  lately,  indicative  of new

home  construction.

Tourism

The  district's  large  tourism  industry  has  continued  to  enjoy

excellent  summer  business.  An  industry  spokesman  in  Minnesota  reports  that

business  this  year  is  far  beyond  projections.  Inquiries  at  Minnesota's  State

Tourism Office  are  up  36  percent over  last year.  Industry  representatives  for

IX-3

the  Black  Hills  of  South  Dakota  note  that  this  year  was  very  good,  and  new

tourist  projects  there  are  now  underway. 

Tourist  trade  has  also  been

flourishing  in  western North Dakota.  In  the  Indianhead  region of northwestern

Wisconsin,  campgrounds  and  resorts  have  been  full. 

And  the  best  tourism

conditions  in  six  years  have  been  reported  from  Michigan's  Upper  Peninsula.

Most areas  are  projecting  good  fall  business  as  well.

Resource-Related  Industries

Some  good  news  is  evident  in  the  district's  resource-related

industries.  Signs  of  increased  interest  in  oil  exploration  were  mentioned  by

observers  in  western  North Dakota and  in  Montana.  Gold mining has  been  active

in  South  Dakota  and  Montana.  The  country's  first  platinum/palladium  mine,

employing over  200  workers,  was  recently  dedicated  in  rural  Montana.  'The port

of  Duluth  reports  a  big  increase  in  the  amount  of  coal  and  iron  ore  shipped

through to  U.S.  and  Canadian  destinations  this year.

Agriculture

Agricultural  conditions  have  continued  to  improve.  Higher  livestock

prices  and  profits  are  causing  euphoria  among  raisers,  according  to  a  Bank

director  from  South  Dakota.  A  director  from Montana  notes  that  calf  prices

are  also  high  and  that  Montana wheat  producers  are  benefiting  from a big  crop

and  price  supports.  Record  soybean  yields  are  expected  in  Minnesota.  Plans

for  an  egg-laying  facility  holding  one  million  hens  were  just  announced  in

South  Dakota. 

Wet  weather  is  a  concern  to  farmers  in  some  parts  of  North

Dakota, though.

TENTH DISTRICT  - KANSAS  CITY

Overview.  Some modest  improvement is  apparent  in Tenth District

economic  activity.  Overall  retail  sales  are  growing slightly and new car

sales  are  somewhat stronger.  Manufacturers' purchasing agents  report  further

price  increases  for  inputs  but materials generally  remain readily available.

Some  limited  improvement has occurred  in  oil  exploration and development

activity.  Little  strength is  present  in  the housing sector.  Loan demand at

district banks has weakened recently.  Fall  crop yields are  expected  to be

generally  above  average.  Little  expansion is  evident  in  the  livestock sector.

Retail  Sales.  A majority of respondents  report  sales  above  year-ago

levels. Most also  report  growing  sales over  the past  three months,  though a

few report constant or  declining activity.  Prices have been generally stable

over the  past  three  months.  About half of the  retailers  surveyed  report

increasing  inventories,  while  the  rest  report stable  stocks.  Expectations  of

future  inventory change  are  also mixed.  Most respondents expect  stronger

sales  ahead.

Automobile  Sales.  Automobile dealers  generally report  that  sales are

steady  to  slightly stronger  in August.  Inventories  are  trim as  dealers  await

1988  models.  Adequate  financing  is  available  for  both dealer  inventories  and

customer purchases.  Dealers are hopeful  that  sales  will be  stable  to  up

slightly during  the  remainder of 1987.

Purchasing Agents.  Purchasing agents  report that  prices have  generally

increased  over a year ago,  with the greatest  increases  occurring  in oil

derivatives such  as  plastics and  in  textile  inputs  such  as  cotton cloth.  Most

respondents  expect  increases  to  level off  in  the  next  quarter.  Materials  are

generally readily available and  few problems  are  expected for  the  remainder of

the  year.  Inventory  levels  are  generally satisfactory with some  trimming  and

X-2

seasonal  adjustments being made.  Many agents  report  that plants  are  running

near  capacity.

Energy.  After  tensions  in  the Persian Gulf pushed domestic spot prices

into  the  $20-$22  range,  reports  that OPEC has been producing in  excess  of  its

quota have  sent  domestic prices back down to  the  $18-$20  range.  This

volatility will  likely prevent  a strong rebound  in the  district's  energy

industry  in  the near  future.  But some  limited  improvement in  exploration and

development  activity has been observed.  The average weekly number  of

operating drilling rigs  in the  Tenth District  increased from 232  in  June  to

273  in  July, 45  percent above  the year-ago  level.  Nevertheless,  the  rig count

in  the  district remains  less  than one-fifth of its  1982  peak.

Housing Activity and Finance.  District homebuilders report  that housing

starts  remain at  or  above  last  year's levels,  but generally down from a month

ago.  Single-family home construction remains stronger  than multi-family

construction.  Looking ahead, homebuilders expect housing starts  to  stabilize.

Most homebuilders report  that new home  sales are  up  and inventories  are  down,

with house  prices  rising  at  about  the  rate  of  inflation.  Builders have had no

problems with materials  availability and they expect none  in  the  foreseeable

future.

Deposit  growth at  Tenth District savings  institutions  is  reported down

from a year ago.  However,  there has been a recent  slight  improvement  in

savings  inflows.  Demand  for mortgage  funds has  been slow and  is  expected  to

remain  steady or  improve  somewhat  during the  remainder of  1987.  Mortgage

rates,  which have been to  steady  to  firming recently, are  generally expected

to  remain steady or  increase slightly during  the rest  of 1987.

Banking.  Respondents  report  that  total  loan demand fell  slightly  at

Tenth District banks  during  the  past month.  Demand weakened slightly  for

X-3

commercial and  industrial,  consumer,  and residential  real  estate  loans.

Demand  fell  off more  sharply for commercial  real  estate  loans,  while  demand

for  agricultural  loans held steady.  Respondents  report no change  in  their

prime  rates,  and virtually none  expect any change  in  the  near term.  No

changes  in consumer  loan rates were  reported, and, again, no changes are

expected.  Balances  in  all  types  of deposit accounts  generally remained

constant,  though there  are  scattered reports  of changes,  both up  and down.

Agriculture.  Fall  crops  are  doing well  across most of  the Tenth

District  as  the harvest  approaches.  Good moisture and warm weather combined

for  an excellent growing season, and corn, milo and  soybean yields  are

expected to  be  above  average  in many parts  of  the  district.  In  parts of  mid-

Missouri where  the  corn harvest has  already begun, yields  up to  30  percent

above  normal have been reported.  The  expectation of exceptional yields has

created  some  concern about  storage  capacity around the  district.  Although

most  areas  report  adequate  storage,  some  limited storage expansion  is

underway.  In other areas,  harvested crops  may have  to be put on the  market as

storage  facilities  are  filled.

There  are  a few  signs of  limited expansion in hog  inventories  in Kansas

and Nebraska.  However, most  operators  in the  district are not  expanding,

afraid  that currently high hog prices  will  not hold. 

Similarly, there  has

been little or  no  expansion in district  cattle  herds,  though cattle  prices

remain  relatively strong.  Many district feedlots  are  currently running well

below capacity, in  anticipation of  a large  seasonal  influx  of feeder cattle

this  fall.

XI-1

ELEVENTH  DISTRICT-DALLAS

The  District  economy  is  growing  very slowly.  Manufacturing  activity  is  stable  or

increasing  in  most  industries.  Drilling  continues  to turn  up.  Construction  values  have

been  showing  gains.  Retail  sales  remain  fairly  flat,  but some  respondents note

increases.  There  has  been  essentially  no  deposit  growth at  the  commercial  banks  in  the

Eleventh  District  during  the last  three  quarters.  Farm  prices  are  up  from  a  year  earlier

and  agricultural  credit  conditions  are  improving.

District  manufacturers  indicate  that,  overall,  business  conditions  have  improved

very  modestly  in  recent  months.  Orders  to  apparel  producers  have  increased

significantly,  as  retailers  have  begun  to  shift  from  foreign  to  domestic  suppliers.

Refiners  note  that  their  output remains  strong,  but that  profit  margins  are  slim.

Chemical  manufacturers  say  that  orders  to  them  are  strong,  considering  normal  seasonal

weakness,  and  express  a  favorable  outlook  for  the  coming  months.  Sales  by  electrical

and  electronic  equipment  manufacturers  have  been  fairly  stable in  recent  months  and

remain  above  a year  earlier.  Defense  contractors  say  output  and  prospects  for  new

orders  remain  strong.  Sales  by  producers  of energy-related  durable  goods  have  lately

remained  unchanged,  despite  continued  increases  in  drilling  activity.  Some

manufacturers  of durable  goods  tied  to  the  construction  industry  report  that  orders  are

stabilizing  at  very  low  levels,  while  others  report  additional  declines.

The  District  drilling rig  count  continues  to climb.  The  rig count  rose  in  July  and

held  steady  in  the  first  half  of  August.  Well  permit  applications,  a  leading  indicator  of

drilling  activity,  also  increased  in  July.  Energy  industry  observers  say that  recent

increases  in  drilling  were  not based  on  this  summer's  runup  in  oil prices  and  that  the  price

declines  in  August  are  unlikely  to  induce  drilling  declines.

Indicators  of  District  construction  activity  have  lately  shown  gains.  For  the  three

months  ended  in  July,  the  value  of construction  contracts  was  up  10.0  percent  from  the

XI-2

first  quarter.  This  expansion  represents  an  increase  from  low  levels,  however,  and

contracts  have  grown  only  slightly over  the depressed  levels  of  a  year  earlier.  These

increases  have  occurred  despite  continued  reductions  in nonresidential  building.  The

strength  in  contracts  has been  focused  in  non-building  construction,  a category  that

includes  sewer  and  water  lines  and  streets  and  roads.  Residential  contracts  have  also

shown  some  growth over  the  last  few  months  but  remain  below  a  year  earlier.

Nevertheless,  both  single-family  and  multifamily  building permits  have  been  declining

lately.  Construction  employment  is  continuing  to drop in  response  to past reductions  in

contracting.

District retailers  report  flat to  slightly  increased  sales.  Sales  of home  furnishings

and  of some  appliances  have  picked  up,  after  a protracted  period  of  weakness.  This

increase  is  ascribed  to  growth  in  the proportion  of homebuyers  who  are  purchasing  a

residence  for  the  first  time.  Sales  of consumer  electronics  continue  to  fall, however,  in

response  to  rising  prices  tied  to  the  declining  value  of  the  dollar.  Most  retailers

expressed  optimism  about  third  quarter  sales.

District  auto  sales  are  up  in  response  to interest  rate incentives  offered  by

domestic  manufacturers.  Dealers  say  that  domestic  auto  sales  are  also  up  because  prices

of  domestic  models  have  remained  unchanged,  while  prices  of  foreign  cars  continue  to

climb.  Concerns  are  widespread  that  sales  may slow  substantially  after  the  financing

incentives  lapse  at the  end of  September.

Conditions  at  the  District's  financial  institutions  continue  to  be sluggish.  The

deposit growth  rate  at  thrift institutions  continued  to  slow  in  July  but  remained

positive.  Regulatory  capital  at Texas  thrifts  decline  from  a positive  $3.4 billion  in  May

1986  to  a negative  $2.1  billion  in  May  1987.  There  has  been  virtually no  deposit

expansion  at District  commercial  banks  during  the  last  three  quarters.  In  July,  deposits

were  1.7  percent  lower  than  a year  earlier.  Large  time deposits  at  District  commercial

XI-3

banks  are  declining  at an  increasing  rate,  but  these  reductions  are  being partially  offset

by  increases  in  small time deposits.  The  legalization  of  limited  branch  banking  in  Texas

in  1986  has led  to reductions  in  the  number  of banks.  The  decline  primarily  represents

mergers  of subsidiary  banks  of multibank  holding  companies  into  a  single  bank  with  a

branch  network.

In  District  agriculture,  product prices  are  substantially  above  a year  earlier  and

farm  credit  problems  are  diminishing.  Profit  margins  in  livestock  operations  are  wide,  as

a result  of  low  feed  prices and  increased  livestock  prices.  Reduced  output  by  foreign

producers,  together  with  renewed  consumer  demand  for  cotton  products,  has  put upward

pressure  on  cotton prices.  A  warm  September  will be  needed  to  protect  the  West  Texas

cotton  crop,  much  of which  was replanted  in  June  after  heavy rains  and hail  destroyed

previous  seedings.  In  July  1987,  prices  of all  major  District  crops  were  above  a  year

earlier,  with  the  exception  of potato  prices.  For  the  same  period,  prices  for  all

components  of  the  Texas  Livestock  and  Livestock  Products  Index  were  above a  year

earlier,  with  the  exceptions  of  broilers  and  eggs.

XII-1

TWELFTH  DISTRICT  - SAN  FRANCISCO

Summary

Overall,  economic  activity  in  the Twelfth  District  continues  at  a healthy  pace,

although  Alaska,  Idaho,  and  Utah do  not  share  in the  current  prosperity,  and the  pace

of  construction  activity  continues  to  weaken  in  many  parts  of  the  District.

Consumer  spending  is  steady,  and  high-technology  manufacturing  activity  appears  to

be  picking  up.  Lumber  producers  continue  to enjoy  strong  prices  and  demand,  while

oil-producing  regions  are  benefiting  from  recent  price  hikes.  Construction  activity

continues  mixed,  among  regions  as  well  as  among  building  types.  Many  financial

institutions  are  experiencing  substantial  changes  in  their  portfolio  mixes,  away  from

consumer  credit  and toward  home  equity loans.

Consumer  Spending

Consumer  spending  patterns  have  not  changed  appreciably  in  most  parts  of  the

District  during  recent  months,  with  most  respondents  describing  overall  sales  as

"flat" or "unchanged."  Strength  in car sales varies  geographically,  and  within  market

areas  sales  generally  are  stronger  among  used  cars  and  smaller  cars,  including

Korean  imports.  In  most  areas,  apparel,  housewares,  and  small appliances  are  selling

well.  Shopping  malls  and  department  stores  in  southern  California,  Oregon,  and

Seattle  report  sales  growth  and express  optimism  regarding  fall  sales.

An  Arizona  survey  suggests  a  broad-based  decline  in  purchases  and  planned

purchases  of  consumer  durables  in  that  state,  consistent  with  the  slowing  pace  of

activity  there.  Consumer  purchases  since  the  last  survey  declined  in  most  spending

categories,  but  the proportion  purchasing  home  appliances  increased  from  24 percent

to  31  percent.  The  proportion  planning  to  purchase  automobiles  during  the  next  six

months  dropped  from  42  percent  of  the  respondents  in  July  1986  to  28  percent  in

July  1987,  while  the  fraction  planning  to  buy  electronic  products  and  tools  dropped

XII-2

from  43  percent  to  33  percent.  Declines  of  10  to  15  percentage  points  also  were

reported  for  household  furnishings  and  home  improvements,  with  home  appliances

experiencing  a  smaller decline.

Manufacturing

The  long-anticipated  turnaround  in  the  semiconductor  and  electronic  equip-

ment  industries  appears  to  be  materializing  at  last  but, 

in  the  words  of  one

respondent, 

it  is  "a  slow  creep-out  rather  than  a  rapid  turnaround."  Orders  and

shipments  are  stronger  overall,  but 

increased  demand  currently  is  concentrated  in

computers  and  office  equipment,  communications,  and  instruments.  One  Portland-

area  firm  has  announced  plans  to double  capacity  at  one  of  its plants,  and  another  is

re-examining  old  plans  to  build  a  new  $130  million  silicon-wafer  plant.  Moreover,

17  percent  of  respondents  to  an  Arizona  survey  planned  increased  capital  spending,

an  improvement  from  recent  quarters  when  virtually  none  planned  spending

increases.  The  same  survey  revealed  that  57  percent  of  respondents  expected  to

increase  employment  during  the  coming  months,  and  the  remaining  43  percent  plan

no  changes.  However,  many  firms  are  increasing  production  by  utilizing  existing

plant  capacity  and  labor  resources,  which  has  limited  plant  expansion  and  additional

hiring. 

In  addition,  continued  offshore  migration  of  production,  particularly  of

standard  memory  devices,  is  limiting  U.S.  gains.

Several  respondents  note  that  exports  to  both  Europe  and  Japan  have

strengthened.  A  Washington  banker  argues  that  the  improvement  also  is  due  to  new

product  designs  and  redesigns  of existing  products  reaching  the production  stage,  and

that  continued  improvement  in  this  area  depends  critically  on  activity  at  large

regional  electronic  and  electrical  equipment  firms.

Agriculture  and  Resource  Related  Industries

Most  Idaho  lumber  mills  reported  that  they  were  operating  at  capacity,  with

6 percent  fewer  employees  than  a  year  ago.  Softwood  lumber  exports  to  Europe  and

XII-3

Japan  for  the  first five  months  of  1987  were  up  16  and  12  percent  respectively  from

the  same  period  in  1986,  while  log  exports  rose  11  percent.  Exchange  rate  con-

siderations,  a  surge  in  housing  starts  in  Japan,  and  increases  in  log  demand  from

China  and  Korea  account  for  much  of  the  improvement.  Canadian  lumber  imports

for the  first  five  months  of  1987  were  2.8 percent  lower  than they  were  in  1986.

Some  oil  equipment  firms  finally  are  operating  "in  the  black,"  as  the  number  of

drilling  rigs  has been  increasing  for the last  eight  to nine  weeks.  In  Kern  County,  the

number  of  drilling  rigs  has  increased  during  each  of  the  last  four  months,  and  51.5

percent  of  the  rigs  are  working,  compared  with  only 27.5  percent  of  rigs  a year  ago.

Construction  and  Real  Estate

Construction  activity  in  the  Twelfth  District  continues  to  be  mixed,  with

particularly  weak  activity  in  economically  struggling  areas,  and  multifamily

construction  weakening  throughout  the  District. 

In  California,  the  number  of

residential  construction  permits  year-to-date  through  July  stands  11.5  percent  below

last  year's  level,  while  the  value  of  nonresidential  construction  awards  for  the  first

seven  months  of  the  year  remains  14  percent  above  the  year-earlier  level  despite

deterioriation  during  June  and  July.  The  number  of  housing  permits  and  mortgages

in the  Seattle  area  has declined  in  recent  months,  and  sales  of  both  new  and  existing

homes  have  fallen  in  eastern  Washington. 

In  Utah,  total  construction  value  for  the

first  six  months  of  the year  was  down  15.7  percent  from  last  year's  level,  after  June

declines  of  25  percent  in  the  number  of  new  single-family  construction  permits  and

45  percent  in nonresidential  valuation.

Financial  Sector

Declines  in  consumer  loan  volume  and  in  credit  card  usage  compared  with  last

year  were  reported  in  most  parts  of  the  District,  but  were  not  universal.  At  a

Washington  bank,  consumer  loans  outstanding  advanced  at  over  a  10  percent  annual

rate  between  April  and  July,  following  net  paydowns  in  the  first  part  of  the  year.

XII-4

Moreover,  an  Arizona  banker  reports  that  credit  card  usage  through  the  first  seven

months  of  the  year  rose  21  percent  from  the  comparable  period  last  year,  and

installment  credit  rose  by 6.6  percent  over  the  same period.

Many  respondents  attributed  the  general  decline  in  consumer  credit  volumes  to

the  new  tax  law,  which  eliminated  consumer  interest  deductions,  causing  increased

use  of  home  equity  loans  and  home  equity  lines  of  credit.  An  Oregon  bank  reports

that  credit  card  debt  has  grown  only  minimally,  and  auto  loans  have  been  flat,  while

the  use  of  home  equity  credit  lines  has  increased  by  17  percent  in  the  last  year.

There  is  little  evidence  that  consumers  are  drawing  down  savings  accounts  to

purchase  durable  goods.  One  large  California  bank  reports  that  its  passbook  savings

volume  has  advanced  significantly  since  December.  A  community  bank  in  the  San

Joaquin  Valley  also  reports  increases  in  savings  account  balances,  while  one  Arizona

bank  reports  that  its  savings  account  balances  are  up  15  percent.  However,

contradictory  evidence  comes  from  a  southern  California  Savings  and  Loan,  where

savings  inflows  have  been  weak  for  the last  seven months.

