FEDERAL  RESERVE  press  release 

For  Use at  4:30 p.m. 

December  16,  1988 

The  Federal Reserve Board and the  Federal  Open Market 

Committee  today released the  attached record  of  policy actions 

taken  by the  Federal  Open Market  Committee  at  its  meeting on 

November  1, 1988.  

Such records  for each meeting of  the  Committee  are made 

available  a few  days  after the next  regularly  scheduled meeting 

and  are published in the  Federal  Reserve  Bulletin and the  Board's 

Annual  Report.  The  summary descriptions  of  economic  and financial 

conditions  they contain are  based  solely on the  information that 

was  available  to the  Committee  at  the time  of the meeting.

Attachment

RECORD OF POLICY  ACTIONS OF  THE 
FEDERAL OPEN MARKET  COMMITTEE 

Meeting Held on  November  1, 1988 

1.  Domestic Policy Directive 

The  information reviewed  at  this meeting indicated that  the 

expansion in  economic  activity had moderated from the  vigorous  pace 

evident  earlier in  the year.  Private  domestic  final  demand grew  at  an 

appreciably slower  pace in  the third quarter than in  the  first  half  of 

the  year;  and other  recent  statistics,  including data  on  labor market 

activity, also suggested  some  slowing in  the  rate  of  economic  expansion.  

Information on  wage  and price developments  gave  no  clear  evidence  on 

balance of  any change  in  underlying  inflation trends.  

Total  nonfarm payroll employment  increased considerably  in  the 

third quarter,  but  the  gains  were  less  than those registered  in the 

first  half.  In August  and September,  hiring in  all major  sectors  except 

government  moderated, and employment  in manufacturing declined.  Despite 

this  broad-based slowing in  the  growth  of  private payrolls,  the  civilian 

unemployment  rate  fell  to  5.4  percent  in  September and has  remained in  a 

narrow  range  around 5-1/2  percent  since  early spring.  

Industrial  production increased  only slightly  on balance  in 

August  and  September after  a strong  surge  earlier in  the  summer.  Output 

of  business  equipment  continued to  advance fairly  rapidly while 

production of  consumer  goods  was  sluggish.  Total  industrial  capacity 

utilization declined  slightly  in  September but  was  still  more than  1/2 

percent  above  the  relatively high second-quarter level.

Overall  consumer  spending  in  constant  dollar terms  increased 

substantially on  average in  the third quarter,  as  outlays  for  services 

and nondurable  goods  strengthened while  purchases  of durables  were 

little  changed.  However,  retail  sales  weakened  in  August  and September, 

owing partly to  reduced  sales  of motor vehicles.  

Indicators  of  business  capital  spending in  the third quarter 

suggested a considerably  reduced rate  of expansion  compared with the 

first  half  of  the  year.  Growth  of  real  outlays  for business  equipment 

slowed  sharply,  as  investment  in  information-processing  equipment 

decelerated.  Nonresidential construction activity was  weak in the  first 

two months of  the quarter,  with oil  drilling and expenditures  on 

commercial  and industrial  structures  other than office  buildings 

contracting  further.  Inventory  investment  in the manufacturing and 

wholesale sectors  picked  up  in  July  and August,  but  stocks accumulated 

about  in  line  with the  growth of  sales.  Retail  inventories,  reflecting 

little  further  change  in  stocks  at  auto  dealers  after a sharp  rise  in 

the  second quarter,  increased much less  rapidly.  Housing  construction 

had been  flat  in  recent months;  the  third-quarter pace of  starts  of 

single-family homes was  unchanged  from that  of  the previous  quarter 

while multifamily  starts  edged  down.  

Preliminary data  for the  nominal  U.S. merchandise  trade  deficit 

in  August  showed  a larger  deficit  than  in  July.  However,  the  average 

for  July and August  was  slightly lower  than the  second-quarter rate  as 

exports  increased more than  imports.  Most  of  the  rise  in  exports  was  in 

nonagricultural  goods, particularly capital goods  and consumer  durables; 

increased imports  of  consumer goods  and  food  outweighed a slight

reduction  in the value  of  purchases  of imported oil.  Economic activity 

in the major foreign industrial  economies  appeared to have  rebounded 

somewhat  in  the  third quarter,  following a pronounced slackening in  the 

second quarter.  

Reflecting a decline  in gasoline prices  at  the refinery level, 

producer prices  of  finished goods registered a smaller  advance  in 

September than  in August;  however,  for the third  quarter as  a whole, 

these prices  rose more rapidly than during the  first  half  of  the year.  

At  the  crude materials level,  producer  food prices  continued to  rise 

sharply.  Consumer prices  increased  at  a somewhat  slower  rate  in 

September as  declines in  energy prices  outweighed the passthrough to the 

retail  level of  higher  wholesale  food prices.  Excluding food  and energy 

items,  consumer prices on a year-over-year basis  continued to rise  at 

about  the  4-1/2  percent  annual  rate  evident  since  late  1987.  Most 

measures of  labor costs  indicated  some  slowing in  the  rate  of  increase 

over  the  summer months, after a sharp upward movement  in the second  half 

of  1987  and early 1988.  

In the  foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of 

the  dollar  in terms  of the  other G-10  currencies  had declined  from 

its  high  level of  last  summer by the  time  of the  previous Committee 

meeting on September  20.  Following the  meeting, the dollar  initially 

fluctuated in  a narrow  range but  later  declined appreciably  in response 

to  indications of more moderate  U.S.  economic growth  and to  information 

suggesting  a slower  U.S. external  adjustment  than the markets  had 

anticipated earlier.

At  its meeting on  September  20,  the  Committee  adopted a 

directive  calling for  no  change  in the  degree  of  pressure on  reserve 

positions.  These reserve  conditions  were  expected to be  consistent  with 

growth of  M2  and M3  at  annual  rates  of  about  3 and  5 percent 

respectively  over the period  from August  to  December.  The members 

agreed that  somewhat  greater reserve  restraint would,  or  slightly  lesser 

reserve  restraint might,  be  acceptable depending on  indications of 

inflationary pressures, the  strength of the  business  expansion, the 

behavior  of the monetary aggregates,  and developments in  foreign 

exchange  and domestic  financial markets.  

Adjustment plus  seasonal borrowing  fluctuated over  a sizable 

range  during the  intermeeting period,  averaging about  $630  million in 

the  two  complete  reserve maintenance periods since  the  September 

meeting.  The  federal  funds  rate  rose  somewhat,  with  funds trading 

around 8-1/4  percent  and sometimes  higher over most  of  the  intermeeting 

period.  Most  other short-term interest  rates edged higher,  perhaps 

reflecting the  firmer  federal  funds  rate  as  well  as  increased  supplies 

of Treasury bills  and CDs.  Interest  rates  in  long-term debt markets 

declined a little  further  as  indications of more moderate economic 

expansion and weak energy prices apparently reduced concerns about 

inflation and buoyed expectations that  money market  conditions would  not 

be tightened substantially  further.  Lower bond yields  apparently 

contributed to higher  equity prices;  some broad  indexes  of  stock  prices 

rose about  3 percent  since the  September meeting.  

Expansion of M2  slowed  further  in  September,  and preliminary 

data  suggested that  growth  remained quite weak  in October  as  earlier

increases  in market  interest  rates  and opportunity  costs  continued to 

damp demands  for  liquid deposit  components.  By contrast,  after slow 

growth  in August  and September, M3  appeared to have  strengthened 

somewhat  in October,  in  association with  a resumption  in  growth of  bank 

credit.  After  registering relatively  strong  expansion in  June  and  July, 

M1  had increased only slightly on balance in  recent months,  with total 

transactions deposits  falling marginally.  

The  staff  projection prepared  for this meeting  suggested that 

growth  of the  nonfarm sector  of  the  economy in  the  current  quarter might 

be near the  reduced pace  of the  third quarter and that  expansion in  1989 

was  likely  to remain, on balance, well  below the  pace of  the  first  half 

of  1988.  The  effects of  the drought  would continue to  be  reflected  in 

an uneven  quarterly pattern of  growth of  GNP,  notably through the  first 

half of  next  year.  To the extent  that  expansion of  final  demand  at  a 

pace  that  could foster  higher inflation  was not  accommodated by monetary 

policy, pressures  would be generated in  financial markets that  would 

restrain domestic  spending.  The  staff projection, which  assumed a 

slightly restrictive  fiscal policy,  continued to  indicate  relatively 

sluggish growth of consumer  spending,  sharply reduced expansion of 

business  fixed investment  from the  pace  in the  first  half  of 1988,  and 

restrained housing activity.  As  in  earlier projections, the external 

sector  was  expected to contribute  importantly to  domestic economic 

growth.  The  staff now anticipated  some marginal  easing in  aggregate 

price  increases  in  1989,  in large part  because  recent  declines in  crude 

oil  prices  portended lower  energy prices  more  generally.  However,  any 

decline in inflation would  be  limited, largely because of  continuing

-6-

pressures  stemming from still  strong demands  pressing against  reduced 

margins of unutilized labor  and other production resources.  

In the Committee's  discussion of  the economic  situation  and 

outlook, members  welcomed  the apparent moderation in  the  expansion of 

economic  activity toward a pace  that  might prove to  be more  sustainable 

and consistent with progress  over time toward price  stability.  Con

tinuing expansion, but  at  a more moderate  pace than that  experienced  in 

the  first  half of 1988,  was  viewed  as  a reasonable  expectation, partly 

in  light  of  the monetary policy tightening that  already had been 

implemented this  year.  There was  no  evidence  of  emerging imbalances  in 

key sectors of  the economy that  might bring the  expansion to an end, 

although the  outlook remained clouded by  the  nation's outsized trade  and 

federal  budget  deficits and the  financial  problems or  debt  exposure  of a 

number of  depository institutions  and business  firms.  In  the view  of 

many of  the members,  the  risks  of  deviations  from  current  expectations 

continued to  be  in the direction of  greater inflationary pressures.  

Other members,  while  concerned about  the  potential  for  inflation, felt 

that  the  economy already appeared to be  on a track  consistent with  no 

pickup  in inflation and  perhaps some  improvement  next  year.  

In  the course  of the  Committee's discussion, members  noted that 

despite  signs of  some  slowing in  recent  months, the  expansion in 

business  activity  retained appreciable momentum as  evidenced, for 

example,  by order backlogs,  ongoing  strength in business  capital 

spending, and noteworthy improvement  in the  agricultural sector.  

Further  improvement  in the  nation's  trade  balance also  appeared  likely, 

and while  the  gains  might  be  more  limited  than in  recent  quarters, they

would  help to  sustain domestic manufacturing activity.  Consumer 

spending might be  supported to  some extent  by gains  in real  incomes 

stemming from reduced energy prices.  By most measures, business 

inventories appeared to be  relatively  lean and, assuming continued 

moderate growth in overall  final  demand,  further  inventory accumulation 

might provide a modest  fillip to  the  expansion over  the  year  ahead.  On 

the  other hand, members  also took  note  of  the  relatively  sluggish 

performance of retail  sales  recently, notably of  durable goods,  and the 

continuing weakness of  construction activity,  including housing.  A 

review of  local business  conditions  continued to  indicate an uneven 

pattern of  regional  activity, but  on balance  local developments  tended 

to confirm broader  indications of  further,  though  reduced, growth  in 

overall business activity.  

With regard  to the outlook  for inflation, a critical  issue  in 

the  view of  many members was  whether overall  demand  conditions in the 

economy would be consistent  with  containing or  reducing inflation.  A 

number  of  members expressed  concern that  underlying pressures  on 

resources  remained  strong and that  the  possibility of greater  inflation 

constituted the  major current  threat  to  sustained economic expansion.  

One  observed that  the uncertainties  in the  outlook  for  inflation were 

compounded by the  prospect that,  with production  resources  at  or  close 

to  full  capacity, even  small  differences  in  demand pressures  could have 

a disproportionate effect  on the  actual  rate  of inflation  next year.  

However,  some members  commented that,  on the  whole,  price and wage 

developments  were  more  favorable  than might  have  been anticipated at 

current  rates of  capacity utilization.  Recent  reports  from around the

nation suggested that  inflation  was not  worsening in regional markets, 

including parts  of the country where business  activity remained 

relatively robust.  Indeed, there were  indications  that  prices  of  some 

business products  previously in  short  supply  now were  showing some 

tendency to  level off,  and there was  little  or  no  evidence  of  faster 

increases  in  wages.  Moreover,  recent  developments  in  financial  markets 

suggested some  lessening of  inflationary expectations,  although the 

latter  remained volatile.  

At  its meeting  in  late  June,  the  Committee  reviewed the  basic 

policy objectives that  it had set  for  growth of the  monetary and debt 

aggregates  in  1988 and  it established tentative  objectives  for  expansion 

of  those  aggregates  in 1989.  For  the period  from the  fourth  quarter of 

1987  to  the  fourth  quarter of  1988,  the  Committee  reaffirmed the  ranges 

of  4 to  8 percent  set  in  February  for growth  of both M2  and M3.  The 

monitoring range  for  expansion of  total  domestic nonfinancial  debt  in 

1988  was  left  unchanged  from its  February  specification of  7 to  11 

percent.  For the year  to date, M2  had grown  at  an annual  rate  somewhat 

below,  and M3 at  a rate  somewhat  above,  the midpoints of their  annual 

ranges.  Expansion of total domestic  nonfinancial debt  appeared to  have 

moderated to  a pace marginally below the midpoint  of  its  range.  For 

1989  the  Committee  agreed on tentative  reductions  to  ranges  of  3 to  7 

percent  for  M2  and 3-1/2  to  7-1/2  percent  for M3.  The  monitoring range 

for  growth of total  domestic nonfinancial  debt  was  lowered to  6-1/2  to 

10-1/2  percent  for  1989.  It was  understood that  all the  ranges  for  next 

year  were provisional  and that  they would be  reviewed in February  1989 

in  the light  of  intervening developments.  With respect  to Ml,  the

Committee  reaffirmed in  June  its  earlier decision not  to  set  a specific 

target  for growth in  1988  and  it  also  decided not  to  establish a 

tentative  range  for  1989.  

In the  Committee's discussion  of  policy  implementation for  the 

period immediately ahead, the members generally agreed that  the  current 

relatively  balanced performance  of  the  economy and the  uncertainties 

surrounding the  outlook  argued  for  an  unchanged policy at  this  point.  

Some  commented that  the apparent  strength  of  underlying inflationary 

pressures might  require further monetary restraint  later, but  for  now 

they  favored or  could accept  a steady policy  course.  Other members  were 

more  persuaded that,  in  the  context  of  the recent  evidence of  slower 

economic growth, monetary policy  already appeared to be  on  a course  that 

would  promote progress  in  reducing  inflation.  From the  perspective  of 

the  growth of  the  monetary aggregates  and reserves  as  well  as  interest 

rates  developments, monetary policy had been  fairly  restrictive  for  some 

months  and further restraint  needed to  be  approached with  some  caution.  

At  the  same  time, members  stressed  the  continuing need to  sustain the 

System's  commitment  to  its  long-run objective  of  controlling inflation, 

including the  desirability of  making  clear that  the current  rate  of 

inflation was  unacceptable.  

In  the  course  of  the  Committee's  discussion, the members  took 

account of  a staff  analysis  which  concluded  that  the maintenance of 

unchanged reserve conditions  was  likely  to  be  associated with  relatively 

slow monetary growth over the  balance  of  the  year.  Some  pickup  in  the 

growth of  M2  and M3  was  anticipated  from  the  very sluggish performance 

of  September  and October, but  further  adjustments of  asset  portfolios to

-10-

previous  increases  in  interest  rates  and opportunity  costs  were  likely 

to limit  the  rise.  In addition, reductions  in  compensating balances  in 

response  to  earlier increases  in market  interest  rates  were  expected to 

be more  pronounced late  in  the  year,  though such  adjustments  would have 

their major impact  on Ml  growth.  Concurrently, expansion of M3  and to  a 

lesser  degree M2 might  be  buttressed to  some  extent  as  banks  undertook 

to  secure  funds  to  underwrite  a perhaps  substantial  portion of  the 

initial  cash needed to  finance the  recent  surge  in merger  and buyout 

activities.  Although members observed that  any easing of  reserve 

conditions  to  stimulate monetary growth would not  be  desirable at  this 

point,  some  indicated that  they would become  increasingly concerned  if 

very weak monetary growth were  to  persist  in the  context  of  sluggish 

expansion in  economic  activity.  

With regard to  possible  adjustments  in  the  degree of  reserve 

pressure  in  the  intermeeting period, a majority of  the members believed 

that  operations  should be  adjusted more  readily toward  further 

tightening than toward any easing.  Some  indicated that  they viewed  the 

incorporation of  such an  understanding as  a key element of  an  acceptable 

directive, given  their assessment  of  the  inflationary risks  in  the 

economic  outlook.  Most  of  the  other members  indicated that  they could 

accept  such  a directive, although they were  less  inclined than  they had 

been previously to  bias it  toward  further  restraint;  in this  view, the 

direction of  any potential adjustment  in  policy implementation was  less 

certain than earlier,  given the  recent  performance of  the  economy and 

behavior  of  the monetary aggregates.  One member  felt  that  the  risks  of 

some  further weakness  in  the  economy  were  sufficiently  strong that  a

-11-

continued bias  toward possible tightening  during the  intermeeting period 

was  not acceptable.  

At  the  conclusion of the  Committee's  discussion, all but  one 

member  indicated that  they favored or  could accept  a directive that 

called for maintaining the  current  degree  of  pressure on reserve  con

ditions  and that  provided  for remaining  especially alert  to potential 

developments  that  might  require  some  firming during the intermeeting 

period.  Accordingly, somewhat  greater reserve  restraint  would be 

acceptable,  or  slightly lesser  reserve  restraint might  be acceptable, 

over  the  intermeeting period depending on indications  of  inflationary 

pressures,  the  strength of  the business expansion, the  behavior  of the 

monetary aggregates,  and developments  in  foreign exchange and domestic 

financial markets.  The  reserve  conditions  contemplated by the  Committee 

were  expected to  be consistent  with growth of M2 and M3 at  annual  rates 

of  around 2-1/2  percent and  6 percent  respectively over the  three-month 

period  from  September to December.  The  intermeeting  range  for the 

federal  funds  rate,  which provides  one  mechanism for  initiating 

consultation of the Committee when  its boundaries are  persistently 

exceeded, was  left  unchanged at  6 to  10  percent.  

At  the conclusion  of the  meeting, the  following  domestic policy 

directive  was  issued to the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New York: 

The  information  reviewed at  this  meeting indicates 

that  the  expansion in  economic activity has moderated 
from the  vigorous pace  earlier in  the  year.  Total 
nonfarm payroll  employment  grew considerably in  the 
third quarter but  the  gains  were  less  than those 
registered in the  first  half  of  the  year and employment 
in manufacturing declined in  August  and September.  The 
civilian unemployment  rate  fell to  5.4  percent  in 
September,  remaining in the narrow  range that  has 
prevailed  since  early  spring.  Industrial production 
advanced only  slightly on balance  in August  and

-12-

September  after  a sharp  increase  in  July,  while  housing 
construction  has been  flat  in  recent months.  Consumer 
spending  increased  substantially on  average  in  the 
third quarter but  apparently slowed in  recent months.  
Indicators  of business  capital  spending  suggest 
considerably  slower  expansion in  the  third quarter, 
following very  rapid  growth in  the  first  half  of  the 
year.  Preliminary data  for  the  nominal U.S.  
merchandise trade  deficit  in  August  showed a greater 
deficit  than in  July,  but  the  average  for  July-August 
was  slightly less  than the  second-quarter rate.  The 
latest  information on  prices  and wages  suggests  little 
if  any change  from recent  trends.  

Interest  rates  in  long-term debt  markets  have 
declined a little  further  since the  Committee meeting 
on  September 20,  while  rates  in  short-term markets  have 
edged higher.  The  trade-weighted foreign  exchange 
value  of  the  dollar  in terms  of  the  other G-10 
currencies  declined appreciably  over the  intermeeting 
period  from the high  level of  last  summer.  

E::pansion of  M2  has  slowed  considerably in  recent 

months;  growth of  M3  moderated in August  and September 
but  appears to  have  strengthened somewhat  in October.  
Thus  far  this  year, M2  has  grown at  a rate  somewhat 
below, and M3  at  a rate  somewhat  above,  the  midpoint  of 
the ranges  established by the  Committee  for  1988.  M1 
has  increased only slightly on  balance  in  recent months 
after  registering  relatively strong  growth  in  June  and 
July.  Expansion of  total  domestic nonfinancial  debt 
for  the  year thus  far  appears  to  be  at  a pace  somewhat 
below that  in  1987.  

The  Federal Open Market  Committee  seeks  monetary 

and  financial  conditions  that  will  foster price 
stability  over time,  promote growth  in  output  on a 
sustainable  basis,  and contribute  to  an  improved 
pattern  of  international transactions.  In  furtherance 
of  these  objectives, the  Committee  at  its  meeting  in 
late  June  reaffirmed the  ranges  it  had established in 
February for  growth of  4 to  8 percent  for  both M2  and 
M3,  measured  from the  fourth  quarter of  1987  to  the 
fourth  quarter of  1988.  The  monitoring range  for 
growth of  total  domestic  nonfinancial debt  was  also 
maintained at  7 to  11  percent  for  the  year.  

For  1989,  the  Committee  agreed on  tentative  ranges 

for monetary growth, measured from the  fourth quarter 
of  1988  to  the  fourth  quarter of  1989,  of  3 to  7 
percent  for M2  and 3-1/2  to  7-1/2  percent  for M3.  The 
Committee  set the  associated monitoring  range  for

-13-

growth  of total  domestic nonfinancial debt  at  6-1/2  to 
10-1/2 percent.  It was  understood that  all  these 
ranges were  provisional  and that  they would be  reviewed 
in early 1989  in the  light  of  intervening developments.  

With  respect  to M1,  the  Committee  reaffirmed its 
decision  in February  not  to establish  a specific target 
for  1988  and  also  decided not  to  set  a tentative  range 
for  1989.  The behavior  of this aggregate  will  continue 
to be  evaluated in the  light  of  movements in  its 
velocity, developments  in the economy  and financial 
markets,  and the  nature  of emerging price pressures.  

In  the  implementation of policy  for  the  immediate 
future,  the Committee  seeks  to maintain the  existing 
degree  of pressure  on reserve positions.  Taking 
account  of  indications of  inflationary pressures,  the 
strength of  the business  expansion, the  behavior  of  the 
monetary aggregates,  and  developments  in  foreign 
exchange and domestic  financial markets,  somewhat 
greater reserve  restraint  would, or  slightly lesser 
reserve  restraint  might, be  acceptable  in the 
intermeeting period.  The  contemplated reserve 
conditions  are  expected to be  consistent with  growth of 
M2 and M3 over the period  from  September through 
December at  annual  rates  of  about  2-1/2  and 6 percent, 
respectively.  The  Chairman may call  for  Committee 
consultation  if  it appears  to  the  Manager for  Domestic 
Operations that  reserve  conditions  during the  period 
before  the  next  meeting are  likely to be  associated 
with a federal  funds  rate persistently  outside a range 
of  6 to  10  percent.  

Votes  for this  action:  Messrs. Greenspan, 

Corrigan, Angell, Black, Forrestal,  Heller, 
Hoskins,  Johnson, Kelley, LaWare,  and Parry.  
Vote  against this  action:  Ms.  Seger.  

Ms. Seger  indicated that while  an unchanged policy was acceptable 

to  her  at  this  point,  she did  not want  to bias  the  directive  toward 

potential tightening.  In her view current  indications  of slower  economic 

growth and the  lagged effects  of  earlier policy  tightening actions pointed 

to  relatively  slow expansion  and reduced inflationary pressures over  the 

year ahead.  In these  circumstances,  she  would not  want  to  react more 

promptly or  vigorously to  indications  of greater strength or price

-14-

pressures  in the  economy, which might  well prove  to be  temporary, than to 

evidence  of a weakening economy.  

In the  period following the Committee meeting on November 1, it 

became  increasingly evident  in  the  implementation of policy that  depository 

institutions  had  reduced their  demands  on the  discount  window;  in this 

period, a significantly  lower level  of  adjustment  plus  seasonal borrowing 

was being associated with a slightly higher  federal  funds  rate than  had 

been  anticipated at  the  time of  the  meeting.  To take account  of this 

change  in  behavior, but  also  in  light  of  recent  information suggesting  that 

the  economic expansion retained  considerable strength, the Manager  for 

Domestic  Operations adjusted the  reserve paths  to  incorporate a lower level 

of  borrowing, with the expectation that  federal  funds  would  continue to 

trade  in the  slightly higher  range that  had prevailed recently.  This 

adjustment  in open market  operations  was discussed with  the Committee on 

November  22,  1988.  The members  agreed that  the  factors relating  to  the 

apparent  change  in the  relationship between borrowing and the  federal  funds 

rate,  and the broader  implications  for  the  conduct  of  open market 

operations, would be  reviewed further  at  the December meeting.  

2.  Authorization  for Domestic  Open Market  Operations 

Effective November  2, 1988,  the Committee  approved a temporary 

increase  of $4 billion, to  $10  billion,  in the  limit  between  Committee 

meetings on  changes  in  System Account  holdings  of  U.S.  government  and 

federal  agency securities  that  is  specified  in paragraph  1(a)  of  the 

Authorization  for Domestic Open Market Operations.  The  increase was 

effective  for  the  intermeeting period ending  with the  close  of business  on 

December 14,  1988.

-15-

Votes  for  this  action:  Messrs.  Greenspan, 
Corrigan,  Angell,  Black, Forrestal,  Heller, Hoskins, 
Johnson,  Kelley, LaWare, Parry,  and Ms.  Seger.  
Votes  against  this  action:  None.  

This  action  was  taken on the  recommendation of  the Manager  for 

Domestic  Operations.  The Manager had advised  that the  usual  leeway  of 

$6 billion  for  changes  in  System Account  holdings  would probably  not be 

sufficient  over  the  intermeeting  period because  of  seasonal  increases  in 

currency in  circulation  and  in  required reserves.  

3.  Change  in  Terms  of  Certain Members  to  Calendar-Year Basis 

The  Committee  amended its  "Rules  of  Organization" to  advance 

from March 1 to  January 1 of  each year the  start  of the  terms  of  office 

of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank presidents  who serve  one-year terms  as 

Committee  members or  alternate members.  The  change will  be  effective 

starting with the  calendar  year  1990.  Because  the  Committee's 

objectives  for monetary  growth  are established  on  a calendar-year basis, 

the  Committee  believed that  it  would be  appropriate to  have  all the 

members responsible  for  carrying  out  those  objectives during  the  year 

participate  in  the  vote to  establish them at  the start  of  the  year.  The 

Committee  emphasized  that  this  change  was  essentially procedural  in 

nature,  given the  continuity  of  its  decision-making process.  The  Full 

Employment  and Balanced  Growth Act  of  1978  requires  that the Committee's 

monetary growth objectives  for  the  calendar year be  transmitted to 

Congress  by February  20  of  each year.  

Votes  for  this  action:  Messrs.  Greenspan, 

Corrigan, Angell,  Black,  Forrestal, Heller, 
Hoskins,  Johnson,  Kelley, LaWare,  Parry, and 
Ms. Seger.  Votes  against  this  action:  None.

