SUMMARY OF  COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICT

OCTOBER  1988

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY................................................................. 

First District  - Boston.................................................. 

Second District  - New York.............................................. 

i

I-

II-1

Third District  - Philadelphia........................................... 

III-1

Fourth District - Cleveland............................................. 

IV-1

Fifth District  - Richmond............................................... 

V-1

Sixth District - Atlanta................................................ 

VI-1

Seventh District - Chicago...............................................  VII-1

Eighth District  - St. Louis.............................................  VIII-1

Ninth District  - Minneapolis............................................ 

IX-1

Tenth District  - Kansas  City............................................ 

X-1

Eleventh District  - Dallas.............................................. 

XI-1

Twelfth District  - San Francisco........................................  XII-1

SUMMARY*

Most  districts  report continuing  growth  in  their  regional  economies.  New

York,  Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond,  Chicago,  and San Francisco  all  report

further  expansion  over  the past six weeks.  Four districts  --Atlanta, St.  Louis,

Kansas  City, and Dallas  -- report  slow or  sluggish growth.  Boston represents

general  business  sentiment  as  cautious,  and Minneapolis says  business  conditions

have held  steady.

Though conditions  in agriculture vary across  districts,  it  now appears

that,  in  the aggregate, the drought will have a much smaller impact  on  farm

income than was  originally thought.  The  slump  in  oil prices  has  depressed the

energy  industry in  the Dallas  district,  but  the  effect  has  been minimal

elsewhere.  Construction of  residential dwellings,  especially multifamily

structures,  is  slow and  homebuilders are preparing  for further  declines;

nonresidential  construction, though, remains healthy.  The manufacturing sector

continues  to expand,  bolstered by a growing demand for  exports.  The outlook

calls  for  caution and  some easing  in  activity, however.  Retail trade  remains

sluggish  in  most parts  of  the  country,  and store  operators  are anticipating  only

modest  gains  in  the  fourth quarter.  In  the financial  sector, demand for

consumer  loans  remains strong,  led  by home equity borrowing.  Business  lending

is  holding up  as  well.

AGRICULTURE

Agricultural conditions vary  considerably by  area.  In  the aggregate,

however,  it  appears that  the  impact on  farm income  of  any reduction in  yield

Prepared at  the  Federal Reserve Bank  of  Philadelphia using
information gathered prior to  October  11,  1988.

due to  the  drought will  be largely  offset by higher  crop  prices  in  general and

federal  aid to  affected farmers  in  particular.  And, while  livestock producers'

profits  are being  squeezed  by rising  feed costs,  livestock  prices  are heading up

as well,  which will allow producers  to  pass  on  some  of  the increased  costs.

Kansas City reports  that  some  cattle  ranchers  are maintaining herds  through the

winter  in  anticipation of  higher prices  in  the  spring. Feedlot operators,  on  the

other  hand, are seeing  profits eaten away.

MINING AND ENERGY

Dallas reports  significant weakness  in oil  and gas  drilling and  indicates

that  the rig  count  in  the Eleventh District has dropped by  14  percent  since May.

The slump  has had  little  noticeable effect  in  other regions,  however.  While the

rig count  in  the Atlanta District  is  down 7 percent from a year ago,  operators

of  offshore  installations  say they would  expand production  if  they could  find

qualified  labor.  In  the  San Francisco District,  drillers are waiting to  see  if

prices  rebound before they  change plans,  and refiners  and retailers  are enjoying

wider profit  margins as  a result  of  the  drop  in  the wholesale price of  oil.

Minneapolis reports  that gold-mining operations  in Montana have expanded in

the last  year and that  the stage may be  set  for  expansion in  copper mining as

well.  As  a result, mine employment  may be headed  for  its highest  level  in

that  district  since  1983.

CONSTRUCTION

All districts  except Kansas City and Dallas  report a slowing or weakening

in residential  construction and real  estate;  St.  Louis  and Atlanta note

softening  house prices  as  well.  Overall, multifamily residential construction

is  weaker than  single-family construction.  Several districts  indicate  that

homebuilders expect mortgage rates  to  head upward  and are therefore bracing for

further  slowing.  Nonresidential  construction, however,  remains healthy in most

areas.  Chicago specifically mentions public works projects  as being  strong.

MANUFACTURING

Virtually every district  indicates  continuing  strength or expansion  in the

industrial  sector.  Many cite rising  exports as  a primary source of demand  for

manufactured goods;  Cleveland  indicates  that  domestic production  is displacing

imports  in  some  cases.  The expansion  in manufacturing spreads across  a wide

range of  industries.  Among the  strongest  are chemicals,  paper and pulp, primary

metals  (specifically steel),  fabricated metals,  automobiles and trucks,

electrical  and electronic machinery, and nonelectrical machinery.  Weaker

industries  include textiles and  apparel,  equipment  related to  oil  and gas

drilling, and defense-related operations.

Despite  the  continued growth  in manufacturing and the expansion of  factory

employment, wage pressures  do not  appear  to  be mounting  at this  time.  Price

movements vary by  region and  industry, but  are generally moderate.

Plans  for  increased capital  spending by manufacturers  are reported by

several districts.  In the  New York District, major manufacturers of  steel,

automobiles, and electronic equipment have announced plans  to  establish new

plants  or enhance existing operations.  Dallas  indicates  that  chemical producers

are  straining capacity and are planning expansion.  In  the Philadelphia

District, over  40 percent  of the  respondents  to  the  monthly Business Outlook

Survey say they plan to spend more  on  plant and equipment  in  the next  six

months.

Despite the current boom  in the  sector,  manufacturers are becoming  less

optimistic about  coming months.  Several districts  say a slight  slowdown  became

evident in  late  summer  and that manufacturers, foreseeing  a leveling off  of

activity through the first  half of  1989,  have  become very cautious.  For the

second month  in  a row,  manufacturers in  the Richmond District are  anticipating a

drop  in  business  activity from current levels  over  the next six months.

RETAIL TRADE

Although several districts  report  a recent  pickup  in  sales  of  general

merchandise, retail  business  can  accurately be  described as  weak  or  slow  in most

areas.  Women's  apparel is  mentioned by  several districts as  a particularly weak

line.  Philadelphia says  a slight pickup has  occurred recently in  higher priced

merchandise.

Despite continued sluggishness  in sales,  retail  inventories  at  stores  in

most districts  are at  acceptable,  lean  levels  thanks  to strict monitoring and

tight  ordering policies.  And, although sales  remain  low relative to  plan,

Boston, Philadelphia, and San Francisco all  report  difficulty  in  hiring

qualified,  in-store help and note some  upward pressure on  wages as  a result.

Retail  prices are mixed.  Boston reports that  prices  of  lower-end

merchandise are fairly stable, but  that  prices of  higher-end items  are rising

fairly  quickly.  Minneapolis says price  increases have been moderate and  that

some  retailers  in  that  region have  switched  to  domestic  suppliers  as  the prices

of  imported goods  have  gone up.

Sales  of  cars  and, especially, of  trucks  are reported to  be  strong  in  most

districts.  Cleveland  reports slower  sales  stemming  from a small  inventory of

1988  leftovers  and  the  reluctance of  dealers  to make price concessions  to  clear

them out.  In St.  Louis,  sales have  leveled  off  after seven months  of  strong

gains.

The outlook for  retail  sales  can  be  summed up  in  one word:  cautious.  Store

officials'  forecasts for the  fourth quarter  range  from "moderate" to  "slightly

improved."  No one,  however, is  predicting a boom  in  holiday sales  and most are

likely to  continue  their  policies  of  tight  inventory management.

v

FINANCE

Business  loan volume  is growing or  stable  in most districts, while  consumer

loan  demand is generally described  as  strong.  Mortgage  lending,  however, has

tapered off.  Home  equity loans,  on the other hand, are reported to  be strong  by

New York  and Richmond.  Philadelphia notes  that  some  bankers are  concerned about

funding the  growth in loans  and expect  to have  to  raise interest  rates on

deposits to  attract  funds.

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

Caution characterizes business  sentiment  in the First District.

Residential  real  estate  sales have  slowed compared with a year  ago.  In

contrast, manufacturers' sales  are well  above year-earlier  levels,  but over

one-third of  those  contacted have  experienced softer demand since July or

August.  While manufacturers indicate that  upward pressure on materials

prices has  eased, most  contacts report  reduced  constraint on their own

prices.  For most  First District retailers,  sales  fell  short of

expectations in  September.  Retailers also  expressed  concern with rising

labor costs  and  selected wholesale price  increases.

Retail

Sales were up  slightly or  flat  in September  according to  most

retail  reports.  One  exception was building supplies;  demand  recovered

"nicely" after  a dismal  period attributed  to  the  summer's heat.  Among

general merchandisers, women's  sportswear  continues  to be  the weakest

line.  Back-to-school purchases  also  did not measure up  to  expectations.

Despite disappointing  sales,  inventories  are not  out  of line.

All  contacts mentioned rising wages  and difficulty hiring  in-store

help, but  the  price picture was mixed.  Prices are  reportedly stable at  the

lower end  of the market  but are  rising noticeably for higher-end

merchandise.  For  example,  the  cost of basic  apparel is rising  5 percent,

while  high-fashion women's  clothing  is up  10  to  15  percent.  Discounters

are  finding  low-cost merchandise in  third-world  countries whose  currencies

have not  appreciated against  the dollar.

Flat  sales,  price-cutting  promotions,  and rising  costs  are  all

cutting  into  profits.  Nevertheless,  capital  spending plans  remain

"ambitious."  For  several merchants, however,  this spending  is  aimed at

increasing  efficiency rather  than expansion.  Some  contacts with

idiosyncratic  explanations  for  their  recent poor  showing are quite

optimistic  about  the  remainder  of  the year;  others  are  less  upbeat.

Manufacturing

First  District manufacturers report  that  sales and orders  are

generally 10  to  25  percent above  last year's  levels;  profits - when

mentioned - have gained  even more.  Manufacturers say demand is  well

dispersed across  a range of  industries  and  customer  groups.  As  exceptions,

contacts mentioned  that defense-related and  consumer  goods were  relatively

weak.  In  addition, some  firms  that  had experienced several  quarters  of

accelerating gains  in  sales  and orders now report  that  the  trend  flattened

late  this  summer.

Most  First District manufacturers believe  that  materials price

increases have  leveled off.  Although one  firm mentioned  rumors  of  an

additional  steel  price  increase  in November,  others  suggest  that  steel  and

food  prices have peaked.  Contacts pointed  out  that  new capacity will  curb

price rises  for  computer  chips,  paper,  and chemicals,  while the  strong

dollar reduced  the price  of  imported  inputs  during  the  third  quarter.  By

contrast,  most  firms  seemed less  reluctant  than in previous  quarters  to

raise  their  own prices.  The  3 to  5 percent  increases mentioned more than

offset most  firms'  rising materials  costs.  In  explaining their pricing

actions,  respondents mentioned a decline  in discounting, competitors' price

changes  and  their  own capacity  constraints.

Manufacturing contacts  indicate  that  employment  levels  are

generally rising,  but  in  contrast to  retailers,  few  found labor markets

tight  or wage pressures  mounting.  While  inventories  are  considered  a bit

high, they  are not  seen as worrisome.  In most  cases,  capital  spending

continues  at  last year's  pace, with productivity increases  and  expansion

the primary goals.

Half  the  respondents  expect  a recession or significant  slowdown

within the next  18  months.  The others  see  favorable  prospects  for

themselves  and the  economy.  Even among  the  optimistic, however, caution

prevails.  For  example, one  corporate  economist  is  concerned that  economic

activity may be  less  robust  than widely believed  because  the  prolonged fall

in  computer prices  is  distorting measured growth in "real"  investment  and

GNP.  Another  respondent  is "nervous" that  talk of  recession will  prove

self-fulfilling.  A third who  sees no  evidence of  recession has

nevertheless counseled his management to  "tread water."  As  one

manufacturer who usually describes himself as  "cautiously optimistic" put

it, "Now I'm just  plain cautious."

Residential Real Estate

Some  residential  realtors in  the  First District  say activity has

slowed recently;  others,  with an earlier  summer  sales peak, noted a

slowdown in August  and  moderate  comeback in  the past  few weeks.  Most

report  that business  is slower now than a year  earlier.  This weakness  is

attributable to  cautious buyers, not  to  a lack of  inventory.  More

expensive homes  are  generally selling better  than less  expensive ones, and

houses are  selling better  than condominiums.  Half the  realtors  surveyed

foresee healthy activity  through year-end;  the  rest  think sales will  fall.

II-1

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

The Second District economy remains generally healthy and  registered some

further modest  expansion since the last  report.  The percentage of purchasing

managers who  reported improved  business conditions increased and  leasing activity in

the District's  office markets continued at  a moderate pace.  Retail sales were

sluggish during August but  spending picked up  somewhat  in September.  Activity among

homebuilders has  generally been slow though there continue to be some areas of

strength.  Small  and medium-sized banks  report  strong demand for  home equity loans.

Consumer  Spending

District retail  sales  remained sluggish  in August when a prolonged heat

wave continued  in many areas.  Spending picked  up somewhat  in September though the

extent  of  the  improvement  varied.  Thus far,  the  sales results  for the new fall

fashions  in women's apparel have  been mixed.  Items cited as in  stronger demand were

children's  back-to-school clothes, athletic apparel,  electronics and toys.

During August  sales at  District retailers whom we contact declined from a

year  earlier by from 0.5 percent to  5.5  percent,  results which were definitely below

plan.  With the  unusual heat,  the main items in  strong demand were air conditioners

and fans.  September  brought a general improvement  in  sales with over-the-year

changes ranging from -2.0  percent to +10.0 percent.  For the most part, sales

remained  somewhat  below plan but retailers  are hopeful that year-to-year gains will

increase as the holiday season nears.  Despite  lower-than-expected  sales,

inventories  are generally at  satisfactory  levels  and actually below plan at  some

retail  chains as  a result  of  strict monitoring.

Business Activity

Some  further  expansion in the District's business activity occurred  in

recent  weeks.  During September  the percentage of purchasing managers in both

II-2

Rochester and Buffalo who reported  improved conditions increased--in Rochester to

the highest level  since March.  Rochester, New York's  leading manufacturing export

center,  is  benefitting greatly from the dollar's relative weakness with its average

factory workweek climbing to a record 45.4 hours at  one point this year.  Major

exporters  there include Eastman Kodak,  Xerox and Bausch & Lomb.

Plans for  several  new projects  in  the District were recently announced.

Port Chester,  N.Y. officials signed an agreement for a $200 million harbor

redevelopment which will include condominium homes, a yacht club, boat  slips,  a

restaurant and commercial-retail space.  In another attempt to reclaim a waterfront,

Buffalo officials approved a $63  million plan which will  include shops, offices, a

hotel and a lakefront park.  Since one of the developers of this plan was involved

in the  restoration of the Boston, Baltimore, and New York City waterfronts, Buffalo

is hopeful that  its project will  also prove to be a popular  tourist attraction.  In

the manufacturing sector,  Bethlehem Steel  unveiled plans to  spend some $45 million

over  the next few years to enhance its  three remaining operations in the Buffalo

area.  This follows announcements made earlier  that General Motors will  invest $80

million to build a new series of  hi-tech engines beginning this fall and that

Motorola will  build a new plant  in that  area as well.

Residential Construction and Real Estate

Activity  among District homebuilders has generally been slow in recent

weeks  though  there continues to be  some strength in  upstate New York.  Sluggishness

in the  resale market was cited as a major deterrent.  Potential new homebuyers have

reportedly not  reduced asking prices  sufficiently to  sell  their current dwellings,

and a substantial  inventory of  existing homes  for  sale has developed.  Higher

mortgage  rates and the  satisfaction of  pent-up demand during the past few years were

also mentioned as contributing to the current slowdown  in residential construction.

Few observers  anticipate improvement  in the near  future.

Leasing activity in the District's office market continued at a moderate

pace  in recent weeks.  Additional leases were  signed for extensive space in  several

II-3

of the commercial buildings under  construction on the developing west  side of

Manhattan and some renewed activity took place in  lower  Manhattan as well.  Long

Island continues to have one of the lowest office vacancy rates in the suburban

U.S.,  due  in part to temporary moratoriums placed by  some communities on new

buildings  in recent  years.  Realtors report a turnaround in Westchester County's

office market with increased demand and virtually no new supply resulting  in lower

vacancy rates and  increased  rentals.

Financial  Developments

Based on a survey of small  and medium-sized banks in the Second District,

demand for  home equity loans  remains strong.  Some officers stated that demand for

home equity  loans has never  been greater,  though others reported  that demand is  not

quite as high as during  the introductory period.  Most expected demand will rise

through early 1989 and especially during the upcoming holiday season.  Approximately

half of  the banks in the survey indicated that they were aggressively marketing home

equity  loans at the present time.  Because most home equity loans have adjustable

interest rates, a popular marketing feature  is  a low cap on potential interest  rate

increases.  Even at  those banks without a promotion campaign, home equity loans

comprise a large and growing  share of total consumer  lending.  Home equity credit is

most  commonly  used  to  defray  expenses  related  to  home  improvement  and  college  costs,

as well as  for debt consolidation.  A number of bankers noted that borrowers using

home equity credit for debt consolidation usually did so  for  the tax advantage, not

because they felt pressed to reschedule overwhelming debt.  However,  few banks

actually inquire about the purpose of  the loan in  the credit screening process.  The

officers believed that prudence by borrowers and strict credit  standards have thus

far  resulted  in very low delinquency rates  for  home equity loans.  Many commented

that home equity loans have by far  the lowest delinquency rates of any consumer  loan

on  their  bank's portfolio.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Moderate expansion in  the Third District economy  is  continuing  in October,

according to  indications  from the manufacturing and finance sectors,  and there

are some  signs  that the consumer  sector  is  regaining momentum.  Manufacturers

report  ongoing improvement  in  business  is  boosting  both current shipments  and

order backlogs.  Retailers  saw a slight pickup  in sales  during September that

has  continued  into October.  Bankers note  strength in  business  loan  demand

carrying  over  from the  summer.  They also say personal loan  growth is

accelerating modestly as  credit  card outstandings  are beginning  to  rise,  adding

to already healthy demand  for other types  of personal  loans.

Views of the  future  for the Third District  economy are mostly positive.

Manufacturers generally foresee further gains, although at  a somewhat more

modest pace than  in recent months.  Confidence among  retailers  is  rising

slightly  in response to  the  current  improvement  in  sales  and they are raising

their  forecasts  for  the fourth quarter.  Bankers expect more growth in  business

and consumer  lending through the fourth quarter  but  they anticipate further

moderation in  the rate at which real estate  lending  is  increasing.

MANUFACTURING

Area manufacturers are reporting the ninth  consecutive month of rising

output  in  October,  according to  the Business  Outlook Survey.  Nearly 32  percent

of  the firms participating  in  the survey say business  has picked up  from

September levels  while only 5 percent note a drop.  Both the durable and

nondurable  goods  sectors are  sharing  in  this moderate growth.

III-2

Nearly all measures  of  industrial activity are  showing some improvement  in

October.  New orders  and shipments are up  at over  40 percent of  the plants  in

this month's  survey, and order backlogs are higher at  one-fourth of  the  firms.

While delivery times remain unchanged for most  local  companies,  15  percent note

longer  lags on orders  in October versus  September.  Employment also shows

continuing  strength:  26  percent of the industrial  establishments covered by the

October survey are adding workers, and  19  percent have extended working  hours.

Price increases  remain a feature of the area's industrial  expansion.  Over

half  of the  survey respondents are paying more for  inputs  in  October than they

did  in  September, and nearly one-fourth have raised the prices  of their own

products.  While expectations  of further price  increases  predominate among

survey respondents,  the percentage anticipating  further hikes has moderated

somewhat from surveys  taken during the summer.

In  their  overall assessment of  the  near future,  survey participants  foresee

modest growth;  30  percent expect further  increases  in  business over the next  six

months  while  19  percent anticipate a slowdown.  On balance,  responses to  the

survey  indicate moderate advances  in new  orders and shipments  over  the winter,

and marginal gains  in  employment.  With 41  percent of the  companies  polled in

October planning to  boost outlays  for  plant and equipment, capital spending

should  pick up as  well.

RETAIL

Reports from Third District  retailers  in early October  indicate that

consumer buying  has picked up  slightly in recent  weeks, and more stores  are

making year-over-year gains  than was the case during the summer.  While this

growth  in  sales  is noted  in most  product lines,  there are  indications  that

upscale stores  are doing somewhat better  than discount and mid-market retailers.

III-3

Store officials  continue to note that  labor  shortages are hindering  staffing

efforts  and forcing them to  bid up  wages.

Merchants are raising their sights  a bit for  fall  and winter  sales.  While

most store officials  expect real sales  for  the fourth  quarter to just match or

slightly exceed results in  the same period  last year,  this  forecast  represents  a

modest  increase in  confidence compared to  earlier expectations.  However,

retailers  do  expect promotion efforts and discounting to  accelerate as  the

Christmas  shopping  season  approaches.

FINANCE

Total  loan volume at  major Third District  banks  in  late  September was  about

13  percent above the year-ago  level, and  bankers  contacted in  early October  said

this rate of  increase was being maintained.  Commercial  and industrial  loan

demand was healthy, according to  bank  lending officers;  they report  stepped-up

borrowing  by regular customers  for  working capital needs and  for  investment  in

plant and equipment.

Consumer lending, which accelerated during the summer,  is  still moving  up,

according  to bankers.  Demand for personal  installment  and auto loans  continues

to  grow, and several large banks  indicate  that  credit card outstandings are

increasing after holding steady  for  the past  two  or  three quarters.

The pace of  growth  in real estate  lending, while still healthy, continues

to  taper  off.  Bankers note a decrease  in  loan  requests  from developers engaged

in  speculative  projects.

Third District  bankers  expect loan  demand to  continue  to  grow at  around  its

current pace at  least  through the  end of  the year.  Some  express  concern about

funding this  growth  in assets;  while most  contacts  are satisfied with deposit

growth at  this  time, several expect  they will have  to  increase  interest  rates  on

deposits  soon  in order to attract retail  funds  to match growing  loan demand.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT  - CLEVELAND

Summary

Fourth District  economic conditions have  changed very  little  since  the

last  report.  Manufacturing output continues  to  expand at  capacity rates,

especially in  durable goods  sectors.  New orders  are  strong and  inventories

are  relatively low.  Unemployment rates  in many parts of  the  District are  at

or below  the national  level,  while factory workers earnings  are  stable.

Retail  and auto  sales  remain  slow.  Banks  report  moderate  loan demand.

Retail  Sales

Major  retailers  in  the  District report  that  sales  on average are  5 percent

higher  than a year ago.  Since  retail  price  increases have ranged from  3 to

5 percent over  last  year,  the  slight increase  in sales  represents very  little

gain in real volume.  Inventories  are  reported to  be  lean, and ordering for

winter and spring has been very cautious.  Most respondents  have encountered

no  noticeable capacity  constraints  at  their suppliers,  but one major firm has

noticed longer delivery  times  for  sewn and woven goods.

Auto dealers  report  sluggish sales  compared to a year ago,  reportedly

because  inventories of  1988  model  cars  are  low and manufacturers  and dealers

are  not making large  price  concessions  to  clear  them out.  Initial dealer

experience with sales  of the  1989  models  ranges  from  slow to very good.  Those

reporting slow  sales  blame  the  rather large  price  increase  on various new

models.

Labor  Markets

IV-2

Fourth  District labor  markets have  shown  signs  of healthy expansion

without much accompanying wage  pressure.  For  the  last  three  months,  the  Ohio

and Pennsylvania unemployment  rates  (currently  5.6%  and 4.5%,  respectively)

have both been at  or below the  national  rate.  This has  been accomplished

partly because  the  annual  rate  of  job  creation  in Pennsylvania and Ohio has

exceeded  the  national  rate  during the  past  year.  In contrast,  the

unemployment  rate  in Kentucky has  risen partly because of loss  of agricultural

jobs  from the  summer drought.

Hiring projections by employers  in  the  District suggest  that employment

growth will  continue  to  be strong  in  the  fourth  quarter.  Substantial

increases  in employment are  expected by employers  in 19  of the  25  District

cities  covered in  a recent  survey  of hiring expectations.  Hiring is  expected

to  be brisk  in the  four  largest  cities  in the  District:  Pittsburgh, Cleveland,

Columbus,  and Cincinnati.  Some  smaller  cities, such as  Akron, are  expecting

even  larger  employment gains.

Across  the  district, new job  opportunities  are  expected  in wholesale  and

retail  trade, manufacturing,  services,  and finance,  insurance,  and real

estate.  For  example, two  large  automobile manufacturers have  announced major

expansions  in Northern Ohio, which will directly  add over  2,000 new jobs.

Ohio manufacturing wages  have  fallen slightly,  primarily due  to  a shorter

workweek.

Manufacturing

IV-3

Conditions  in manufacturing remain very much the  same as  last month.  The

manufacturing sector  is  continuing  its  strong performance:  production is  up,

exports  are growing, and domestic  production  is  displacing  imports.  Sentiment

among District manufacturer's  remains  optimistic.

Preliminary estimates  of manufacturing output  in Ohio show a 4.3 percent

annual  increase, after  adjusting  for unusual weather conditions.  Most of

the  increase  comes  from  the  durable-goods  sectors.  Primary metals  and

fabricated metals  showed particularly  strong growth.  For  example,  raw steel

production in Ohio rose  9.0 percent during the  last  three months  over  the  same

three-month period a year ago.

Output  growth is  expected to  continue  as District  purchasing managers

report increases  in  new orders  and declines  in  finished goods  inventories.

However,  some  purchasing managers  report that vendors  are  still having trouble

meeting the  demands of producers  as  firms  continue to  build up  their

inventories of raw materials.

Manufacturers  report  that  production continues  at  capacity rates  in

chemicals,  plastics,  glass,  ceramics,  specialty steel,  and container

industries.  A wide variety of  commodities, particularly bearings,  electric

motors,  and a number of chemical,  steel,  and aluminum products,  remain in

short  supply leading  in some  cases  to  price  increases.  For example,  steel

prices are  reported  to be  up  6 to  7 percent from  a year ago,  and zinc prices

have  risen 50  percent since January.

Banking

IV-4

District  loan demand has been moderate.  Total  loans  outstanding at  large

banks  grew at  an  annual rate  of 6 percent  from mid-August  to  mid-September.

Most  of  the  loan growth was in business  and consumer  lending.  Commercial  and

industrial  loans  rose at  an annual pace  of  3 percent and consumer  installment

loans  increased at an  annual pace of  13  percent.  In  contrast, real  estate

lending has been flat, which may be attributed  in part  to higher mortgage

rates.

FIFTH  DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview

Economic  growth  apparently  slowed  further  in the  District  in September,

although  manufacturing seemed  to  regain  some of  the  strength  that  it had  lost

in August.  Our September  survey  indicates  that retail  sales  were  flat.

Slower  rates  of  increase  in prices  and  wages were  reported  in retailing as

well  as  in manufacturing.  Sales  of  new homes  declined,  as  did  homebuilding

activity.  The  levels  of shipments  in and  out  of our  District  ports  were

largely unchanged.

Reports  from  other District sectors  were mixed.  Depository  institutions

indicated  little  change  in commercial  loan demand  but continued  strength  in

home  equity  loans.  Farmers  gave  uneven  reports  on  the  fall  harvest  and  were

uncertain  as  to  how  disaster payments  will  be  made.  Resort  and  hotel

representatives  said  this  summer's  tourist  activity was  above  last  summer's,

but  that  fall  bookings  were  about the  same  as  at  this  time  a year ago.

Participants  in our  surveys were  also  asked  about their expectations  for

the  next  six  months.  Among  producers,  optimism declined for  the  second month

in a row,  but  most  still  expect  business  conditions  to  remain  the  same  or

improve  in the months  ahead.  Among  retailers,  optimism about the  economic

outlook  remained at  last  month's  high  level.  Most  of  the  bankers  contacted

expect  interest  rates  to  rise,  but most  homebuilders  expect mortgage  rates  to

decline.  District  farmers who escaped  the worst  of the  drought expect  their

incomes  this year  to  be above  those  of a year ago,  and  they  look  for further

income  gains  next year.

V-2

Consumer  Spending  and Tourism

Responses  to  our  regular  mail  survey of District  retailers  imply  that

sales were  unchanged  in September from  August, while other  indicators  of

retail  activity were  mixed.  Almost equal  percentages  of  retailers  reported

declines,  increases,  and  no  changes  in their  sales.  Reports  of decreases  in

employment  outnumbered  reports  of  increases,  but  over  three-fourths of our

retailers  indicated  no  change  in employment.  Inventories  were  said  to  be

higher  by  one-third  of the  respondents,  and  lower by  one-fifth.  About 40

percent  said  they  had  raised  wages  in September,  compared  to about half who

said  they  did  so  in August.

Sales  activity varied  by  type  of  store.  Among  department  stores,  about

40  percent  reported decreases  in sales,  and  about 20  percent reported

increases.  Sales  of big  ticket  items  declined  in 20  percent  of the  department

stores and  rose  in about  10  percent.  Most  car dealers  reported  increases  in

sales,  while most furniture  stores  reported no  change.

Most District resorts  and  hotels  contacted by  telephone  said this

summer's  tourist activity was  higher than  last  summer's.  Bookings  for  this

fall  are  about the  same  as  at  this  time  last year.

Manufacturing

Manufacturing  activity  continued  to expand  in September  according to

respondents  to  our  regular mail  survey.  Thirty-nine  percent of the

respondents  in the  District  reported  increased  shipments  and  13  percent

reported  declines,  compared with  34  and  21  percent,  respectively,  in our

previous  survey.  New  orders,  employment, and  the  length of  the workweek also

increased,  and the  backlog  of  orders  declined.  Inventories  of finished goods

were  unchanged  in September while  inventories  of  raw materials  declined

V-3

somewhat.  Sixteen  percent  of our  respondents  said  they  raised wages  in

September,  compared with  20  percent who  raised  wages  in August.

Prices  of manufacturers'  materials  have  apparently continued  to  rise,  but

the  pace  of  increase  slowed  for  the  third  consecutive  month.  Fifty percent of

our  respondents  said  that  prices  of raw  materials  increased  in September,

compared with  61  percent who  reported  increases  in August.

For the  second  consecutive month, manufacturers  who  said  they expect

decreases  nationally  in the  general  level  of business  activity exceeded the

number who  expect  an  upturn.  Twenty-eight  percent  anticipate  a decline  in the

next  six months,  while  20  percent  anticipate  an  increase.  With  regard to  the

outlook  for  their own  businesses,  40  percent  of the  respondents  believe  their

shipments will  rise  in the  next  six months  and  31  percent  anticipate  declines.

Producers  who  foresee declines  in their  unfilled orders, workweeks,  and

inventories  of  materials  and  finished  goods  outnumbered those  who  expect

increases.

Port Activity

No  clear trend  in trade  is apparent from  the  September  reports  of the

three  major District ports--Hampton  Roads,  Baltimore  and  Charleston.

Shipments  in September were up  slightly over August  levels  at  Charleston,  down

slightly at  Hampton  Roads,  and  unchanged  at  Baltimore.  Import  shipments

remained  about  the  same  at  Baltimore  and  Charleston,  but  declined  slightly  at

Hampton  Roads.

Housing

District  home  builders'  associations  surveyed  by  telephone  indicated a

softening  in activity  in the  housing  sector.  Builders  reported  that  the

seasonally adjusted pace  of  new  home  sales  declined more  in September than  in

V-4

August.  In addition,  the  level  of home  building  in the District apparently

declined further from  its  pace  of a year ago.  While most  respondents  reported

generally slower activity,  some  indicated  increased  sales  of homes  priced

above  $200,000.

Financial

Our telephone  survey  of District financial  institutions  indicated  little

change  in the  demand for  commercial  loans  in September.  Two banks,  however,

reported  declines  in loans  for  commercial  construction.

Reports  of the demand  for residential  mortgages  varied widely.  About the

same  number  of respondents  reported increases  as  decreases.  Many  respondents

said  the  demand  for  home equity  loans  remains  strong  despite the winding down

of promotional  efforts.

Agriculture

Fifth  District  farmers  gave mixed  reports on  their fall  harvests.  In the

areas  of extreme drought,  some  crops  were  total  losses.  A farmer from central

Maryland reported that  corn  fields  were not  worth  picking in  his  area.  A

farmer from  North  Carolina,  however, said  his  state  is enjoying an  above

normal  corn  harvest.  The  peach harvest was  reported to be  very good  in both

Carolinas.  Late soybeans  in  Maryland  and South  Carolina  received  adequate

rain and  should yield well.  District cotton  production  is up this  year,

partly because more  acres were planted.

Total  farm  income  in  the  District probably will  be  higher this year than

last.  Farm production  this year  is expected to  match production  of last year,

which  was  also a year of drought  in the  District.  This year, however, farm

prices--including the prices  of poultry, and  those of most crops--have been

higher because the  drought was  a national  phenomenon  that  reduced supplies.

VI-1

SIXTH  DISTRICT  - ATLANTA

The  southeastern  economy  continues 

its  somewhat  sluggish  pace  overall.

Weakening  growth 

in  manufacturing, 

largely  reflecting  downturns 

in  transportation

equipment,  combines  with  a  slower  pace 

in  the  retail  trade  sector 

to  hold  total

employment  gains  under  the  year-ago  level.  However,  some  sectors  are  performing  quite

well  and  scarcities  of  skilled  laborers  have  been  reported  by  textile  and  appliance

producers  and  in  oil  drilling  operations,  though  wages  are  not  reported  to  be  under  much

upward  pressure.  A  number  of  industrial  contacts  report  rising  input  prices  and  the

ability  to  pass  them  on  to  manufactured  products  because  of  strong  demand.  Inventory

levels  are  generally  lean  and  retailers  seem  especially  cautious  to  avoid  overstocking

problems,  similar  to  those  experienced  in  last  year's  fourth  quarter.  Export  trade  is

unusually  brisk  across  a  wide  range  of  products  and  growth  appears  to  be  gathering

momentum.

Employment  and  Industry  Unemployment  rates  have  been  edging  up  in  the  region

lately,  despite  reports  of  some  tightness  in  labor  markets.  For  example,  although  the

region's  energy  sector  remains  at  a  low  ebb,  offshore  producers  report  they  could  now

double  their  operations  if they  could find  enough  skilled  workers.

Appliance  producers  note  selected  labor  shortages  and  increased  production  costs

due  to  rising  raw  material  costs.  However,  it  is  difficult  to recoup  rising  costs  through

price  increases  because  the  slowdown  in  residential  construction  is  now  weakening

appliance  shipments.  The  housing  slowdown 

is  also  dampening  lumber  markets. 

In

contrast  to  appliance  and  lumber  manufacturers,  the  district's  tire  and  rubber  industry  is

faring  well.  Although  raw  material  costs  are  rising,  tire  producers  are  able  to  increase

prices  because  demand  for  tires  is  currently  outstripping  supply.  Apparel  and  textile

producers  expressed  a  mixed  outlook  with  some  firms  running  overtime  while  others

report  that  orders  are  short  for  this  time  of  year.  Most  are  keeping  tight  control  over

production  and  inventories  are  being  cut  back  as  far  as  practically  possible.

VI-2

Paper  mills  are  doing  exceptionally  well  with  both  export  and  domestic  demand

expected  to  remain  at  high  levels  for  the  remainder  of  the  year  and 

into  the  next.

Orders  are  growing  and  prices  are  firm.  By  contrast,  local  aircraft  and  several  defense

related  equipment  manufacturers  are  cutting back  operations  because  of  reduced  orders.

Consumer  Spending  September  retail  sales  were  sluggish  but  up  slightly  over

August's  soft  performance.  Most  retailers  are  relieved  that  there  has  not  been  a  repeat

of  last  year's  disastrous  fall  season  and  remain  optimistic  that  sales  will  revive  in  the

fourth  quarter.  Southeastern  markets  are  intensely  competitive.  Heavy  promotions  and

discounts  accompanied  by  increased  advertising  are  key  ingredients  of  most  retailers'

sales  strategy. 

In  this  environment,  retailers  are  not  ordering  very  far  in  advance  and

are  keeping  inventories  well  below  those  prevailing  last  fall.  Car dealers  generally  were

satisfied  with  September's  strong  sales  performance  that  left  them  with  a  relatively  low

inventory  of  unsold  1988  cars.

Construction  Year-to-date  nonresidential  construction  growth  in  the  District  is

running  slightly  ahead  of  the  national  level,  but  its  strength  varies  widely  across  the

District.  Retail  construction  is  strongest  in  the  District's  most  prosperous  states  -

Florida,  Georgia,  and  Tennessee  - and  sluggish  elsewhere.  A  significant  amount  of

activity  involves  renovation  of  older  shopping  centers  rather  than  building  new  space  in  a

market  where  overbuilding,  especially  in  strip centers,  has  led  to  vacancy  rates  well  over

10  percent.

The  housing  industry  is  bracing  for  a  further  slowing  of  activity.  The  District

states  are  just  beginning  to  feel  the  impact  of  rising  interest  rates  on  home  sales.  Home

prices  in  Atlanta  dropped  in  August  to  their  lowest  level  in  over  a  year,  and  contacts

report  that  September  prices  were  low  as  well. 

In  Florida,  areas  of  the  state  such  as

Miami,  Orlando  and  Tampa  reported  slowing  sales  in  the  third  quarter  as  rising  interest

rates  began  to  impact  the  market.

Financial  Services  Officers  of  small  and  midsized  banks  in  the  Sixth  District

report  strong  demand  for  consumer  loans.  The  majority  of  bankers  said  that  demand  is

VI-3

the  same  or  greater  than  a  year  ago.  Higher  interest  rates  have  not  dampened

installment  loan  demand  at  the  surveyed  banks  and  several  bankers  expect  demand  to

continue  brisk  throughout  the  year.

Bank  failures  in  District  states  have  declined  from  a  year  ago.  Sources 

in

Louisiana,  the  most  troubled  state,  report  a  downward  trend  in  the  number  of  bank

closures  there  and  prospects  continue  to  brighten  because  of  recent  reductions  in  loan

delinquencies  and  improvement  in  the  local  economy.

Tourism  September  tourism  in  the  Southeast  continues  to  show  slight  gains  over

last  year  in  most  areas.  Central  Florida  is  still  undergoing  a  mini  boom  in  hotel

construction  due  to  continued  high  occupancy  rates.  Builders  are  confident  the  number

of  tourists  will  continue  to  increase  to fill  these  new  rooms  due  to  expanding  attractions

in  the  area.

Port  Activity  Port  activity  continues  to  boom,  with  export  gains  reaching  double

digits. 

In  Miami, 

there  has  been  marked  improvement 

in  exports  of  a  variety  of

commodities 

including  chemicals,  steel, 

textile  and  carpet  products,  fruits  and

vegetables,  and  electric  and  electronic  equipment,  to  Latin  America.  Clay  products,

forest  products  and  chemicals  are  the  leading  sources  of  export  growth  in  Savannah.

Exports  were  also  up  in  Tampa,  largely  due  to  a  healthy  increase 

in  shipments  of

phosphate  chemicals.

Agriculture  and  Mining 

Thanks 

to 

late-season  rainfall,  yields  of  most

southeastern  crops  will  be  down  only slightly  or will  show  improvement  from  the  previous

season.  However,  the  drought  delayed  development  of  the  soybean  and  cotton  crops

increasing  their  vulnerability  to  early  frosts  and  freezing  weather.  The  Florida  Citrus

Industry  expects  another  good  year  with  increasing  output  from  maturing  new  groves  and

strong prices  thanks  to  bright  prospects  for  new  export  markets.

Despite  continued  sluggishness,  the  oil  industry  has  experienced  a  burst  of  new

offshore  activity 

in 

the  Gulf  waters  off 

the  coast  of  Louisiana,  Alabama,  and

Mississippi.  Oil  production,  however,  remains  down  considerably  over  last  year  and  the

number  of  active  rigs  in  the  District  has  slipped  7  percent  since  the  previous  year.

VII-1

SEVENTH  DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.  Business  activity  continues  to  rise  in  the  District,  paced  by

the  strengthening  in  capital  goods  and  exports,  and  supported  by  the  high

level  of  motor  vehicle  sales.  Some  contacts,  however,  note  a  less  rapid  rate

of  growth  in  activity  at  their  companies  or  in  their  industries.  Employment

in  District  states  has  risen  further  in  the  second  half  of  1988  though  at  a

slower  rate  than  in  the  first  half.  Chicago  purchasing  managers  report

continued  widespread  gains  in  output  and  orders,  and  an  uptrend  in  inventory

building,  accompanied  by  rising  prices.  Vigorous  demand  for  steel  from  motor

vehicle,  equipment,  and  construction  markets  is  maintaining  output  near

effective  capacity.  Construction  activity  appears  to  be  holding  up  fairly

well,  but  some  sectors  have  slowed  and  further  slowing  appears  likely.  Sales

at  retailers  sampled  in  the  District  were  slow  in  August  and  mixed 

in

September.  The  fall  harvest  has  progressed  at  a  normal  pace,  but  part  of  the

crop  is  of  poor  quality  or  contaminated  as  a  result  of  the  drought.

Steel.  Mills  are  largely  booked  through  year-end.  Production  slowed

less  than  usual  last  summer  as  producers  used  vacation  and  maintenance

shutdowns  at  customers'  plants  to  reduce  order  backlogs. 

Some  maintenance

work  at  steel  mills  has  been  deferred  in  order  to  meet  strong  demand. 

Among

major  markets,  demand  for  construction  steel  is  strong,  particularly  for

industrial  projects.  Orders  also  continue  strong  from  makers  of  construction

equipment  and  other  machinery,  are  at  a  good  pace  from  auto  companies,  and

have  risen  (from  a  low  level)  from  makers  of  railcars.  However,  orders  for

oil  country  tubular  goods  have  dropped  as  buyers,  facing  lower  oil  prices,

have  tried  to  cut  inventories. 

In  addition,  delays  in  pipeline  construction

have  curtailed  orders  for  steel  from  that  sector.

VII-2

Motor  Vehicles.  Car  sales  continue  strong  and  truck  sales  appear  headed

for  a  record  this  year.  Second  shifts  are  being  added  at  two  truck  assembly

plants  in  Michigan.  Regular  production  was  started  last  month  at  a  new  auto

assembly  plant  in  Illinois  which  is  owned  jointly  by  a  Japanese  and  a  U.S.

firm.  A  Japanese-owned  plant  which  began  production  in  Michigan  a  year  ago

plans  to  shift  some  car  assemblies  to  that  plant  next  year  from  Japan  to

counter  the  high  yen.

Other  Manufacturers.  Demand 

is  either  rising  or  at  a  high  level  for  most

manufacturers,  but  some  reports  suggest  a  slowing  in  the  pace  of  expansion.

A  large  diversified  producer  indicates  that  gains  in  sales,  though  still

strong,  have  been  less  rapid  in  the  second  half  of  1988  than  earlier  in  the

year.  A  maker  of  corrugated  shipping  containers  has  seen  some  slippage  in

the  second  half  from  the  record-setting  pace  of  the  previous  two  years. 

In

contrast,  a  producer  of  capital  goods  reported  strong  gains  in  orders,  and

did  not  note  indications  of  slowing  growth.  A  maker  of  diesel  engines  is

operating  at  capacity,  with  strength  both  in  motor  vehicles  and  nonautomotive

markets.  Construction  machinery  sales  are  reported  up  strongly.  Major

appliance  sales,  though  at  a  high  level,  have  trailed  1987  and  are  expected

to  slow  further.

Construction.  Reports  on  construction  activity  in  the  region  have  been

mixed.  Advance  indicators  such  as  residential  and  nonresidential  building

contracts  have  trailed  1987.  But  employment  in  construction  has  risen  in  the

District  states.  Total  shipments  of  gypsum  board  to  the  five  states  have

been  about  even  with  last  year,  and  shipments  of  cement  have  been  rising.

Strong  sectors  include  industrial  construction  and  public  works,  particularly

streets  and  highways.  Weakness  has  persisted  in  apartments,  and  contractors

are  reported  less  active  on  single-family  housing  construction.

VII-3

Consumer  Spending.  A survey  of  Illinois  retailers  showed  sales  in  August

trailed  the  year-earlier  level.  Weakness  was  attributed  to  the  summer  heat

wave.  Large  retailers  in  the  District  reported  mixed  sales  performance  in

September.

Agriculture.  Crop  prices,  although  still  high,  have  trended  somewhat

lower  in  recent  weeks  as  the  fall  harvest  has  progressed  at  a  normal  pace

over  most  of  the  District.  Elevators  have  been  reluctant  to  accept  some

early-harvest  deliveries  because  of  poor  seed  quality  and  the  presence  of

aflatoxin,  a  highly  toxic  substance  to  humans  and  animals,  in  some  corn.

Testing  procedures  for  aflatoxin  are  complicated  and,  as  yet,  the  extent  of

the  contamination  is  unknown.  But  concerns  were  eased  earlier  this  week  when

the  FDA  reissued  guidelines  that  will  permit  elevators  to  blend  contaminated

corn  with  clean  corn  to  achieve  tolerance  levels  acceptable  for  interstate

shipments.

Recent  figures  confirm  that  farm  equipment  sales  turned  sluggish  again

this  summer  as  farmers  became  apprehensive  about  the  drought.  However,

industry  analysts  are  looking  for  a  modest  upturn  to  resume  by  early  next

year.  Despite  the  drought,  the  demand  for  farm  equipment  is  likely  to  be

sustained  by  high  cash  farm  earnings  and  by  a  sizable  increase  in  crop

plantings  next  year.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT  - ST.  LOUIS

Summary

Economic  conditions 

in 

the  Eighth  District  remain  sluggish.

Employment 

in  most  sectors  has  stagnated. 

Manufacturing  employment has

grown  slightly,  however, 

led  by  job  gains 

in 

factories  producing

electrical  equipment, machinery and chemicals.  Retail  sales  remain flat,

with 

little 

growth 

in  vehicle  sales  or  department  store  sales.

Nonresidential construction activity increased since  the  last report.

Employment

District  nonfarm  employment  has  changed 

little 

over  the 

first 

eight

months  of 

the  year  compared  with  the  nation's  3.6  percent  rate  of

increase.  During  the  three  months  through  August,  all  private  sectors

expanded  more  slowly  in 

the  District  than  in 

the  nation.  The  greatest

weaknesses  were  observed 

in  construction,  mining  and  services.

Manufacturing  employment  rose  slightly,  growing  at  a  1.5  percent  annual

rate  in  the  three  months  through August  after  declining at  a 1.6  percent

rate  in  the  previous  three months.  The  upturn was  due  largely  to  strong

gains 

in 

three  export-oriented  sectors: 

electrical 

equipment,

nonelectrical  machinery  and  chemicals. 

Textile  and  apparel  makers

accounted 

for 

the  sharpest 

recent  decline 

among  major  District

manufacturing 

industries. 

The  slowdown 

in  domestic  apparel  sales

contributed 

to 

the  closure  of  several  regional  textile  and  apparel

plants. 

In 

the  past  six  months, 

three  Missouri  shoe  manufacturers,

employing  eight  hundred  workers, 

have  closed  permanently  or  have

VIII-2

announced 

their  impending  closure.  Employment 

in 

the  region's  food

processing industry also  has  declined since March.

Despite  the  flatness  at  the  District  level,  employment 

in 

the

largest  metropolitan  areas  in 

the  District--St.  Louis,  Louisville  and

Memphis  and  Little  Rock--continues 

to  trend  upward. 

Survey  results

indicate  considerably  weaker  fourth  quarter  hiring  plans  in  St.  Louis

than  in  the  nation.  Staff  reductions  are  foreseen  in  St.  Louis'  retail

and financial  sectors.

Consumer Spending

District  retail 

sales  in 

the  three  months 

through  July  were  2.4

percent  higher  than  a  year  earlier,  compared  with  a  5.8  percent  national

gain.  Spending  was  particularly  weak 

in  Missouri  and  Tennessee  where

retail  sales  rose 

less 

than  1  percent  over 

the  year. 

Weak  sales

continued 

in  District  general  merchandise  stores  in  August  and  early

September  according  to  contacts.  Car  and  light  truck  sales  leveled  off

in August  and September  after  strong  gains  in  the  the  first  seven months

of  the  year.  Rising  interest  rates  were  blamed  for  the  lack  of  sales

growth.  Because  retailers  anticipate  sluggish  sales  and  have  ordered

fall  merchandise  conservatively, 

inventories  are  generally  at

satisfactory  levels.

Construction and Real Estate

The  value  of District  construction contracts  rose  11.7  percent

in 

the 

three  months 

through  August, 

compared  with 

the  5.5  percent

national  average.  Most of the  recent  regional  growth was  due  to  a 21.7

VIII-3

percent  rise  in  nonresidential  construction  contracts. 

Despite 

the

recent  gains,  construction  contracts  remained  slightly  below  the  level

of a year earlier in both the District and the  nation.

The  number of  existing homes  sold  in  August was well  above  the  year-

earlier  level 

in  St.  Louis,  but  the  median  price  fell  almost  5  percent.

Office  vacancy rates  in  St.  Louis and Louisville  dropped in  the  second

quarter  from  their year-earlier  levels  and remained below the  national

average.  Despite  vigorous  economic  growth,  office  vacancy  rates  in

Memphis  are well  above  the national  average and have not declined for  two

years.

Agriculture

The  harvest  of  District 

crops 

is 

underway  with 

few

weather-related  problems. 

Crop  yields 

in  southern  portions  of  the

District  were  better  than  expected.  Growers 

in  Tennessee,  Kentucky  and

Arkansas  report  soybean yields  above  last  year's  yields.  Crop  losses  in

northern Missouri  are  the  largest  in  the  District, but because prices  are

significantly  higher 

than  last  year, 

farm 

income  should  be 

little

changed.  Although  the  average  farm  income  level  will  be  maintained,

there  are  wide  disparities  among  farmers.  For  example,  farmers  who  had

stored  crops  last  year  received  windfall  gains,  whereas  others  suffered

total  crop  failures  due  to  spotty  rainfall  and were  not protected by crop

insurance.  Drought-related  farm  failures  will  be  few  because  the  large

crops  and  high  livestock  prices  of  1986  and  1987  provided  a  cushion

against  this  year's  setback.  Recent  rains  have  helped  improve  pastures

and have allowed  the planting of winter wheat crops.

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

Ninth District economic  conditions have  remained stable  at  satisfac-

tory  levels.  Unemployment  rates  have  not changed much.  Consumer  spending  has

been  fairly  healthy  while  inflation  rates  continued  to  be  moderate.  Condi-

tions  in  resource-related  industries  have  improved,  and  those  in  agriculture

have  remained  largely unchanged.

Labor  Markets

The  employment  situation  has  been  reasonably  good  throughout  the

district.  Between  July  and  August,  Minnesota's  unemployment  rate  rose  only

one-tenth  of  a  percentage  point,  to  3.6  percent;  this  is  substantially  lower

than  the 5 percent rate of a year earlier.  In  July,  the  help-wanted advertis-

ing  index  for  the  Minneapolis-St.  Paul  area  was  up  9.4  percent  from  a  year

earlier.  South  Dakota's  July  unemployment  rate  was  unchanged  from  its  year-

ago  rate  of  3.7  percent.  However,  initial  claims  for  unemployment  insurance

in  that  state  were  down  30.9  percent  from a year  ago.  The  unemployment  rate

in  North  Dakota,  at  4.1  percent  in  July,  was  three-tenths  of  a  percentage

point  lower  than  a  year  earlier. 

In  Montana,  the  need  for  fire  fighters

substantially  improved  employment  prospects.  And  in  the  Upper  Peninsula  of

Michigan,  the  unemployment  rate  was  down  to  5.7  percent  in  July,  a full  per-

centage point  below a year  earlier.

Consumer  Spending

Consumer  spending  on  general  merchandise  has  remained  strong,  and

the  prospects  are  promising.  One  retailer  notes  that,  in  the  January-August

period,  sales  at  comparable  stores  were  25  percent  ahead  of  a  year  earlier.

Another  retailer  notes  that,  after  a  soft  year  in  1987,  apparel  sales  are

coming  back  strongly.  Inventories  are  at  acceptable  levels.  Retailers  are

optimistic about  this year's  Christmas  sales.

IX-2

Motor  vehicles have  been  selling well.  In  particular,  truck and van

sales  are  reported  to  be  up  sharply  over  last  year.  One  manufacturer  of  a

domestic  line  reports  that,  even at  full  capacity,  demand  cannot  be  met.  New

models are generally  expected  to  sell well.

Housing activity  has been  mixed.  The number of homes  sold  in  August

in  the  Twin  Cities  area  was  12.4  percent  below  the  banner  sales  of  a  year

ago.  However,  new housing  permits  issued  in  the  whole state of Minnesota were

up  9 percent during  that  period.

Tourist  spending  has  also  continued  to  increase. 

Despite  the

drought,  the  fall  colors  are  an  attractive  sight  throughout  the  district.

Most  areas  contacted  in  Minnesota  indicate  good  resort  business,  as  do  those

in  the  Upper  Peninsula  of Michigan.  In  Montana,  however,  the fire  at  Yellow-

stone  has  kept  the  number  of  August  tourists  7  percent  below  a  year  ago.

Still,  one  observer  thinks  that  a  sizable  number  of  tourists  have  actually

been attracted  by the  fire.

Consumer  Prices

Consumer  price  increases  have  been  moderate.  Retailers  report  some

price  increases as  they switch  increasingly  from foreign to  domestic buying  of

general  merchandise.  However,  one  retailer  expects  to  see  a slight  decrease

in  prices  of  imported  apparel.  The  drought has  not affected  food  prices  very

much  yet.  In  June,  the  consumer  price  index  for  the  Twin  Cities  area  was  6

percent above a year  earlier.

Resource-Related  Industries

Conditions  in  the  district's  resource-related  industries  have  im-

proved.  Strikes  in  the  wood  products  sector  of  Montana  have  ended.  Copper

mining  in  Montana  is  also picking  up,  with one  analyst suggesting  that,  in  the

IX-3

Butte  area,  2,500  new  jobs  might  be  added  through  1989.  Approximately  2,500

new  jobs  have  already  been  added  in  the  last  two  years  by  gold  mining  opera-

tions  in  Montana.  If  the  copper  forecast  is  accurate,  mining  employment  in

Montana will  reach  1983's high  level.  The timber  industry  in Michigan's Upper

Peninsula  is  also  reporting  a good  year,  with  a new  mill  due  to  begin  oper-

ating  in  1990 and other  mills significantly upgrading  their  facilities.

Agriculture

If  rainfall  returns  to  or  exceeds  normal  levels,  the  effects of the

drought  on  the  district's  agriculture  sector  may  be  milder  than  expected.

Drought  aid  will  significantly  mitigate  the  effects  on  farmers'  incomes.  One

analyst  suggests  that  a  farmer  who  normally  expects  to  gross  $139  per  acre

will  instead  receive  $137  per  acre  in  aid  if  the  farmer's  crop was completely

destroyed. 

Low  water  levels  in  eastern  Montana,  western  North  Dakota,  and

northwestern  South  Dakota  continue  to  pose  some  problems  for  cattle  ranch-

ers.  But  the  sugar  beet  crop  in  North  Dakota and Minnesota is  reported  to be

excellent in  spite  of heavy  rains at  harvest  time.

TENTH  DISTRICT  - KANSAS  CITY

Overview.  The pace  of economic  activity in the  Tenth District  is

relatively  slow.  Retailers  report a slight recent  improvement in sales,  as  do

auto  dealers,  and most manufacturing respondents  report high capacity use

rates.  While  retail  inventories  are  larger  than desired, manufacturing

materials  inventories  are  generally satisfactory.  Housing activity  is  fairly

stable,  and home mortgage  demand at  savings  and loan  institutions  is

relatively weak.  Loan demand at  district commercial banks  has been nearly

constant  recently, while deposits have  grown modestly.  While  some parts  of

the  district were  severely affected by drought, higher prices and near-normal

crop  yields have  maintained farm income  in  other parts.

Retail  Sales.  Retailers  generally report weak sales  compared with a year

ago, but some  note a slight  improvement from earlier this  year.  A number of

respondents attribute  the  recent improvement  to  greater promotional efforts.

Promotional efforts have  also helped hold down price  increases.  Retailers

generally have  inventories  that  are  larger  than desired, and are  trying  to

trim them.  Efforts  to  trim inventories  are  expected to  continue, except  for

seasonal  increases.  Most respondents  expect  sales  increases  for  the rest of

the  year to be moderate at  best.

Automobile Sales.  Most automobile dealers  report steady  or  improved

sales  over  the past month.  Inventories  are  expanding as  dealers receive  1989

models.  Dealers expect  sales  to be stable  or up  slightly during  the  remainder

of the  year.

Manufacturing.  Most respondents  report that materials  inputs  continue  to

be  readily available, and some  shortening of lead times has  occurred.  The

pace of price  increases  for inputs  has apparently slowed somewhat.  Most

respondents  are  satisfied with their  inventory levels,  after  some  recent

X-2

trimming.  Little further change in  inventories  is  planned.  Capacity use

rates are high for most respondents, but no  real bottleneck problems were

reported.

Housing Activity and Finance.  Activity in  the housing  sector remains

fairly stable.  Homebuilders  report housing starts  at or above  both last

month's and  last year's  levels.  Single-family construction has  improved

slightly, while multi-family construction continues  to be  weak.  New home

sales are  stable with some  increases  in  inventories  of new homes.  No problems

are  reported regarding materials  availability or  delivery times.

Most  savings and loan respondents  report that  savings  deposit  inflows  are

near year-ago and month-ago levels.  Respondents  expect inflows  to remain

steady or  increase  slightly during the  remainder of 1988.  In general,

mortgage  activity has been weak, and this weakness  is  expected to  continue

through yearend.  Mortgage  rates have moved in  a narrow range recently and are

expected  to  remain near  current levels  for  the  rest of the  year.

Banking.  District bankers  report little  change  in banking conditions

during the  past month.  Overall  loan demand remained nearly constant, although

demand for  residential  and commercial  real  estate loans  rose slightly.  The

bankers report  that the  recent round of lending rate  increases  is drawing to  a

close.  Most respondents held their prime  lending rate  steady the  past month

and expect no change  in the near  future.  A few bankers, however, either

recently  increased their prime  lending rate by 25  to  50 points  or expect  a

slight  increase.  Consumer  lending rates were  constant to  slightly higher

during the  month.  Little  change  in  consumer rates  is  expected in  the near

term.  On average,  deposits  grew modestly at  the  respondent banks.  Several

bankers  report a shift  in  savings  from Money Market  Deposit Accounts  to  time

and  savings certificates  and deposits bearing a slightly higher  rate of

return.

X-3

Agriculture.  Crop  conditions vary widely across  the  district as winter

wheat seeding nears  completion and  row crop  harvest  continues.  Rainfall

slowed the  harvest of row crops  during  the  latter part  of September, but the

harvest  is  now progressing well across  most of  the  district.  Irrigated crops

are  generally  in very good condition  throughout  the district,  and normal

yields  are  expected.  Dryland corn and  soybeans  in  eastern Nebraska and

northern Missouri were  severely affected by the  drought,  and yields will be

well below normal.  Milo  yields  in Nebraska are  down  due  to  a severe  greenbug

infestation.  In  other areas  of  the district, however, near-normal crop yields

and higher prices  are helping  to maintain farm incomes.

On balance,  district bankers  report that  the rate  of farmer participation

in  the wheat price-support program is  nearly unchanged from last year's  rate.

On one hand, a sharply higher market price  for wheat has  diminished the

incentive  for  farmers  to  participate  in the  federal  price  support program for

wheat.  On the  other hand, a reduction in  the percentage of wheat base  acres

that program participants must hold out of production encourages  program

participation.

The new winter wheat crop received beneficial September  rains  that

promoted development of winter wheat pastures, but additional  rainfall will be

required  to ensure  adequate  grazing conditions  in many areas.  In the  absence

of adequate  wheat pastures,  feed stocks  could be  strained  during a severe

winter.  Ranchers would then be  forced to buy high-priced feed or  liquidate

herds.  At present, most district ranchers  plan to  maintain herds  through  the

winter  in anticipation of higher cattle  prices next spring.

ELEVENTH  DISTRICT--DALLAS

The  District economy is sluggish,  but  there are  positive signs.

Orders  to manufacturers  are growing  slowly overall.  Retail  sales  show little

increase.  Auto  sales  expansion  is weak.  Construction  activity is turning  up.

Drilling  is falling  in  the wake of  oil  price declines.  The drought  has  had

little  effect on  District farm cash  incomes  because  rising product prices  have

offset diminished  yields.  Economic performance  varies widely across  the

District,  with relatively  strong growth  occurring  in  Houston.

Orders  to District manufacturers  are  noticeably  above a year earlier,

but growth  has  been  slower  in the  last  few months.  There  are  a number of

exceptions  to  this  overall  tendency,  however,  as  sales  patterns vary greatly

across  industries.  For example,  chemical  producers  continue to cite  strong

sales  growth  and  to  note  capacity constraints.  Expansions of  plant and

equipment  in this  industry are  widely reported.  Sales of  paper and  paperboard

are  rising  and  product prices  have  increased  substantially,  but  plans for

capacity expansion are  rare.  Orders  to computer manufacturers  are  up markedly

and  respondents  say that  their product  inventories  are  at  undesirably  low

levels.  Electronic  equipment  manufacturers  also  note  some recent  increases  in

sales.  Construction-related  manufacturers, including  those  in  fabricated

metals,  lumber, and  stone,  clay  and  glass,  generally  cite  sluggish demand

except  in the  Houston area.  Most  oilfield  equipment  firms  note  that  sales  are

weak  because of  low  levels  of  drilling activity.  District food  processors  cite

XI-2

little change  in  orders  from earlier this year, but  apparel  producers  say  their

sales  have  been  growing  fairly  steadily.

As  a result  of  sluggish  demand, many retailers have  discounted

heavily to  bring  inventories  down  to desired  levels.  After a protracted period

of weakness,  apparel  sales  have  begun to  turn  up  in  recent weeks. 

Retailers

expect  revenues  in this year's  Christmas  season to  be moderately higher than

last  year's  and  they expect  seasonally  adjusted  growth  to continue thereafter.

Auto  sales  vary with  the economic fortunes  of District communities.

Houston  sales  have  lately shown  steady growth  and  dealers expect  past  patterns

to  continue.  In Dallas,  sales  are  about 2 percent  below a year earlier, which

was  a weak  period.  Dealers there  anticipate  little change  in sales,  aside

from  normal  seasonal  variations.

District construction activity continues  to  show moderate  gains.  The

total  value of  construction contracts  in the  District has  now  increased,  on a

three-month moving  average basis,  for four  months  in a row.  Although  earlier

increases were  concentrated  in New Mexico and  Louisiana, Texas  also showed

growth  in  August.  The gains  in  contract values  have  been led  by expansion  in

residential  building,  although nonresidential  has  shown  some  slight  recent

expansion.  District construction employment  continues  to decline,  but  the  pace

of  reduction  is somewhat  slower than  at  the  beginning  of  the year.

Nevertheless,  some Houston  area  industrial  construction firms say they  are

concerned about  shortages of civil  engineers.

Oil  and gas  drilling  continues to  slip  in response to declines  in  oil

prices  and  to concerns that  low prices will  persist.  After  falling for  four

consecutive months, the  District rig  count was  14  percent lower  in September

XI-3

than  in  May.  Respondents  expect drilling  activity to  remain  low over the  next

four  quarters.  Recent  declines  in well  permit  applications and  a drop  in  the

price of  West  Texas  intermediate  crude oil  to  below $13  per barrel  offer  bases

for concerns  about the  near-term future of  extraction  activity  in  the  District.

Cash  income  to  District agriculture  is anticipated  to  reach

predrought expectations,  in  part,  because  some reduced yields  have  been offset

by  increased prices.  For example, while District  sorghum yields  are  down 25

percent from a year earlier, prices  are up  by  58  percent.  Corn yields are

down by  less  than  2 percent,  while prices  are up  by  47  percent.  The

increasing grain prices  are  squeezing  profit margins of  livestock producers,

whose  product prices  have  risen by  far less  than  the  cost  of  feed.  The

fortunes of  cotton  farmers are  diminished from a year  ago,  as  prices  have

dropped 24  percent and yields  are  down by  20  percent.

XII-1

TWELFTH DISTRICT  -- SAN FRANCISCO

Summary

The economy of the Twelfth District  continues  to  grow, with little sign  of

a change  in  direction.  Growth  remains strong  in the Pacific Northwest and

California, and the weaker economies  in  other parts of the District show few

signs of  further slowing.  The Business  Sentiment survey reveals that

respondents are  becoming more pessimistic about future national growth and

unemployment, but they  report  few signs of  an  impending  slowdown.  Retail sales

improved  in  September, although  they remain generally lackluster.  Construction

has been  strong  in  the Northwest, while  slow  in Arizona and Utah.  Housing

prices  continue to boom  in Southern  California, Washington, and Oregon, although

some slowing  of sales  is reported  in Northern California.  Manufacturing remains

strong  in  aircraft, electronics, paper,  aluminum, and machinery.  Output  in

forest  products  industries has  slowed,  but  remains at a high level.  Agriculture

remains strong  in the  District, while gains  in  refining profits have offset  the

negative effect of  falling oil prices  on production in the energy sector.

Business Sentiment

Continuing the trend  reported last month, respondents have  become more

pessimistic about GNP growth.  Over  40  percent of  the respondents  to  the Twelfth

District Sentiment Survey expect  growth to  slow, up from  34 percent  in September.

Expectations about housing  starts  remain  low, with 83  percent  anticipating

further  slowing, and no  respondents anticipating an  improvement.  Concern about

inflation has  moderated since the last  report, although concern about

unemployment  is increasing.

XII-2

Despite a drop  in expectations about overall growth,  the respondents  did

not report  any  immediate signs  of  slowing  in  the regional  economy.  The  rapidly

growing Northwest  is  expected to  continue to  boom, while the  slower-growing areas

see  no  signs  of  further slowing.

Retail  Sales

Retail  sales  improved  in the District  in September from August  levels,  but

overall activity remains sluggish.  Retailers report  softer-than-expected sales

in  September,  although one respondent  in Washington reports  a 14  percent rise

in  retail sales over  last year.  Classified advertising volumes continue to drop

in Los Angeles and  in the nation, indicating  a slowdown  in consumer  spending  and

the consolidation of  the industry.  Upward price pressure continues  to  appear

in  imported  products, but  the soft  retail market  is making  it  difficult to  make

price  increases  stick at  the retail level.  Inventories  are reported to  be  in

line with desired  levels.  Retailers note some  problems attracting qualified

sales people, and  register  concern about a possible increase  in  the minimum wage.

Automobile dealers report price  increases  of  4 to 5 percent on  both

domestic and  imported  1989  cars.  A substantial number  of  1988 models  remain  in

dealer  inventories,  and GM has extended  its  rebates to  eliminate the surplus.

One respondent  reports  fairly high sales  of new cars  and  light  trucks  in  the

Southern California area.

Manufacturing

Manufacturing activity continues  to  exhibit strength, particularly in  the

Pacific Northwest.  Pulp and paper production remains  strong, although some

slowing  in growth  is  being noted and  some inventories  are rising.  Several

respondents  report  significant  increases  in  farm equipment  purchases, with some

shortages  evident.  Moreover, construction equipment sales  are reported strong

in Utah.  The slowing expansion of  the wood products  industry  is  being  offset

by continued expansion of  aerospace, aluminum, shipping,  and electronic

XII-3

industries  in  the Northwest, with Boeing near  capacity and delivery times

lengthening.  Some concern about  semiconductor demand  is being voiced  in the San

Francisco area, and Arizona respondents remain  concerned about the  effect of

IBM's  plant closure.  Food processing and  canning industries  are expanding in

the District.

Construction

Construction and real estate activity are highly variable  in  the District.

Construction has been  strong  this  past summer  in Washington and Oregon, and

housing prices  have increased  sharply in  Southern California.  The strength of

the Washington economy is now  boosting prices  in that region as  well. 

Some

slowing of  sales has been noted  in  the San Francisco area.  In  contrast,

construction  in Arizona is called  the slowest in  15  years,  and construction,

other than for  road building, remains depressed in Utah.

Resource Industries

Agriculture has had a strong year  in  the District.  Yields  in most  areas

are average or down mildly, but the higher prices have more than compensated.

Inventories of  table grapes are high, the  tomato  crop has  been damaged by heat,

and almonds have  been bothered by  insects, but prices have  been strong.

Livestock producers  report strong  prices, although  feedlot producers  are  losing

profits  to higher  feed costs.  The wood products  industry is still strong,

although production of lumber and plywood has begun to  fall.  Excessive fire

danger and environmental  restrictions are  limiting access  to  forests, decreasing

the  supply of  logs.  The  shortage of  logs  has boosted prices  in  the Northwest.

In the energy  sector, the  recent  drop  in oil prices has had little negative

impact  so  far.  Drillers  are waiting  to see  if the  lower price  persists before

changing plans, while refiners and retailers  are enjoying  the highest margins

in years.

Financial  Sector

XII-4

Strong  competition among  banks  for  quality  loans  continues  to  be  reported

in  the District, particularly in  the Northwest and California.  Conditions  are

improving  in  agricultural areas,  with a drop  in  non-performing loans  and  improved

asset  quality.  Loan growth  is  above expectations  in Washington.  Several

respondents cited problems  competing with below-market offers  by Savings  and

Loan  institutions.

