FEDERAL  RESERVE  press  release 

For  Use  at  4:30  p.m. 

May  20,  1988 

The Federal Reserve Board  and the  Federal  Open Market 

Committee  today  released the  attached  record  of  policy actions 

taken  by  the  Federal  Open Market  Committee  at  its  meeting on 

March 29,  1988.  

Such  records  for  each meeting  of  the  Committee are made 

available  a few days  after the next  regularly  scheduled meeting 

and  are  published  in  the  Federal Reserve Bulletin and  the  Board's 

Annual Report.  The  summary  descriptions of  economic and  financial 

conditions they  contain are  based  solely on the  information that 

was available  to  the  Committee  at  the  time  of  the meeting.

Attachment

RECORD OF  POLICY ACTIONS  OF  THE 
FEDERAL  OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 

Meeting  Held on  March 29,  1988 

Domestic policy directive 

The  information reviewed  at  this meeting  suggested  that  economic 

activity was  continuing  to  expand  in  the  current  quarter, although the  rate 

of growth was  down  somewhat  from the  rapid  pace  in  the  fourth quarter.  The 

moderation reflected a  considerable  slowing  in  the  pace  of  inventory  invest

ment.  However, domestic  final  sales  seemed  to  have  picked up  sharply  in 

the  first  quarter;  business  capital expenditures  apparently increased sub

stantially  and  consumer  spending  also  strengthened, buoyed  by  higher  sales 

of motor vehicles.  The  rate of  inflation had remained  relatively restrained 

over the  course of  recent  months and wage  trends  had  shown little  change.  

Growth  in  industrial  production moderated  in January and  February 

from a  rapid  pace  in  late  1987.  After  a  surge  in  the  second  half  of  1987, 

the  output  of  materials edged  down.  Also, auto  assemblies  and  the production 

of consumer  home  goods dropped  below their  late-1987 levels,  apparently re

flecting  in  part  an effort  to  trim  or  to  moderate  the  growth in  inventories.  

In  contrast,  the  production of  business  equipment remained  quite  strong, with 

gains  in nearly all  categories.  Capacity utilization rates  were at  relatively 

high levels  in  a number  of  industries.  Gains  in  total  nonfarm payroll  employ

ment  continued  strong over  the January-February  period,  led by  the service and 

retail  trade  sectors.  In manufacturing,  employment gains  were smaller  in 

January  and February than  during the  second  half of  1987.  The  unemployment 

rate  edged  down  to 5.7  percent  in February, its  lowest level  since mid-1979.

3/29/88 

-2

Increased demand  for motor  vehicles  produced  a rebound  in consumer 

spending early in  the  year.  That  demand appeared  to  be  bolstered  by  sales 

incentives  programs,  strong  income growth, and rising consumer  confidence.  

Excluding motor  vehicles, nominal retail  sales  were essentially  flat  since 

November, and  the  saving rate was well above  its average  for the  year 

preceding the break  in the  stock market.  

Housing  activity picked  up  in February but  still was  slightly below 

its  fourth-quarter pace.  While  sales  of  new and existing  homes  continued  to 

decline in  January, housing starts  rose  to  an annual  rate  of  1.49 million 

units  in February, with growth stronger in  the  single-family  sector  than in 

the  multifamily area.  

Available  information  suggested  that  business  fixed  investment 

was  increasing rapidly since, late last  year, led  by large  gains  in equipment 

spending.  Data  on  shipments  indicated a surge  in spending  on information

processing equipment.  Increases  in  other  equipment  categories were  smaller 

but  were widespread.  Spending  on nonresidential  structures was  relatively 

weak in early 1988.  Inventory investment  apparently slowed  in the  first 

quarter, reflecting  the strength in sales  of  motor vehicles combined with 

cutbacks  in  their production.  

The  nominal  U.S. merchandise  trade deficit  in  January was  signifi

cantly below the  fourth-quarter average, although essentially unchanged  from 

December.  Non-oil  imports and nonagricultural  exports both fell noticeably 

from their  December  levels.  The current  account  deficit had  narrowed in  the 

fourth  quarter, but  the improvement was more  than accounted for by a sharp 

increase in  capital  gains stemming  from the  depreciation of  the  dollar  and

3/29/88 

-3

the  related  revaluation  in  the  book value of  direct U.S.  investments  abroad 

denominated in  foreign  currencies.  On  average, economic  growth  in major 

foreign industrial countries  continued  strong  in  the fourth  quarter and 

early this  year,  though it  slowed  somewhat  from the  rapid  third-quarter 

pace.  Growth was  particularly  robust  in Canada  and Japan.  

Increases  in  consumer  prices  remained  relatively moderate  in early 

1988,  reflecting the  impact  of  declining energy prices  and a relatively small 

rise  in food  prices.  At  the producer  level,  prices  of  finished goods  fell 

slightly  in  February after  fluctuating irregularly in  other  recent months, 

largely because of  swings  in food  prices.  Commodity  prices  registered 

mixed changes  during the  first  quarter.  The  index of  hourly  earnings was 

unchanged  in  February after  increasing  in  January, and  on  balance  it  rose 

roughly in  line with the  pace  in 1987.  

At  its  meeting on  February 9-10,  1988, the Committee had adopted a 

directive  that  called  for maintaining  the  slightly  reduced degree  of  pressure 

on reserve  positions  that had  been  sought  since late  January.  These  reserve 

conditions  were expected  to  be  consistent  with growth  in  both M2  and M3 at 

annual  rates of  about  6 to 7 percent  over the  period from November  through 

March.  With regard  to  operating procedures,  the  Committee had agreed  that 

the more  normal  approach  to  operations  implemented  especially since  the 

year-end, which emphasized the provision of  reserves  rather  than money market 

conditions, remained  generally appropriate.  Nonetheless,  it was understood 

that  some  flexibility might  continue to  be  needed  in the  conduct of  operations 

in  light  of  the still  somewhat unsettled  conditions  in financial markets, 

the uncertainties  in  the relationship between reserve  and money-market

3/29/88 

-4

conditions,  and  the  substantial  risks  of unanticipated  economic and  financial 

developments.  Taking account  of  conditions  in  financial markets,  the members 

had decided that  somewhat  less  or  somewhat  more reserve restraint  would  be 

acceptable, depending  on the  strength of  the  business  expansion, indications 

of  inflationary pressures, developments  in  foreign exchange markets, and 

the behavior of  the monetary aggregates.  The  intermeeting range  for  the 

federal  funds  rate had  been left  unchanged  at  4 to 8 percent.  

As  contemplated at  the  February meeting, primary emphasis  was  placed 

on achieving  reserve objectives  during the  intermeeting period, although 

slightly greater than normal attention continued  to be  given  to  developments 

in  the money market.  In  the  three reserve  maintenance periods  ending March  23, 

adjustment  plus  seasonal borrowing averaged  $238  million.  Growth in M2  and M3 

remained  relatively robust  in February and  apparently also  in March following 

a rebound in  January.  Since November both aggregates  had expanded at  an  annual 

rate  of  about  7 percent.  Growth in Ml  slowed considerably over  the  intermeeting 

period  from a very rapid  pace  in January.  With transaction deposits  expanding 

at  a relatively  sluggish pace on  balance and  excess  reserves declining, total 

reserves advanced at  a modest  rate  during  the  intermeeting  period.  

The federal  funds  rate  averaged 6.59  percent  for  the  three  full 

reserve maintenance periods  since  the  February meeting, close  to  the  rate 

prevailing  around the  time  of  that meeting  but  below the  average in January.  

Most  other  interest  rates  rose  somewhat  on balance during  the  intermeeting 

period.  The largest  increases were in  bond markets and they  appeared to 

have been prompted  by evidence  of more strength in  the  economy  than had

3/29/88 

-5

been anticipated.  Broad  indexes of  stock prices rose  somewhat over  the 

period, but  price  swings  remained  sizable on  occasion.  

Through most of  the period  since the February meeting the  dollar 

fluctuated  in a relatively  narrow range.  However, it  came under downward 

pressure  late in  the period  following  reports suggesting  stronger than 

anticipated growth in U.S.  domestic demand  that  raised  questions about 

the pace of  adjustment  in  the U.S.  trade  balance.  Over  the  intermeeting 

period  the  dollar declined  2-1/4  percent on a weighted-average basis  in 

relation to  the other G-10  currencies.  The  net  decline was largely accounted 

for by  a 4 percent depreciation in  terms  of  the  pound and  2 percent  in  terms 

of  the  Canadian dollar  and  the yen, while the  mark and other EMS currencies 

remained little  changed in relation  to  the  dollar.  

The  staff  projection prepared for  today's meeting suggested  more 

strength  in business  activity  this year  than  had  been forecast  earlier.  The 

faster  growth was expected to  be associated with little  change  in the  un

employment  rate  from current  levels.  And while the  projection for  1989  now 

indicated  a somewhat  reduced  rate  of growth,  higher levels  of  capacity utiliza

tion  over  the projection  period as  a whole were  associated with marginally 

higher rates  of  inflation  by late  1988  and for the  year 1989.  A key adjust

ment  in  the  forecast  was  stronger investment  spending.  The  staff continued 

to  anticipate  that  the  external sector would make  a substantial  positive 

contribution to  business  activity in  1988 and  1989.  

In  the Committee's  discussion of  the  economic situation and outlook, 

the members generally agreed that  the  information available  since  the February 

meeting pointed  to  a stronger expansion  in  business activity than they had

3/29/88 

-6

anticipated earlier.  Unfortunately,  recent  developments  in  the view of 

several members also  increased the risks  of  more pressures  on  productive 

resources and more  inflation.  A number  of  members  noted  that  the  revised 

staff  forecast  was in  line with their own  projections and  some also  indicated 

that  any deviations were likely  to  be  in  the  direction of  somewhat  faster 

expansion and  even higher  rates  of  inflation.  A number of  other members 

did not  disagree  that  the  risks had  shifted  and  that  concerns  about  a 

recession had receded,  but  they also  referred to  areas  of weakness  in  the 

economy that  implied  the  potential for relatively moderate  growth without 

adding  to  price pressures.  

In the course  of  the Committee's discussion, members referred  to 

high or improving levels  of  business  activity in many parts  of  the  country, 

albeit  from depressed levels  in  some  areas  or  sectors of  the  economy.  

Manufacturing was  exhibiting particular  strength across  the  nation.  Despite 

some  increasing pressures  on manufacturing capacity,  business  executives 

generally appeared  to  remain cautious  in  their  plans for new production 

facilities,  apparently reflecting  their uncertainties about  the  outlook 

for  sales  growth in both domestic and export markets.  However,  some 

businesses  were reported to  be  in the  process  of  reappraising their  capacity 

needs,  and  with demands for business  equipment  relatively strong, a number 

of members concluded that appreciable  further growth was likely in  overall 

business-fixed investment.  The  members differed to  some extent  in  their 

views on  the  outlook for consumer  spending  and business  inventory accumula

tion, but  they generally expected  at  least moderate growth in  total  domestic 

final demands.

3/29/88

In the view of  some members  any strengthening  in domestic  demand 

could well  give rise  to  pressures  on resources  as  net  exports  continued  to 

expand.  The  outlook for trade  remained  subject  to  considerable uncertainty, 

but  further  improvement  in  the  trade  balance was nonetheless  a reasonable 

prospect.  That  prospect  was  supported by reports  from businesses  of  their 

increased ability to  compete internationally.  A number of  members again 

commented  that  long-run adjustment  in  the  trade balance would  require a 

period of relatively moderate growth in  domestic purchases  as  more production 

was  directed to  export markets.  

Turning to  the  outlook for  inflation,  some members  reported that 

an increasing number of  business  contacts  were  expressing concern about  the 

prospects  for  prices and  wages.  On  the positive  side, while  some deterioration 

seemed  to have  occurred recently,  inflationary expectations appeared  to  have 

diminished  on balance since  the  stock market  crash in October.  Moreover, 

aggregate  measures of prices  and wages had not  yet  shown any sustained 

tendency  to  accelerate.  This  could  indicate  that  some  leeway  remained  in 

the  economy before  a more serious  inflation problem emerged.  Inflation 

developments did  not  depend solely on rates  of  capacity use but on the 

overall inflationary  and financial  climate and  on expectations  about  policy 

responses  to  inflation.  In  particular,  responses  to  rising  capacity con

straints  might be  reduced  or  delayed in  light of  the  downtrend  in  inflation 

since  the  early 1980's.  Nonetheless, most members  agreed  that  the  risks 

of more  inflation stemming from increased  pressures  on capacity had  increased 

and  represented a key challenge for  policymakers.  In  a still  limited number 

of  manufacturing industries,  relatively high  capacity utilization rates  were

3/29/88 

-8

being  reflected  in  sizable  price  increases  for  some metals and  other business 

products,  increasing lead  times  in  filling  certain orders,  and  some pre

cautionary  ordering  in  anticipation of  future needs.  While  there was little 

evidence  thus  far  that  the added  price pressures  extended  to  finished  products 

or  that  overall business  buying  and  inventory  patterns were being  significantly 

affected, the  economy might well  be near  the point where faster  growth  in 

business  activity  would induce  a higher rate  of  inflation, and  in  the view 

of  several members  there was  a potential  for a sharp escalation in prices.  

Members were particularly  concerned  that  any tendency  for greater price 

pressures  to  become  imbedded  in more  rapid wage  increases would  make achieve

ment  of  the  ultimate objective  of  price  stability considerably more difficult.  

In  further comments  some members noted  that  an assessment  of  the 

economic  outlook was complicated by  the  continuing risks  associated with 

the  troubled  status  of a number of  financial institutions  and the  still 

somewhat  unsettled  conditions  in  financial markets,  as evidenced  in  part 

by  occasionally sharp movements  in  stock  prices.  Some members  believed 

that  speculative  attitudes  had  intensified  recently  as reflected  for example 

in increases  in  corporate merger, acquisition and commercial  construction 

activities  that  typically  involved  heavy  use  of debt  financing.  Such  a 

development  was surprising  so  soon after  the  October 1987  disturbances  in 

financial markets, and still  growing debt  burdens  served to  increase  the 

vulnerability of  the  economy to  adverse developments.  Some members also 

expressed considerable  concern about  the  outlook  for  the dollar which  had 

been  under  downward pressure  in  the  foreign exchange  markets.  A sizable 

further decline  in the dollar, while  it  might  have  favorable  implications

3/29/88 

-9

for  the U.S.  trade  balance, would tend  to  raise domestic  prices  and could 

adversely affect  the nation's  ability to  continue  to  finance a massive  trade 

deficit,  with disruptive  effects  on domestic  financial  markets and  the 

domestic  economy.  

At  its meeting  in  February  the Committee  had agreed on policy 

objectives  that  called  for monetary growth ranges  of  4 to  8 percent for 

both M2  and M3 for  the  period  from the  fourth  quarter of  1987  to  the  fourth 

quarter of  1988.  The associated  range  for growth  in  total domestic  non

financial debt  was  set  at  7 to  11  percent.  The  Committee decided not  to 

establish a numerical  target  for  M1  growth;  instead,  the appropriateness 

of  changes  in Ml would  be  evaluated  during  the  year  in  the  light  of  the 

behavior  of  M1 velocity,  developments  in  the economy and  financial markets, 

and  the  nature of  emerging  price  pressures.  

In  the Committee's  discussion of  policy implementation  for  the 

intermeeting period  ahead,  nearly all  the members favored  some  increase in 

the  degree  of  pressure  on  reserve positions.  Most  indicated  a preference  for 

only a slight move  toward  restraint, at  least  at  this  time,  but a few urged 

somewhat  greater  tightening.  Several  commented  that  a stronger  economic 

outlook in  the context  of  already high capacity utilization rates  in  a number 

of  industries  required  timely  action to  help  prevent the  business  expansion 

from gathering  excessive  and unsustainable momentum that would  lead  to  higher 

inflation.  A policy response under  emerging  circumstances would  also serve  to 

confirm the  System's  commitment to  achieving price  stability over time and might 

help to  avert  an aggravation of  inflationary expectations.  Moreover, action 

at  this  time might  preclude the need for more  substantial  tightening  later.

3/29/88 

-10

While  they  favored a slight  increase  in  reserve  pressures,  a number 

of  members  stressed  that monetary  policy should not overreact  to  recent 

developments.  The  firming should  proceed with caution in  light  of  the pre

vailing uncertainties  in  the  economic  outlook and the  current absence  of 

evidence  in broad measures  of  prices and wages that  rates  of  inflation were 

already rising.  Other factors  cited  in  favor of  a cautious  approach included 

the  persisting problems  or  incomplete recovery in  some  sectors  of  the  economy 

and areas  of  the  country, the still  sensitive conditions  in  financial markets, 

and the  troubled  status  of  many financial  institutions.  In  the view of  one 

member, underlying  demands  in  the economy were not likely  to  be  sufficiently 

robust  to  pose a threat  of  greater inflation, and so  prospective economic 

and  financial conditions did  not warrant  any tightening of  reserve conditions.  

In  the  course  of  the  Committee's discussion, some members noted 

that  growth of  the  broader monetary aggregates had  remained fairly  rapid in 

February and March.  According  to  a staff analysis,  the  reserve conditions 

favored by most members  were  likely to  be  associated with  some  slowing  in 

the expansion of  those aggregates, assuming a typically sluggish adjustment 

of  offering rates on  retail  deposits to  changes  in  short-term market  rates.  

Even so,  the  analysis  suggested  that  for  the  year through  June growth of 

both M2  and M3 would  still  be appreciably  above the  midpoints of  the 

Committee's  ranges for  1988.  Some members  observed  that  the near-term 

outlook for monetary  growth was  subject  to more uncertainty than usual 

because  the  impact of  new tax laws  on mid-April tax  payments  and  related 

deposit balances  could not be  fully anticipated.  Some  concern was  expressed 

regarding  the  inflationary potential  of  the recent  rates of  growth in  the

3/29/88 

-11

broader monetary aggregates, and one  member commented  that  under prevailing 

circumstances  significantly stronger  than expected expansion in  those aggre

gates  should be  resisted, especially expansion that  brought  the  cumulative 

growth of M2 and M3  to  levels  above  the  Committee's ranges by mid-year.  

During  this meeting the Committee reviewed  its  operating procedures 

at  some  length,  including  the  relative merits of  focusing  primarily on money 

market  conditions  or  on  a specified degree  of  reserve  pressure  in  the  day-to

day  conduct of monetary policy.  The considerable  emphasis on stabilizing  money 

market  conditions  in  the period  after the  October  collapse of  the  stock market 

had given way  increasingly  to  the  earlier concentration on achieving reserve 

position  objectives, especially  since  the  year-end.  Nonetheless,  in keeping 

with the Committee's  instructions  as  reaffirmed at  the February meeting, open 

market operations  had  continued  to  be  conducted with some  degree  of  flexibility 

that  involved  occasional  departures  from  a normal  focus  on  targeting  reserve 

positions  and  slightly greater  than usual attention  to  money market  conditions.  

In  today's  discussion a few members  indicated  that  they  favored  paying  greater 

attention to money market  conditions  in the normal  course of  conducting  open 

market operations.  It  was noted  in  support  of  this view that money market 

interest  rates were a key variable  for  transmitting monetary policy  to 

financial  markets  and  the  economy, and  that  the variability in  those  rates 

that  sometimes  accompanied  the  pursuit of  a given degree  of  pressure  on 

reserve  positions  injected  an unneeded  element  of  uncertainty  in the  decisions 

of  market participants.  However, most  members were in favor of  either  re

taining  the  existing  emphasis on  reserve pressures  or  completing the  process 

of  reinstating  the previous  approach  to reserve management.  Short-run

3/29/88 

-12

variability in money market  interest  rates was  not  seen as  detracting from 

the  functioning of  the market  or  the  implementation of  policy  since market 

participants were well aware  of  the  System's procedures,  and  such  fluctuations 

could reflect  important  shifts  in market  expectations  or underlying  conditions 

of  supply and  demand  for reserves  and credit.  The  shifts would be  masked  if 

the Federal Reserve were to  focus more  closely on  money market  conditions  in 

its  day-to-day conduct  of  open market  operations.  Even  so, a majority of  the 

members  felt  that  the  uncertain economic  outlook and  still  sensitive  conditions 

in  financial  markets warranted some  continuing  flexibility in  the  conduct  of 

open market operations.  

In  the Committee's  consideration of  possible  adjustments  in policy 

implementation  during the  intermeeting period,  some members  felt  that  the 

risks of  more inflation  argued for giving  particular attention to  developments 

that  might  call  for  somewhat  tighter reserve conditions.  A majority of  the 

members believed, however,  that  there  should  be no  presumption about  the 

likely  direction of  intermeeting adjustments,  if  any,  in the  implementation 

of  policy.  While these  members generally agreed that  the  economic  risks 

were  in  the  direction of more  inflation, they preferred  not  to weight  the 

directive  toward  possible  further tightening  in  light  of  the  firming that 

was  already contemplated  at  this meeting  and  the considerable  uncertainties 

that  they  saw in  the economic  and  financial  outlook.  One member  proposed 

placing more emphasis  on  the behavior  of  the monetary aggregates as  a factor 

that  might  trigger  some firming  during  the  intermeeting period, but  other 

members  preferred  the  current  emphasis,  partly because any surge  in money 

growth over  the weeks  ahead might  reflect  temporary developments  related

3/29/88 

-13

to mid-April  tax payments.  Some  consideration was given during  the  discussion 

to  an upward adjustment  in  the  intermeeting range  for the  federal  funds  rate, 

especially since  federal  funds  could  trade well  into  the  upper half  of  the 

Committee's  range  following the  decision made  at  today's meeting.  However, 

the members  concluded  that  increasing  the range  under  current  circumstances 

could be  misread as  implying  a greater move towards  restraint  than  the 

Committee intended.  

At  the  conclusion  of  the  Committee's discussion, all  but one of  the 

members  indicated their  acceptance of  a directive that  called  for a slight 

increase  in  the  degree  of  pressure on  reserve positions.  With regard  to 

the  Committee's operating procedures,  a majority continued to  endorse  the 

view  that  some  flexibility might  be  desirable  in  the  day-to-day conduct  of 

open market operations  in  light  of  the  still  somewhat  unsettled conditions 

in  financial markets  and the  uncertainties surrounding  the economic  outlook.  

Taking account  of  conditions in  financial markets,  the  members  indicated 

that  somewhat  greater  or  somewhat  lesser  reserve restraint would be  acceptable 

depending on  the  strength  of  the  business  expansion, indications of  inflation, 

the  performance of  the dollar  in foreign exchange  markets, and  the behavior 

of  the monetary aggregates.  The  reserve conditions  contemplated by  the 

Committee were expected  to  be  consistent  with growth in  both M2 and M3 over 

the period  from March through June at  annual rates  of about  6 to  7 percent.  

As at  previous meetings,  the  Committee decided not  to  indicate  any expectation 

regarding  the growth of  Ml over  the months  ahead.  The members  agreed  that  the 

intermeeting  range  for  the  federal  funds  rate,  which provides one mechanism for 

initiating  consultation of the  Committee when its  boundaries  are persistently 

exceeded,  should be left  unchanged at  4 to  8 percent.

3/29/88

-14-

At  the  conclusion of the meeting  the  following  domestic  policy 

directive was  issued  to  the  Federal Reserve  Bank of New York: 

The information reviewed at  this meeting  suggests 

some moderation  in the expansion  of  economic activity 
in  the  current  quarter  from the  rapid  pace  in  the 
fourth quarter;  the continuing  expansion has  been 
supported  by  a sharp  pickup  in domestic  final  sales 
while  the  accumulation of  inventories  appears  to 
have slowed.  Total  nonfarm payroll employment  rose 
substantially  over the first  two months  of  the year, 
although  employment growth  slowed  somewhat  in  the 
manufacturing sector.  The civilian unemployment  rate 
fell  slightly  to  5.7  percent  in February.  Growth  in 
industrial  production moderated in  early  1988  from a 
brisk  pace during  the second  half  of  1987.  Consumer 
spending  strengthened in January and February,  buoyed 
by higher sales  of motor vehicles.  Indicators of 
business  capital  spending  pointed  to  substantial  gains 
in  the first  quarter.  Housing  starts  rebounded  in 
February  but were  still somewhat  below the reduced 
fourth-quarter average.  The nominal U.S.  merchandise 
trade  deficit  changed little  in January and  was 
significantly below the  fourth-quarter average.  In 
recent  months  the  rise  in consumer  and producer prices 
has been relatively modest on  balance,  reflecting 
developments  in  food and energy prices, and wage 
trends  have  shown  little change.  

Most  interest  rates were  up somewhat  on  balance 

since  the Committee's meeting in February, with the 
largest  increases  concentrated in  bond  markets.  The 
trade-weighted foreign exchange value  of  the  dollar 
in  terms  of  the  other G-10 currencies  fluctuated  in 
a relatively narrow range over most of  the  intermeeting 
period, but  declined  somewhat  in  recent  days.  

After  strengthening in January, growth  of  M2 and 

M3  remained  relatively  robust  in February  and  in  the 
first part  of  March.  Thus  far  this year expansion  of 
these  two aggregates  appears to  have been  in the upper 
portion of  the ranges  established  by  the Committee  for 
1988.  Ml has grown moderately on balance  since  the 
fourth quarter.  Expansion  in  total domestic  nonfinancial 
debt  appears  to  be  continuing at  a pace  close  to  that 
in  1987.

3/29/88

-15-

The  Federal  Open Market Committee  seeks  monetary 
and  financial conditions  that  will foster  price  stability 
over  time, promote growth  in output  on a sustainable  basis, 
and  contribute to  an improved  pattern of  international 
transactions.  In furtherance  of  these  objectives,  the 
Committee  at  its  meeting  in February established  growth 
ranges  of  4 to  8 percent  for both M2 and M3, measured 
from  the fourth quarter  of  1987  to  the  fourth  quarter 
of  1988.  The monitoring range  for  growth  in total 
domestic nonfinancial  debt was  set  at  7 to  11  percent 
for the  year.  

With respect  to  Ml,  the Committee decided  in 
February not  to  establish a specific  target  for  1988.  
The behavior  of  this  aggregate  in relation  to  economic 
activity and  prices has  become very sensitive  to changes 
in  interest rates, among  other  factors,  as  evidenced 
by sharp swings  in  its  velocity in  recent  years.  
Consequently, the appropriateness of  changes  in Ml 
this year  will continue  to  be  evaluated  in  the  light 
of  the  behavior of  its  velocity, developments  in the 
economy and  financial markets,  and the  nature  of 
emerging  price  pressures.  

In  the  implementation  of  policy  for the  immediate 

future,  the  Committee seeks  to  increase  slightly  the 
degree  of  pressure  on reserve  positions.  The Committee 
agrees  that  the  current more  normal approach to  open 
market operations remains  appropriate;  still  sensitive 
conditions  in financial markets and  uncertainties in 
the  economic outlook may continue  to  call  for some 
flexibility in operations.  Taking  account  of  conditions 
in  financial markets,  somewhat greater  reserve restraint 
or somewhat  lesser  reserve  restraint would be  acceptable 
depending on  the  strength of  the  business  expansion, 
indications  of  inflationary pressures,  developments 
in  foreign exchange markets, as  well as  the behavior 
of  the  monetary aggregates.  The contemplated reserve 
conditions  are  expected  to  be  consistent with growth 
in M2 and M3 over  the  period  from March through June 
at  annual  rates of  about  6 to  7 percent.  The Chairman 
may call  for Committee consultation  if  it  appears  to 
the Manager for Domestic  Operations  that  reserve 
conditions  during  the  period  before  the  next  meeting 
are likely to  be associated with a federal funds rate 
persistently outside  a range  of  4 to  8 percent.

3/29/88

-16-

Votes  for  this  action:  Messrs.  Greenspan, 

Corrigan, Angell, Black, Forrestal, Heller, 
Hoskins,  Johnson, Kelley,  and  Parry.  Vote 
against  this  action:  Ms.  Seger.  

Ms.  Seger  dissented because she  did not  believe  that  economic 

and financial developments warranted  any tightening  of  reserve  conditions.  

She  did not  see a significant  risk of  more inflationary pressures on 

productive resources  stemming  from prospective demands  in  domestic and 

export  markets.  She  remained  concerned  about  the  downside  risks  in  the 

economy,  the  fragility in  financial markets,  especially  the  stock market, 

and  the weakened  condition of  many depository  institutions.

