SUMMARY  OF  COMMENTARY ON  CURRENT  ECONOMIC  CONDITIONS

BY  FEDERAL  RESERVE DISTRICT

June  1989

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS

SUMMARY........................ ..........  ............................. 

First  District--Boston.............................................. 

i

I-1

Second  District--New York........................................... 

II-

Third  District--Philadelphia......................................... 

III-

Fcurtr  District--Cleveland....................  ..................... 

IV-1

Fifth District--Richmond............................................ 

V-1

Sixth  District--Atlanta.............  .... .......................... 

VI-1

Seventh  District--Chicago......  ....................................  VII-1

Eighth  District--St.  Louis....................................  VIII-1

Ninth District--Minneapolis................  ....................... 

IX-1

Tenth  District--Kansas  City.......................................... 

X-1

Eleventh District--Dallas..................  ........................ 

XI-1

Twelfth  District--San Francisco.................................... 

XII-1

SUMMARY*

Economic activity  for most  of  the  nation  continues  to  advance,  but  a

number  of  Federal  Reserve districts  note  ebbing  rates  of  expansion.  Although

auto  sales  have dipped,  reports of  retail  sales  are  generally  positive.

Manufacturing growth  is leveling  off.  Real  estate  markets are  sluggish.  In

the  resources  sector,  firming oil  prices have  helped  the  energy-producing

districts,  while  environmentally-related  legal  issues  are  said  to  have

restricted  lumber  supplies.  Recent  rains  have alleviated  drought  problems  in

several  districts.  Loan  growth  varies considerably  across  regions.  A number

of  districts mention  undesirably  high  inventories,  particularly  in autos.

With  some exceptions,  wage  and  price  pressures are  not  accelerating.  Some

districts  said  their  respondents  had  not  been  able to  pass  their  input  cost

increases  through  to  their  customers.

Consumer  Spending

Retail  sales  reports  are  mixed,  but  the  tone  is generally positive.

Cleveland mentions  that  sales  in Ohio  rebounded  in May,  and  that gains

continued  into  June.  Demand  has  picked  up  in the  Kansas  City  district.  Dallas

and  New  York  note year-over-year gains,  and  Minneapolis  cites  strong  consumer

spending.  Boston, Chicago,  and  Philadelphia offer  less  positive comments,

however.  Strength  in sales  of  women's apparel  was  noted  by  several  districts,

but  consumers  appear  to  be  increasingly  cautious  about  purchases  of  big-ticket

items.

Auto  sales  have  weakened.  Philadelphia, Cleveland,  Richmond,  Chicago,

Kansas  City,  and San  Francisco  all  note  softening  demand,  while Atlanta

mentions undesirably  high  inventories  among dealers.  Dallas  cites moderate

*Prepared  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Dallas  and  based  on  information
gathered  before  June  12,  1989.

sales  growth  and  Minneapolis also  refers  to recent  expansion.  San  Francisco

reports  that  demand  is strong  in  some  parts  of  its  district,  although  not  in

most  of  them.

Manufacturing

Growth  in manufacturing activity  has  slowed.  Boston,  Philadelphia,

Richmond,  and  St.  Louis  all  note  evidence of  reduced rates  of  expansion,

although  San  Francisco  reports  robust  activity.  Boston,  Dallas,  and  San

Francisco mention  negative  impacts  of  reduced defense  contracting.  Several

districts  also  refer to  weak  demand  for  construction-related  products.

Nevertheless,  a number  of  sectors remain  strong  and  have  high  rates  of  capacity

utilization.  San  Francisco reports  bottlenecks  in the  commercial  aircraft

industry and  tight  capacity  at  most paper mills.  Chicago  and  Cleveland  note

strong  capital  goods  orders  and  Atlanta cites  upward  revisions  in capital

spending  plans by  several  manufacturers.  Most  plants  in the  St.  Louis  district

are  said  to  be  operating  near  full  capacity.  Although Atlanta and  Boston  say

export  demand  is strong,  a number of  other  districts  cite  concerns over

potential  or  actual  softening of  export markets for  some  industries.  Some

districts mention  rising  prices  of  basic  inputs,  particularly metals  and

certain  plastics.

Construction

Construction is showing  signs  of  sluggishness.  Boston,  New York,

Minneapolis,  Kansas  City, and  St.  Louis  mention evidence of  slipping

residential  real  estate  markets.  Nonresidential  activity  shows  greater

variance  across  regions,  with high  rates  of  industrial  construction  in the

Chicago  district  and  with strong  commercial  real  estate markets  in the  coastal

states  of  the  San Francisco  district.  In Arizona, which  is also  in the  San

Francisco district,  commercial  and  residential  real  estate markets  are

languishing.  Although Manhattan  is undergoing  a spate  of  hotel-building

activity,  loan officers  in the  southern  portion of  the  New  York  district  say

their  commercial  real  estate  markets  are  generally  quite  weak.  Dallas  mentions

that  nonresidential  construction  is unchanged  at  a low  level,  while

Philadelphia reports  that  commercial  real  estate markets  there  are  softening.

Resource  Industries

Conditions  in the  resource  sector  vary  among  individual  industries.

The  recent  firming  of  oil  prices  is said  to  have  helped  the  energy  sectors  in

the  Atlanta,  Kansas  City,  and  Dallas  districts, while  St.  Louis  reports  some

increases  in coal  output.  Minneapolis,  however,  notes  that  the wood  products

industry's  access  to  local  raw  materials  has  been  severely  limited  as  a result

of  environmental  concerns.  San  Francisco mentions  that  legal  issues  have

contributed to  a reduction  of  lumber  production  there,  but  that  exports  of  logs

have  also  contributed to  the  slowdown.

Agriculture

In agriculture,  the most  significant  news  may be  the  recent  rains,  which

have  helped  to  alleviate  drought  problems  in several  districts.  Subsoil

moisture  levels  remain  a cause of  concern, but  past  difficulties  have  been

reduced  by  precipitation  in the  St.  Louis,  Kansas  City,  and  Dallas  districts.

The  rains  came  too  late  to  avert  considerable damage  to  the  winter wheat  crops

in the  Dallas  and  Kansas  City  districts, where past  dry  weather  has  also

motivated ranchers  to  reduce  their  herd  sizes.  Wheat yields  in some  other

districts,  including  Richmond  and  Minneapolis  are expected  to  be  high.

Banking

Financial  industry  activity varies markedly  among  the districts  that

mention banking  conditions.  New York  notes  that  loan  demand  at  small  and

medium-size  banks  is the  same  or somewhat  weaker than  a year  ago.  Commercial

iv

loan demand  in the  Richmond  district remains  unchanged,  compared  with modest

growth  in the  first  half  of  April,  while  consumer  credit demand  there  is up

modestly.  Loan  volume  in  the  Philadelphia district  is growing,  but  at  a slower

rate  than during  the  first  quarter.  In May,  loan demand  surged  in the

Cleveland  district.  Loan  demand  in the Kansas  City  district  is also

increasing,  while St.  Louis  notes  improved  bank  profitability  and  asset

quality.  In the  San  Francisco  district,  commercial  loan demand  is increasing

and  most  western banks  are  posting  strong  profits.

FIRST  DISTRICT-BOSTON

Manufacturing  activity  in the  First District remained  soft  in April

and May, with-new orders showing  little growth from year-ago levels.

Retail  results were mixed, but  customers  are characterized as  cautious.

Some  firms have cut  capital  spending plans;  others  are proceeding  to  expand

operations.  Price increases,  except  for  selected materials,  are  reportedly

moderate.  A new  forecast for  the  region predicts  continued job  growth

through 1991,  albeit  slowing  in 1989  and 1990.

Retail

First  District  retailers  report  a variety of sales results  for

May.  Some  respondents enjoyed double-digit  increases from year-ago levels,

while  others saw  their receipts decline.  In general,  retailers  find

customers becoming  cautious.  Moderate-priced, discounted, and heavily

promoted  items are doing  especially well.  Sales of men's clothing have

weakened, while women's  clothes  are bouncing back.

Prices are generally stable, respondents  report.  While  prices of

some hardware  items  are edging higher, promotions are pulling other prices

down.  Profits are  also steady, as  sales  increases  or cost  cuts have offset

declines  in gross margins.  Labor costs have also stabilized.  While

contacts  still  consider the  labor market tight,  they report  lower  turnover

rates  and an  improvement in the  quality of new hires.

Half the retailers surveyed  expressed optimism about  the  remainder

of  1989.  These firms  continue  to  expand, but with caution.  Financing is

available, and real  estate developers are  actively seeking  tenants.

Nevertheless,  several contacts view New England  retailing as overbuilt and

highly competitive.  They worry that  firms  that  took on large debts during

a corporate restructuring were weakened in the  process.  One wholesaler

also noted  a rise  in receivables  and expressed concern over  the  strength

of  its  small retail  customers.

Manufacturing

For many First District manufacturing  contacts, business  activity

in April  and May slowed  from its previous  pace.  However, several  firms

sensed  a modest pick-up  at  the  end of the  period.  Sales ranged  from 12

percent  above to  12  percent below year-ago  levels, while orders were

generally  flat.  Demand  for  construction-related products  and most

defense and  consumer goods has  been relatively weak.  By  contrast,

industrial demand has  stayed relatively strong, and computer-related

activity may have  stabilized recently.  Exports also remain strong.  Half

the  firms  expressed concern about the dollar's recent  rise, but the

others believe that  foreign demand for  their products  is not

price-sensitive.

As  a result  of the  recent  softness and continuing productivity

gains,  employment levels  are  generally flat  to  down slightly.  Observers

in defense- and  computer-related  industries  expect  "downsizing" to

continue.  Similarly, over half the  respondents have pared capital

spending plans by 10  percent  or  so  from previously forecast  levels.

Capital purchases  include buildings as well as  equipment, with  some

expansions  located  in New England.  Inventories  remain satisfactory.

First  District manufacturers continue  to  complain of  increases  of

10  percent  or more  in the cost  of certain materials, including nickel  and

other metals, plastic  feedstocks,  packaging materials and ball bearings.

Most contacts  say  that  they cannot  pass these  cost  increases  through  to

their  customers.  A few have succeeded raising  their sales prices  between

1 and 5 percent.

First District manufacturers describe  their outlook as

"guarded."  Most  expect  GNP to  be virtually flat  for  the  rest  of the

year;  however, several  contacts believe that their own firm will

outperform the  economy.

Residential Real Estate

Residential real  estate  sales slowed in May and  are below

year-ago  levels.  Realtors believe  that  concerns about  the  regional

economy have  contributed more  to  this weakness  than have higher  interest

rates.  Nevertheless, both  factors have reduced demand  at a time  when the

inventory  is  large because of previous heavy building.

The  fall-off  in sales  is  concentrated  in condominiums and

mid-priced homes  ($150,000 to  $250,000),  but one  contact reported price

declines  at  the high  end  of Boston's  suburban market.  Most realtors

foresee  stable residential  sales through  the  summer, with a small

seasonal  improvement  possible.

Outlook

The New England Economic Project  (NEEP) held  its  semi-annual

outlook conference  in late May.  The NEEP forecasts  for  the New England

states  call  for nonagricultural employment to  grow more slowly  in 1989

than the  2.1  percent pace  of 1988.  Mirroring  the national outlook,

further  slowing  is  expected in 1990,  followed by a pickup  in 1991.

Nonmanufacturing jobs  will continue to  expand  over the  forecast period,

while manufacturing  employment will shrink until  late  1990.  Although

unemployment will  inch up, NEEP forecasters expect  the  region to  remain

prosperous, with unemployment rates  well below and per capita  income

considerably above  the national average.

II-I

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

A mixed pattern of  developments in the Second District  economy continued during

recent  weeks.  District  retailers  had over-the-year  sales gains during both April and

May, though  the extent  of  the increases varied widely.  Unemployment  rates in  District

states have  seesawed recently but are currently at  or  below the national level.  While

office leasing activity picked up further,  homebuilders reported  a slower pace of

construction.  Most small- and medium-sized banks reported that demand for commercial

loans  is  generally the  same or  somewhat  weaker  than a year ago.

Consumer Spending

District retailers  reported over-the-year sales gains during both April and May

though the extent of  the increases varied widely.  April gains  ranged between

2.7  percent  and 13.6 percent  while the May range was from 0.5 percent  to  6.6 percent.

Several contacts described their April  sales as well  above plan but a few found theirs

disappointing.  May results were generally below or  just about on target.  Among items

in strong demand at  District  department  stores  throughout  the period were women's

apparel, accessories and  cosmetics.  Men's  apparel and home  furnishings also sold well

in April but  demand for  them slowed after  that.

Inventories at  the start of  June were characterized by most respondents as

satisfactory, though  in one case only as a result of  heavy markdowns during recent

promotionals.  This  retailer  remarked  that profit margins at many stores are

increasingly being squeezed by higher  import  and supply prices on the one hand and

customer  resistance to  paying  for  these costs on the other.

Business Activity

District  unemployment  rates have seesawed  in recent  months but currently are at

or below the national  level with a May reading of  5.3 percent  in New York and

II-2

3.0 percent  in New Jersey.  (The New York rate averaged 4.2 percent last  year, however.)

In New York,  spokesmen for  Grumman now predict that  as many as 10,000  to 15,000  jobs

would be lost  on Long Island  if the Pentagon carries  out its plan to cancel several Navy

aircraft  contracts.

Some  40 percent  of purchasing managers  in Buffalo and Rochester  reported

improved business conditions in May, unchanged from the last surveys.  However,  in

Buffalo, there was  also an  increase in the percentage of firms with worsened conditions.

Several  large projects were announced  in the District  since the last report.  An

aluminum company will  invest $175  million over  the next  three years to modernize a

sheet-producing plant north of Syracuse, and General Electric will produce eight  steam

turbine engines at  its Schenectady facility as part of a $750  million order from a

foreign utility company.  Elsewhere,  the Yonkers City Council gave final approval to a

$300  million waterfront  project which will include apartments, a shopping mall and

various recreational  facilities, and the Islip Town Board approved a master plan for

redeveloping  an 800-acre former  state hospital  into a mixed-use complex  composed of

industrial, office  and retail space, a hotel,  housing,  recreational facilities and an

expansion of  the New York Institute of Technology campus.  Newark was the site of  several

recent  developments:  construction was begun on two shopping centers;  Seton Hall

University will build  two office towers  and expand its law school  in conjunction with a

development corporation and the city; plans were also announced for a $130  million

office, hotel and  retail  complex to be linked  by  "skyways" to the nearby railroad station.

Residential Construction and Real  Estate

District homebuilders report  a slower pace of construction activity  in recent

weeks.  In some areas where builders earlier had been quite busy, this slowing was

attributed in large part  to  unusually rainy weather, which deterred potential buyers  from

looking and restricted  the amount  of construction which could be done.  In other areas,

however, where  large inventories of  homes for resale exist,  demand for new homes

continued weak  in the face of buyer resistance  to high prices.  Some observers noted a

pickup  in the  remodeling and  expansion of existing homes by owners  unwilling to  reduce

II-3

their asking prices.  While the current  lull  in the  housing market  is viewed by many as an

inevitable part  of  a cycle following  several years of  substantial strength, the  recent

decline in  interest  rates has generated hope that  an upturn in  buyer enthusiasm will occur.

Office leasing activity picked up  further  in  recent weeks  and both downtown and

midtown Manhattan had  volume well above year-earlier  levels.  Despite strong  leasing,

however,  Manhattan vacancy rates  showed no  improvement because of  the large  amount of

additional  space recently put on the market.  Office vacancy rates  did edge down in  some

parts of  the District  such as  northern New Jersey and Fairfield and Nassau counties.

Manhattan is currently undergoing a spate of  hotel-building activity in areas

which,  until  recently, had  been deemed unlikely  locales.  Three hotels are under

construction near  Times Square, where the first  new hotel opened four  years ago,  and two

others are going  up in  the Wall Street  area,  where the first  hotel  opened eight years

ago.  New developments  such as tourist attractions,  a convention center,  and a cluster of

new office buildings are credited with turning these areas  into more viable hotel  sites.

Financial Developments

Based on a survey of  senior officers  at  small- and medium-sized banks in  the

Second District, demand for commercial  loans  is generally the same or  somewhat weaker  than

a year  ago.  Most  officers did  not believe that  the  rise  in  interest  rates over  the past

year substantially dampened commercial loan demand.  In their opinion, other factors  such

as projected sales and expectations of  future economic conditions are probably more

crucial in  expansion and modernization plans of firms and the subsequent  loan demand.

With regard  to particular  types of  commercial  lending, bankers in upstate New York tended

to report  strong demand for  construction loans while those in the southern portion of  the

Second District  stated  that  the commercial real  estate market  is quite weak.  However,

except  for  the real  estate sector,  most  respondents believed that  their  local economy is

basically healthy, though only a few noted  strong growth.  The majority of  those surveyed

expect demand for commercial loans  to remain stable through 1989, barring a sharp fall  in

interest  rates.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT  - PHILADELPHIA

Indications from nearly all sectors of the Third District economy surveyed

in June reveal little, if any, growth in recent weeks.  Manufacturers report that

both new orders and production activity have been virtually steady since April.

Retailers say current dollar  sales are generally running just even with the pace

of  last  spring.  Bankers  indicate that growth in  loans  and deposits continues,

but  at  a slower  rate  since  May  than  in  the  first  four  months  of  the  year.

Realtors  say that home  sales  in April and May were very sluggish but  appear to

be picking up with the recent  drop  in mortgage rates;  however,  commercial real

estate markets are beginning  to show signs  of weakening.

The  consensus outlook  for the region's economy  is for  stable conditions,

at best, through the  summer.  Manufacturers forecast  steady to  slightly slower

activity  for  the  second  half  of  the  year,  and  they  are  planning  cuts  in

employment  and  smaller  increases  in  capital spending.  Retailers  expect sales

in  the  second  half  to  run  even  with  or  fall  below  the  current  pace,  in  real

terms.  Bankers  expect  slower  growth in  loan  demand  from  both  businesses and

consumers  and they plan to reduce commercial real  estate lending as well.

MANUFACTURING

Third District manufacturers contacted in late May and early June generally

report  that business  continues  to run  at an even  pace, as  it has  since  April.

Just over half of the firms surveyed indicated steady business as June began and

the rest  are  evenly divided  between those noting  a pickup  since May and  those

for  whom  business  slowed.  While  the  overall  picture  is one  of  no  change,

durables  producers  are  experiencing a drop-off  in  activity  while  nondurables

producers  are seeing some  improvement.

III-2

Firms  in the region have seen a leveling off  in the rate of  new orders  in

the past few weeks, in  contrast to the steady growth they had been experiencing,

and  order  backlogs  are  falling  as  shipments  continue  on  an  upward  trend.

Nevertheless,  inventory reduction, which had been  reported for  several months,

appears to have stalled in June.  Despite these indications of slackening demand

for manufactured goods, industrial firms in the region are maintaining employment

levels, although working hours are being trimmed at  some plants.  On the price

front,  increases  in  input  costs  are  noted  by  nearly  half  of  the  companies

contacted for this  report and about one-quarter are raising  the prices of their

own products.  These  indications  of price  increases are not quite as widespread

as  they had  been earlier this  year.

Looking  ahead,  sentiment  among  Third  District  manufacturers  is  widely

divided  but,  overall, slightly negative.  On  balance, managers  at area  plants

forecast  slower  business  during  the  second  half  of the  year, with  new orders

running just  steady and shipments declining as  order backlogs are worked down.

In line with their forecasts of reduced output, local firms plan to trim payrolls

and  working hours  somewhat by year-end, and  they  intend to  reduce inventories

as  well.  Capital  spending plans  still call for increased outlays over the next

six months,  on  balance,  but  compared  to  reports  over  the  last  twelve months,

fewer firms are boosting  spending and more are cutting back on plans.

RETAIL

Third District merchants generally report that sales in May were only about

even with the same month a year ago, in dollar terms.  Although women's apparel

sales continue to improve, sales in most other lines of goods are disappointing.

Discount stores are achieving somewhat better results than other types of stores,

but nearly all retailers contacted in early June describe  consumers as cautious

and reluctant  to  step up spending.  Auto  dealers  have seen  sales  slip despite

III-3

manufacturers'  incentives,  and many  dealers  are  cutting back  on orders  to the

factories  in an effort  to keep  inventories under control.

Retailers expect a soft  summer, and some predict that  the year-over-year

gain in  unit  sales for  the second  half will  drop  below the  increase posted  in

the first half.  For 1989  as a whole, area merchants are in agreement that  sales

will  increase  by  only  a  few  percent  above  1988,  in  dollar  terms. 

With

expectations  receding, retailers are trimming  inventories,  cutting orders,  and

holding  the line  on hiring.

FINANCE

Total  loan  volume  at  major  Third  District  banks  in  mid-May  was

approximately 11  percent above  the year-ago  level  as  growth  eased  from the  13

percent year-over-year gain for  the first quarter.  Lending  to both businesses

and  consumers  continues  to  increase,  according  to  bankers  contacted  in  early

June,  but they note some slackening  in  the upward pace  and they expect  further

slowing  of  growth  in  these  loan  categories  in  the  second  half.  Real estate

lending remains  fairly strong, with rising commercial construction loans making

up  for  slower  growth in residential mortgage lending.  Bankers say  concern for

credit  quality  in  commercial  real  estate  is growing,  however,  as  rents  and

occupancy  rates  appear  to  be  declining,  and  they  expect  to  cut  back  on

commitments for commercial real  estate financing  in the months  ahead.

Deposit growth at major Third District banks has slipped in the past month,

according  to  bankers,  but  not  by  as  much  as  asset  growth  has,  so  bankers

generally do not express concern about gathering funds.  Demand deposits declined

for  most  banks  in  May,  and  bankers  attribute  this  to  consumers  shifting  to

interest-bearing accounts  in response  to the  first quarter  increase in  interest

rates and  to  increased use  of cash management  services by corporate customers.

Time  deposit  growth  is  described  as  healthy.  Several  banks  are  promoting

certificates  of  deposit,  especially in  9-month to  2-year maturities,  and they

are gaining  significant deposits with rates of up  to  10  percent for  the

III-4

2-year term.

REAL ESTATE AND CONSTRUCTION

In  most  areas  of  the  Third  District,  realtors  say  sales  of  residential

properties are running well below last year's pace and price appreciation is only

marginal.  The  usual  spring  upturn  in  sales  did  not  materialize  this  year,

according  to realtors surveyed  in  early June,  but some  note signs  of  a pickup

with the recent  drop in mortgage rates.  Nevertheless, some realtors  say  sales

will  not  regain  much  strength  because  would-be  first-time  home  buyers  are

hampered by  an  inability to  make  the  typical  20  percent  downpayment,  despite

having  incomes  that would qualify them for  substantial monthly payments.

Commercial real  estate  in the  Third District  is also  showing some  signs

of  softness.  Office  occupancy rates remain fairly healthy in the Philadelphia

central  business district,  according to  realtors,  but  plans  for  several major

new buildings have  been postponed.  In the suburbs, vacancy rates are rising for

both  office  and  retail  space,  but  construction  has  not  slowed  significantly.

Industrial construction contracts awarded since April have fallen below the first

quarter rate, according to  builders, but remain above the value of contracts let

during  the spring  of  last year.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT  - CLEVELAND

Summary.  Most  of the  forecasters  who  attended the  latest  meeting  on  the

economic outlook  at  this  Bank still  expect  a  slow growth path  in  output

accompanied by  a 4.5%  rate  of  inflation well  into  1990.  District  respondents

report strengthening  in retail  sales  in May, although auto  sales were

less  than expected.  The  pace of manufacturing  appears  to  be  slowing.

Interest rates  are  generally expected  to  ease  further.

Economic  Prospects.  Economists  who  attended the  quarterly meeting  of  the

Fourth District  Economists'  Roundtable  on June  2  still  expect  a  soft  landing

for  1989-90.  The  27  forecasters, who  represent industry,  trade  and  financial

institutions  inside  and outside  this  district, expect a  1.5%  growth rate  in

output  into mid-1990, a  little  less  than  they  expected at  last  February's

meeting, and  a  step-up  to  a  2.5%  annual rate  of  increase  in  the  second half of

1990.  Individual forecasts  range  from a  supply-constrained  2.5%  growth rate

in output  to  a mild recession beginning  in 1989.  A  few expect  a  recession,

beginning  this  quarter or  next,  similar  to  the  mild recessions  in  1960-61  and

1969-70.

A  common  thread  in most of  the  forecasts  is  the persistence  of  inflation

at  about  an annual average  rate  of 4.5%  through  the  end of 1990.  A  concern

expressed by some  of  the  group  is  that  the  rate  of  inflation will  not  slow

once  it builds,  and  that  it will  not easily  slow unless  there  is  some  slack in

the  economy.  Therefore,  an issue  raised by  discussants  is  whether  there  is

greater  cost  if  the  inflation rate  climbs  to  6%  or  if  the unemployment  rate

IV-2

climbs  to  6%.  Some  felt  that policy risks  must be  taken now to  lower  the

inflation rate;  otherwise, inflation will build  in  the  absence of  slack.  A

few also cautioned that  an easier  monetary policy would risk accelerating

inflation  in a full  employment economy.

Consumption.  Two  large retailers  report  their  sales  in  Ohio  rebounded

in May and  that  gains  are  apparently  continuing  into June.  One reports  a

sizable year-over-year  increase  in  sales,  except  for weak sales  of home

electronics  and appliances.  Another retailer  reports  a better May, including

sales  of home  electronic products, which may be more  competitively priced

because  of alternative overseas  sourcing when Japanese  import  prices  rose

rapidly.  That retailer reports  high inventories  and plans  to  aggressively

promote  sales  in order  to cut  stocks.  A retail  trade  economist expects  real

consumer  spending will  increase  less  than 2% this  year.  His  studies  show

interest  rates  now have  little  effect  on consumer spending  for either  durable

or nondurable  goods.

Auto retailers  describe  consumer responses  to  the  latest  round  of

incentives  as  lackluster  and worse  than  expected.  Incentives  initially

boosted new car  sales  but consumer interest  since  then has  waned.  Dealers

generally complain of  squeezed profit margins  partly because  of  interest  costs

on unsold inventories, which have  also  resulted in  some  dealers  offering cars

at  about  cost.  Dealers  contacted expect  that  their orders  for  1990  models

will be conservative because of a likelihood of high  inventories  of  1989

models  going into  the new model year.

IV-3

Manufacturing.  Orders  and production generally remain strong, although

some  easing from full capacity levels  is  reported,  in part because  of summer

vacations.  Purchasing agents  in Cleveland and Cincinnati  report a reduced

pace both  in manufacturing activity and commodity price  increases.  Some  also

report  slower growth  in  exports.

Capital  goods  respondents report  that business  remains  strong and has been

unaffected by interest  rates.  One producer expects business spending  for

durable  equipment to be  only  slightly less  this  year  than  last.  He

expects  that  capital stock will  increase  faster  than  industrial output  this

year,

thereby easing pressure  on operating rates  and on producer prices.  Another

producer reports no  let  up  in  orders  for  electrical equipment.  Prices might

increase  a little more  this  year  despite ample  capacity as  producers  attempt

to  recover  some  of the  higher costs  of copper and aluminum.  A machinery

producer reports  production schedules  for  domestic  purchasers are  leveling

out, availability of materials  is  improving, and price pressures  are  showing

some  signs  of  easing.

Steel producers also note  some  let up  in activity  from consumer  durable

and capital  goods  producers.  Summer vacations,  auto changeovers,  and  some

softening in  demand for  steel  are expected to  reduce  steel  shipments  next

quarter  from this.

Financial Developments.  Several respondents believe  that  the  peak in

short-term  interest rates  for  this  year will  be  in  the  second quarter,  and one

bank  economist expects  that  the  funds  rate  could move  downward to  9% by

IV-4

yearend.  Some  respondents cautioned, however,  that interest  rates  could

rebound if premature easing by the Federal  Reserve were  to  result  in  stronger

economic  growth and further acceleration in prices.

Some banks  report that  loan demand surged in May, despite higher interest

rates,  and speculated that business  loans  were being used to  finance

inventories.  The  latest decline  in  the prime  rate  is  not expected to

change  loan activity much, even  though loans  tied to  the  prime  rate will  also

be  adjusted slightly downward.  Some mortgage  lenders  and  a producer of

household appliances  expect  that  recent declines  in  mortgage rates,  which may

result  in  a better-than-previously-expected level  of  housing sales  and  starts.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview

The  District economy showed  signs  of  slower  growth  in May, following  its

earlier  deceleration  in April.  Retail  sales  were  generally  lackluster,

although  some  department stores  reported  increases.  Manufacturing activity

grew  at  about  the  same  pace  as  in April,  which  had  been  slower  than  earlier

this year.  Residential  construction  remained  soft,  and  bankers  reported

little  growth  in loans.  Exports  rose  at  the  three major District  seaports,

while  imports  declined or  remained  unchanged.  On  District  farms,  planting

activity  progressed  rapidly  in recent weeks.

Manufacturers  and  retailers  expect  a deterioration  in the  trade  balance

and  little  change  in the  rate  of increase  in prices  and  wages  in the  next  few

months.  Bankers  expect  inflation  to  remain  in check.

Consumer  Spending

According  to  our  regular mail  survey,  District  retail  activity slowed

further in May.  There was  little  change  in the  proportion  of  respondents  who

reported  increases  in sales,  but  the  proportion  of  those who  reported

declines  rose.  More  than  half of the  retailers  expect  sales  to  rise  in the

next  six  months.

Retail  activity differed  by  type  of store.  Most car  dealers  indicated

declines  in sales.  Sales  at  department  stores  apparently  improved  in May,

however, as  almost  half  of  the  respondents  reported  increases.  Big  ticket

items  did  not  sell  well  at department  stores  in May but  are expected  to  do

better  in the  next  six  months.  None  of the  department  store  respondents

expected sales  to  decline  in  the  next  six  months.

Manufacturing

District manufacturing  activity continued  to  grow  in May  at April's

pace,  which  had  been  slower  than  in  previous  months.  About  half  of the

respondents  to  our  regular  mail  survey  reported no  change  in activity.  Among

the  other  half of  respondents,  those who  reported  increases  in shipments,  new

orders,  and employment  slightly outnumbered  those who  reported declines;

however, more  respondents  reported declines  than  increases  in unfilled orders

and  the  length  of  the workweek.  Prices  for  both  finished products  and  raw

materials  apparently continued  to  rise  at  about  the  same  rate  as  in April.

District manufacturers  are  guardedly  optimistic  about prospects  for

growth  in their businesses  in the  next  six months.  Respondents  who  expect

increases  in  sales  outnumbered  those who  expect  declines,  but  more  expect

decreases  than  increases  in  employment,  unfilled orders,  and  the  length  of

the  workweek.  With  regard  to  general  business  activity  in the  nation,  more

respondents  expect  decreases  than  increases  in the  next  six  months.

Inflation  and  Trade  Expectations

We asked  manufacturers  and  retailers  in the  District to  indicate  their

expectations  about U.S.  prices,  wages,  exports,  and  imports  in the  next  six

months.  The  results  are  summarized  in the  table  below.

Respondents  Expecting  Rate  of  Increase  to:

Rise 
15% 
21% 
24% 
32% 

Slow 
26% 
16% 
42% 
25% 

Not  Change
60%
62%
34%
43%

Prices 
Wages 
Exports 
Imports 

Housing

A survey  of District  homebuilders  indicated  that  residential

construction  remained  soft  in many areas  when  compared to  a year  ago.

Several  respondents,  however,  noted  that  activity  has  picked  up  somewhat

recently.  Most of  those  surveyed expect  the  demand  for  new  homes  to  increase

in the  next  several  months.

Financial

A telephone survey  of  bankers  indicated  that  the  demand  for  commercial

and  industrial  loans  was  flat  in many  parts  of  the  District  in May  compared

with modest  growth  in the  first  half  of  April.  Bankers  in Charlotte  continue

to  see  strong  loan activity.  Consumer credit  demand  was  reported  to  be up

modestly,  but  several  bankers  noted weakness  in automobile  loans.  Most

respondents  anticipate  a gradual  leveling  of  the  economy, while  none  expects

a severe  downturn.  Further,  none  of the  bankers  surveyed  expects  a

significant acceleration of  inflation.

Port Activity

The  three major  District seaports--Hampton  Roads  (Norfolk),  Charleston,

and  Baltimore--reported  increased exports  in May as  compared with April,  and

two  of the  three  reported decreased  imports.  Port  representatives  noted  that

compared  to  a year ago,  export  activity was  greater while  import activity was

generally  unchanged.  Representatives  from  Charleston  and  Baltimore  expect

export  activity to  continue  to outpace  import  activity during  the  next  six

months.  A representative  from the  Port  of Hampton  Roads,  however, expects

little  change  in the  ratio of exports  to  imports  in the  next  six months.

Agriculture

Drier weather  throughout much  of the  District  has  enabled  spring

planting activity to  progress  rapidly  in recent  weeks.  As  the  harvest of

winter wheat approaches,  most  areas  look for  high yields.  Fruit  and

vegetable crops  are  generally  rated  fair  to  good,  and  early prospects  for the

hay  crop  are  also  good.  In most  areas  of the  District,  farmland prices

continue to  rise.

VI-1

SIXTH  DISTRICT  - ATLANTA

Overview:  Firms  headquartered  in  the  Southeast  continue  to  report  business

activity  growing  although  many  believe  that  it  will  slow.  Reported  upward  revisions  in

capital  spending  plans  by  several  manufacturers,  indications  of  producers'  expanding

capacity,  and  strong  export  demand  provide  evidence  of  continued  growth.  At  the same

time,  there  are  also  reports  of  undesired  accumulations  of  inventories  in  construction

materials,  agricultural  supplies,  paper  materials,  automobiles  and  retail  goods  at

department  stores.  On  the  price  front,  our  contacts  are  indicating  generally  stable

prices  for  most  producer  inputs  used  in  their  operations.  Labor  costs  are  an  exception;

contacts  say  that  nonwage  benefits  have  been  rising  rapidly  and  report  that  localized

shortages  of  skilled  and  nonskilled  workers  are  generating  some  upward  pressure  on

wages.

Reports  of  Business  Activity:  Most  of  our  contacts  indicate  that  while  business

activity  is  still  growing,  its  pace  is  slowing.  A  few  contacts,  primarily  in  export  related

sectors,  indicated  a  recent  increase 

in  demand  and  corresponding  plans  to  expand

output.  Several  manufacturers  have  reported  that  they  have  recently  increased  their

capital  spending  plans.  A  chemical  producer  is  restarting  an  idle  plant,  while  a  plastics

manufacturer  is  planning  to  purchase  new  equipment  to  expand  output.  Several  oil

companies  operating  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  note  that  capital  spending  has  been  more

rapid  than  expected  as  the  result  of  oil  price  increases.  Sixteen  mobile  drilling rigs  have

recently  been  put  back  into  operation.  On  the  agricultural  side,  strong  demand  for

poultry  has  prompted  one  producer 

to  expand  processing  capacity  by  50  percent.

Financial  institutions  are  reporting  a  slight  weakening  in  overall  consumer  lending  and

credit  reference  firms  report  no  unusual  trends  in  consumer  credit,  except  reductions  in

new  auto loans.

The  Inventory  Picture:  The  overall  inventory  picture  as  painted  by  our  contacts

shows  some  moderation  in  economic  activity resulting  in  unanticipated  inventory  building

VI-2

in  some  sectors  while  other  sectors  continue  to  experience  substantial  growth  and

inventory  tightness.  Undesired  accumulation  was  reported  in  weaker  sectors  of  the

economy.  A  supplier  of building  materials  notes  that  inventories  are  higher  than  desired,

as  does  a  producer  of  chemicals  used  in  construction.  Stocks  of  crushed  rock  have

started  to  accumulate,  and  one  producer  has  cut  production  hours  15  percent.  Producers

are  reporting  increased  inventories  of  some  chemicals  and plastics.  Agricultural  supplies

have  been  building  up  as  some  farmers  delay or  cancel  plantings due  to heavy  rains  in  the

Southeast. 

Several  financial  firms  noted  increased  loan  demand  to  finance  higher

inventories  at some  department  stores  but especially  at  auto  dealers.

To  balance  the  inventory  picture  somewhat,  reports  of  desired  accumulation  and

tightness  were  also  received.  A  paper  manufacturer  reports  a  buildup  of box  inventories,

but  this  was  intentional  in  anticipation  of  increased  demand  later  in  the  year.  Several

large  retailers 

indicated  that  inventories  are  at  desirable  levels. 

A  producer  of

telecommunication  equipment  reported  less  than  desirable  stocks  in  part  because  of

increased  export  demand.  Because  of  higher  demand  for  electricity  and  strong  export

demand,  coal stocks  are  below  the  level desired  by producers.

Price  Pressures:  Southeastern  contacts  do  not  report  strong  concern  about  price

pressures. 

In  fact,  they  indicate  that  partly  as  a  result  of  unintended  inventory

accumulation,  some  downward  pressures  could  develop.  A  producer  of  chemicals  and

plastics  reports  that  increasing  supplies  of primary  chemicals  are  expected  to cause  price

reductions  later  this  year.  He  added  that  the  demand  for  certain  thermoplastics  and

polyvinylchloride  compounds  has  eased  recently  because  of slowdowns  in  construction.  A

plastic  container  manufacturer  who  had  earlier expected  to raise  prices  did not  because

of an  improved  supply of  resins  and  corrugated packaging.

Paper  prices  have  recently  backed  off from  the  increased  levels  established  early

in  1989,  and  one  producer  anticipates  further  cuts.  Weakness  in  the  price  of  linerboard

was  also  reported,  and  one  paper  manufacturer  reports  that  while  demand  is  strong,  it  is

VI-3

weaker  than  expected  earlier  this  year.  And  a  producer  of  wood  pulp  noted  that  his

firm's  price  is  currently  10 percent  higher  than that  of some  European  producers.

Those  surveyed  report  scattered  labor  market  shortages  but  do  not  regard

generalized  wage  pressures  as  substantial.  Wage  increases  are  generally  reported  below

5  percent.  The  cost  of  employee  benefits,  however,  has  been  rising  more  rapidly  and

many  contacts  report  they  have  been  trying  to  reduce  nonwage  compensation  to  control

costs,  in  particular,  medical  coverages  for employee  dependents  is being  restricted.

One  respondent  indicated  that  wages  for  unskilled,  outdoor  labor  in  Nashville  are

often  well  above  minimum  wage  levels.  Entry  level  workers  for  hotels  and  restaurants

are  in  short  supply,  and  a  large  Atlanta  retailer  reports  that  entry  level  wages have  been

under  constant  pressure,  although  productivity  increases  have  so  far  offset  wage  gains.

The  shortage  of  registered  nurses  continues,  with wages  rising faster  than  inflation.  One

banker  in  Atlanta  has  found  it  difficult  to  locate  experienced  managers  and  skilled

clerical  help.  A  producer  of  lumber and  paper  indicated  that  mandatory  Sunday  overtime

is  being  eliminated  and  that  the firm  has seen  no  unusual  pressure  on  wages.

VII-1

SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.  Indicators  of  overall  business  activity  in the  District  are  giving

mixed  signals.  Payroll  employment  in the  five states,  through  April,  trended

upward  from late  1988  at  a somewhat  slower  rate than  last year,  about  in line with

the  nation.  However,  employment  measured  in the household  survey  for  Illinois  and

Michigan  fell  in May  for  the  third  straight  month.  Chicago-area  purchasing

managers  reporting  increased  production  in May  continued  to  outnumber  those  noting

declines,  but  by  a smaller margin than  since early  1987,  and  orders  and  backlogs

slipped.  Motor vehicle  sales  below  last  year's  pace, despite attractive buyer

incentives,  have  prompted  limited  production  cuts.  Markets  for  many types  of

industrial  machinery  still  appear  strong,  though weakening  has  been  reported  in

some  equipment  markets,  including  light  construction  equipment,  communications

equipment,  and  some  other electronic  types.  Industrial  construction  is strong  in

the  region.  Office  construction continues  at  a brisk  pace  in downtown Chicago.

Recent  rains  have  improved  crop  prospects  in most  District  states.

Equipment.  Demand  continues  vigorous  in many  industrial  equipment  markets.

Orders  for  industrial  diesels,  for applications  other than  in large  trucks,  are

described  as  strong  in domestic markets  and  for  export,  except  from manufacturers

of  light  construction  equipment,  reflecting  the  slowdown  in housing construction.

Demand  at  producers  of  highway  construction  equipment  was  characterized  as  very

strong.  Robust  orders  have  been  reported  recently  at  foundries,  metal  fabricators,

and  machinery  builders.  Incoming  orders  for  machine tools  have  slipped,

particularly  from  foreign  buyers,  but  backlogs  remain  far above  year-earlier

levels.  One  large  machine  tool  builder expects  its  order  backlog to  support

continued  increases  in shipments  in this  year's  second  half.  Orders  have  weakened

for  communications  equipment  and  some  other electronic  types.

Construction.  Indicators of  construction  in the  District  continue  to  show a

relatively  robust  pace  of  activity.  For example, year-over-year  increases  in

VII-2

shipments  of  cement  and  gypsum board  to  District  states  have  been  larger than

nationwide  (though this  partly  reflects  the  mild  January weather  in the  region).

Strong  demand  for  downtown Chicago  office  space  and  relatively  few completions  of

new buildings  this  year  have  lowered  the  vacancy  rate  (as  defined  in two  recent

surveys)  to  less  than  10%, encouraging plans  for additional  buildings.  The  market

for  Chicago-area  industrial  property  is also  strong.  In Detroit,  ground was  broken

recently  for  a $1 billion  auto  assembly plant,  a replacement  for  an  aging plant.

Preliminary  site work  is very  strong  for office  buildings  and  industrial  facilities

in the  Milwaukee area.  Construction  activity  on  houses  is said  to  be  holding  up

well  around  Chicago but  sales  of  existing homes  slipped  this  spring  as  mortgage

interest  rates  climbed  above  11%.  Rates  typically  offered  on  30-year  fixed-rate

loans  have  since  fallen  to  a 10%  to  10-1/4%  range,  and  below 10%  at  some  area

lenders.

Motor Vehicles.  Sales  of  motor  vehicles  continue to  trail  year-ago levels

despite  recently  enhanced  incentives which a contact  described  as  the  most

attractive  for buyers  in at  least  2-1/2  years.  Extended model  changeover shutdowns

have  been  announced  for  some  District assembly  plants;  another plant  was  recently

shut  for  one week  to  control  inventories;  and  a planned  start-up of  a second  shift

at  a car  assembly plant  was  cancelled.  But  overall  production  cutbacks  have  been

modest.  Heavy truck plants  have  been  running close  to  effective  capacity.

Steel.  Steel  demand  continues  strong.  A Chicago-area  integrated mill  is

hiring  summer  help,  for  the  first  time  in about  a decade,  to  cut  excess  overtime  of

regular employees.  However, there have  also  been  reports  recently  of  some  slippage

in orders,  perhaps  only  seasonal.  Steelmakers  have announced  additional  large

investments,  including  another new plant  to be  built  in Indiana  and  major  upgrading

of  an  existing facility  in that  state.

Retailing.  A contact  described  retail  sales  recently  as  satisfactory, but

generally  less  so  than  earlier this  year.  Cooler  weather may  have  deterred  some

VII-3

retail  sales  in the Midwest  in May.  This  retailer  viewed  consumer spending as

supported  by  good  income  gains  this  year,  but  indicated  concern about surveys

showing  increased  consumer pessimism regarding  inflation,  interest  rates,  and  home

buying  prospects.

Agriculture.  Early  season  crop  prospects  over most  of  the  District  have

benefitted  considerably  from recent  rains.  In Indiana,  however,  the  rains  have

further delayed  the wind-down  of  the  planting season  and  stressed  some

early-planted  crops.  Late  spring  frosts  apparently  caused  some  fruit  and  vegetable

losses  in Michigan.  While  no  official  tabulations  have  been  made, some  observers

characterize  the  losses  as  "less  than  expected."

Labor  Markets.  District  labor market  conditions  show considerable  diversity.

Unemployment has  declined  in the District,  as  utilization of  labor  resources  has

pressed  against available  supply  in many areas.  Unskilled  industrial  labor,  for

example,  is in tight  supply  in Chicago's  western  suburbs,  and  pay  levels  have  been

pushed  upward,  squeezing  profits  of  employers  competing with  firms  in lower

labor-cost areas.  The  seemingly chronic  shortage  of  some  industrial  skills,  such

as  experienced welders  and  machinists,  may  have  been  exacerbated  by  the  industrial

upturn  of  the  past  2 years.  Employers  in local  areas  where  labor  is tight--parts

of  Indiana,  for  example--are advertising  for  skilled workers  in areas where  there

were  sizable  lay-offs  a few years  ago.  Job-hopping  in pursuit  of  higher  pay

reportedly has  increased.  But  employers  in some  industries  continue to  press  for

concessions,  indicating a willingness  to  shut  facilities  or  replace  striking

workers  in order to bring down  labor  costs,  in some  cases  citing  costs  at

competitors.  Industries  in the  District  in which  this  has  been  taking  place

include auto parts  manufacturing, grocery stores,  and  truck  transport.  Jobs  remain

hard  to  find  in some white-collar occupations.  Staffing cutbacks  or  curtailments

on  hiring  continue in response  to,  or  to  stave  off  the  threat  of,  corporate

reorganizations.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT  - ST.  LOUIS

Summary

Employment  growth has  declined because  of  slower  job  growth  in

manufacturing  and  services  and  job  declines  in  construction.  Current

agricultural 

conditions  indicate  that 

normal  crop  yields  are  possible

this  year.  The  rise  in  the value  of  the  dollar has  not had a  significant

effect  on  District  exporters.  District  banks  report  stronger  profits

propelled by lower  loan loss provisions  and lower  loan  losses.

Labor Markets

District 

employment  growth  has  slowed. 

In 

the  three  months

through  April,  District  nonagricultural  employment  rose  at  a  2.3  percent

annual  rate,  less  than  half the  rate  for  the  previous  three  months  and

slightly  slower  than  the  national  average.  The  District  slowdown  was

particularly sharp  in Missouri  and Tennessee.

Manufacturing  employment  growth  has  slowed 

throughout 

the

District.  In Missouri, manufacturing  employment  in  the  February-April

period  declined  slightly 

from  the  previous  period  largely  due  to  job

declines  in  food  processing  and  a  layoff  in  an  auto  assembly  plant  to

reduce  inventories.  Automobile  employment will  decline  this  summer  as

two  St.  Louis  auto  assembly  plants  close  for  one month.  Although auto

assembly  plants  typically 

close  for  one  or 

two  weeks  each  summer 

to

retool 

assembly 

lines 

for  the  next  model  year,  analysts  suggest  the

longer  shutdowns  this year  are  to  reduce  inventories.

VIII-2

Exports

A  District  bank  and  exporters  involved  in  plastic  production,

food processing, electrical motor manufacturing  and grain handling report

that  the  recent  rise 

in 

the  dollar  has  not  significantly  affected

exports.  Long  contract  periods  were  frequently  cited  as  the  reason  for

the  minimal  impact.  One  large  lumber  products  manufacturer,  however,

noted that exports  to  Europe, especially plywood, have  dropped by as  much

as  25  percent  from a year  ago,  largely  due  to  the  rise  in  the value  of

the  dollar. 

In addition, some  exporters  expressed concern about  future

export sales  if  the  dollar continues  to  rise.

Construction

The  value  of  residential  construction  contracts  issued  in 

the

three  months  through  April has  fallen  3.7  percent  from  the  same  period

last  year  both  regionally  and  nationally.  During 

the  same  period,

nonresidential  contracts  dropped  14.5  percent  in 

the  District  and  2.7

percent nationally.

In  St.  Louis, 

labor  strikes  shut  down  most  commercial  and

residential  construction projects  for  two  weeks.  St.  Louis  metropolitan

area  office vacancy  rates,  currently below the  1988  national  average,  are

expected to  rise  sharply  in  1989.  The  quantity  of new space  demanded  in

1989 

is  expected  to  decline  from  1988  levels  while  the  volume  of  new

space  will  almost  triple.

Outlook

A  recent  survey  of  District  small  businesses  reveals  a  more

pessimistic  outlook than a year  earlier.  Almost twice  as  many businesses

think economic  conditions will worsen rather than improve  in  the  next  six

months,  while  in  April  1988, 

roughly  equal  numbers  expected  a  worsening

VIII-3

or  expected  improvement.  Consistent  with  these  views,  more  respondents

expect  declines  in  their  real  sales volume  than a year  earlier  and  fewer

plan  to  increase  the  size  of  their  workforce.  Finally,  even  though  a

smaller  proportion  planned  to  increase  average  compensation  to  their

employees  than  in 

the  earlier  survey, 

a  larger  proportion  planned  to

raise  their prices  in  the  following  three months.

Agriculture  and Mining

Topsoil  moisture  conditions  are  reported  as  adequate 

in  most  of

the  District,  while  subsoil  moisture  conditions  are  still 

short  in 

some

areas,  most  notably  in  northern Missouri.  Most  of  the  District's  wheat,

corn  and  cotton  crops  are  in  fair  to  good  condition. 

District  coal

production  for  the  four  months  ending  in April  was  3.5  percent  higher

than  the  same  period last  year.  Industry  analysts  expect  annual  coal

production 

to  run  about  2  percent  to  3  percent  ahead  of  last  year.

Banking

First  quarter  data  indicate 

improved  profitability  and  asset

quality  for Eighth District banks.  With net earnings  rising  10.3  percent

over  first  quarter  1988,  annualized  returns  on  assets  and  equity

improved.  Nineteen fewer banks reported  negative earnings  during  this

year's  first  quarter  in  comparison to  the  same  period last  year.  Helping

to  boost  earnings  were 

lower 

loan  loss  provisions 

and 

lower  loan

chargeoffs.  First  quarter loan  losses decreased 80  percent  from  the  same

period  in  1988.  Nonperforming  loans,  however, 

increased  slightly  as

banks  reported growing problems  in  commercial real  estate  loans.

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

Ninth  District  economic  conditions  have  been  generally  good.  The

employment  situation  has  been  fairly  good  throughout  the  district.  Consumer

spending  has  been  generally  strong,  but  housing  activity  has  been  weak.

Conditions  in  resource-related  industries have been good.

Employment

The  employment  situation  has  been  fairly  good  throughout  the  dis-

trict. 

The  unemployment  rate  in  Minnesota  in  April  was  4.7  percent,  0.2

percentage  points  higher  than  in  March  and  0.9  percentage  points  higher  than

in  April  1988.  The unemployment rate  in  the Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan

area  rose  to  3.8  percent  in  April,  compared  to  3.5  percent  in  March and  3.0

percent  in  April  1988. 

The  Minnesota  State  Government  predicts  that  the

closing  of  a large  computer  manufacturer's  supercomputer  division  located  in

St.  Paul  will  have  major  effects  on  employment  in  the  state.  The  state's

analysis  suggested  that,  aside  from  the  800  jobs  lost  directly  from the  clos-

ing,  3,000 additional jobs could  be  lost  from companies who  supplied the  divi-

sion.  A large  local  company  engaged  in  the  travel  and hospitality industries

reported  that  it  expected  to  add  about  1,000  jobs  in  the  state.  Some  ob-

servers noted  that  while wages were edging higher  for some entry-level  service

sector  jobs,  there  was no evidence  of any  sizable increase  in  wage rates.

The  unemployment  rate  in  North  Dakota  fell  to  4.5  percent  in  April

from  5.2  percent  in  March  and  5.0  percent  in  April  1988.  The  unemployment

rate in  South Dakota dropped  to  3.5  percent in  April  from 4.2 percent  in  March

and  3.7  percent  in  April  1988.  The  unemployment  rate  in  Montana  dropped  to

6.1  percent  in  April  from 7.6  percent  in  April  1988;  in  the Upper  Peninsula of

Michigan  the  unemployment  rate  in  March  was  10.5  percent  compared  to  11.7

percent  in  March  1988.

IX-2

Consumer Spending

Consumer  spending  on  general merchandise has  continued  to  be  fairly

strong.  One  retailer reported  that sales  in  May were  15.0  percent higher  than

a year  ago;  year-to-date  sales  were  16.0  percent higher  than  for  the  compar-

able  period a year  ago.  Another  retailer  reported  that  sales  in  May were  6.1

percent  higher  than  in  its  comparable  stores  a  year  ago.  Inventories  were

also reported  to be at  acceptable  levels.

Automobile  sales  recovered  from  low  levels  in  the  first  quarter.

Dealers  for  one  domestic  line  reported  that  car  sales  were  19  percent  higher

and  truck  sales  were  11  percent  higher  this  May  than  a  year  ago.  However,

year-to-date  sales  of  cars  were  only  2.5  percentage  points  higher  and  truck

sales  were  0.3  percentage  points  lower  than  in  the  comparable  period  last

year.  Sales  of  boats  and  other  recreational  equipment  were  reported  to  be

sharply  lower,  with  one  dealer  stating  that  April  and  May  sales  were  the

lowest  in  20  years.

Housing activity  was  sharply  lower  than  a year  ago.  The  number  of

new housing  permits  issued  in  Minnesota in  April  was  26  percent lower  than  in

April  1988.  The  number  of  new housing  permits  issued  in  the  Minneapolis-St.

Paul  Area  was  33  percent  lower  in  April  than  a year  ago.  May  home  sales  in

the  Minneapolis-St.  Paul  Area  were  33  percent  lower  than  in  May  1988,  though

they were only  10 percent  lower  on  a year-to-date basis.  Contracts  for  future

residential and  nonresidential  construction  did not  suffer  as  sharp  a decline

as  did  housing.  The dollar  value of such contracts  was about 3 percent lower

in  May  than  in  May  1988  and  was  approximately  the  same  on  a  year-to-date

basis.

All  our  contacts  reported  expectations  of a strong  tourist  season.

North Dakota, South Dakota,  and  Montana are  celebrating  their  centennial  year

IX-3

as  states  in  the Union  and  were  reported  as  expecting  a good  tourist  season.

One  observer  speculated  that  Yellowstone  would  draw many  visitors  curious  to

see  the  aftermath  of  last  year's  fire.  Most  of  the  tourist  resorts  in  the

Wisconsin  Indianhead  area  reported  being  booked  through  October  and  reported

the  fishing  season to  have  gotten off  to  a good start.

Resource-Related  Industries

Conditions  in  resource-related  industries  have  been  good. 

North

Dakota  is  expected  to  have  a  record  grain  crop.  The  winter  wheat  crop  was

excellent  and,  because  the  drought  lowered  yields  in  Kansas,  it  is  expected

that  North  Dakota  will  have  the  highest  yield  in  bushels  per  acre  in  the

country.  A director  described  the  winter  wheat  crop  in  South Dakota  to be  in

pretty  good  condition.  The  subsoil  moisture  levels  throughout  the  district

were  described  as  adequate  to  fairly  good.  Mining  activity  has  been good;  a

director  reported  that  a  mining  company  in  Montana  was  considering  plans  to

start  the  world's  largest  silver  mine.  In  the  Upper  Peninsula,  feasibility

studies  on  opening  new  copper  mines  were  reportedly  started.  The  wood  pro-

ducts  industry  reported  severely  limited  acess  to  lumber  due  to  environmental

concerns. 

In  Montana,  wood  products  output  declined  by  11  percent  in  the

first  quarter  of  this  year  compared  to  last  year;  this  was  primarily  attri-

buted  to raw material shortages.

X-1

TENTH DISTRICT  - KANSAS  CITY

Overview.  The  pace of  economic  activity in  the  Tenth District  remains

relatively  slow.  Retail  sales  continue to  improve, but  new car  sales  are

soft.  Manufacturers'  input prices  are  still  rising,  and availability  is  not  a

problem.  Drilling activity, though modestly higher than  in March,  is  still

below  a year earlier.  Housing  construction and home  sales  are  relatively

weak,  and mortgage  demand is  low.  Loan  demand at  commercial banks  is  flat  to

up  slightly, and deposits  are  somewhat  higher.  The  winter  wheat crop  will

fall  well short  of  normal,  while  prospects  for  spring  crops  depend on  timely

rainfall.

Retail  Sales.  Most  merchandisers  report  retail  sales  performance has

improved  from a year  ago  and over  the  last  three months,  and they expect  some

additional  improvement  the  rest  of  the year.  Some  retailers  report  price

increases  that  reflect  higher  costs,  and they expect  further  price  increases

in  the  future.  Most  respondents  are  satisfied with inventory  levels  and do

not  expect  to make  any  changes.  Automobile  dealers generally report  soft

sales  over the last  month.  Adequate  dealer and customer  financing is

available,  with  some very  attractive  customer  financing.  Most  dealers  are

trying to  trim inventory levels  because of  soft  sales.  Sales  are  expected to

continue  at  about  their current  pace.

Manufacturing.  All respondents  report  input prices  are  higher than  a

year  ago  and three months  ago.  Most  respondents  expect  little  change,

however, over the  next  three months.  Firms  report  no  difficulties in

acquiring materials, and most  anticipate  no  future  problems  with availability;

some  report  longer  lead times,  however. Inventory  levels  are  generally

satisfactory.  Most  plants  are  operating close  to  full  capacity, but  no

bottlenecks  or  labor  shortages  are  reported.

X-2

Energy.  While the  recent  firming in  oil  prices  appears  to  have helped

the district's energy  sector,  the  industry  remains  cautious  due  to  uncertainty

about  the  implications of  OPEC's  recent  meeting.  After  increasing  sharply

from only 211  in March, the  average number of  active  drilling rigs  in the

district  fell  from 241  in April  to  234  in  May.  Exploration and development

activity thus  stands  about  10  percent below the  level  of  a year earlier.

Housing Activity and Finance.  District  housing starts  are  down  from a

year ago,  and most  homebuilders  report  unchanged activity from a month

earlier.  Single-family construction  continues  to  exceed multi-family

construction.  New home  sales  are  down  slightly, and prices  remain about

stable.  Most  respondents are  uncertain  about  future  activity because  of

uncertainty  about  future  interest  rates.

Most  respondents  from district  savings  and loan  institutions  report  net

outflows of  deposits  over the  last  month.  Net  deposit  flows  are  generally

similar to  a month earlier, but  are mixed relative  to  a year  ago.  Respondents

expect deposits  to  be  steady  or  lower  in  the  near term.  Mortgage demand  is

low  in most  areas  and  is  generally expected to  remain  low.  Some  respondents

attribute  low mortgage demand and depressed real  estate prices  to  sales  of

foreclosed properties by HUD.  Nearly all  respondents  report  slightly  lower

mortgage  rates,  but most  expect fairly  stable  rates  in  the coming months.

Banking.  District  commercial banks  report widely varied behavior  of

loan  demand last  month, with more  respondents  reporting  increases  in  loan

demand than decreases.  While  responses varied for  all  loan  categories,  some

increase in  consumer and home mortgage  loan  demand was  apparent,  as  was  a

decrease  in  commercial  real  estate  loan  demand.  District banks  have begun  to

X-3

join  in  the  recent  reduction  of prime  lending  rates,  but  almost  no  banks

report  changes  in their  consumer lending  rates.  Deposits  grew  last  month,

with the  increase  concentrated in  large  time  deposits and  small  time  and

savings  deposits;  transactions  deposits  were  constant  or  decreasing  at  most

responding banks.

Agriculture.  Crop growing  conditions  are  a major  concern  in  the  Tenth

District.  Despite widespread  rainfall  during the  past  month, the  district's

winter  wheat  harvest  is  expected to  be much  smaller  than  normal.  Wheat  yields

in  southwestern Oklahoma,  where the  harvest  is  already nearing  completion, are

expected to  be  only two-thirds  of  normal.  Wheat yields  in Kansas  and Nebraska

are  generally expected to  range  from a  fourth to  a  half  of  normal,  and severe

drought  in  some  areas  has  caused the  wheat  crop  to  be  abandoned.

The  small  wheat  crop is  likely to  reduce  incomes  of many district

businesses,  including grain elevators,  where  storage  income  has  already  been

depressed  by  low  grain inventories.  Railroad cars  used to  transport  grain  sit

idle  in  parts  of the  district.  The  financial  condition of  grain-dependent

businesses  now  appears  to  depend on  a more normal harvest  of  other  crops.

Recent  rainfall has  improved prospects  for pastures  and  spring-planted

crops.  Planting  of  spring crops  in the  district  is  nearly complete,  and last

month's  rainfall  improved growing  conditions.  Soil moisture  reserves  are  low,

however,  and prospects  for these  crops  depend on  the  amount  and timeliness  of

rainfall  during  the  rest  of  the  growing  season.  Dry weather  has  produced poor

grazing  conditions throughout  the  district.  Diminished  feed supplies  are

leading  some  ranchers  to  sell more  cattle  than  normal to  reduce the  size  of

their herds.  Still,  few herds  have been  completely  liquidated as  a  result  of

feed  shortages.

ELEVENTH  DISTRICT--DALLAS

The  District economy continues  to  expand  at  a modest pace.  Demand  for

manufactured  products  is growing  slowly.  Retail  sales  increases  are  strong  and

auto  sales  expansion  is moderate.  Construction activity  shows  little  change

in  either  direction.  The oil  and  gas  drilling recovery continues.  In

agriculture, recent  rains  have moderated  the  drought.

Manufacturing  output  is expanding  slowly overall.  The turnaround  in

drilling  activity  last February has  generated  steady  increases  in  oilfield

equipment  sales,  particularly  to  export markets.  Demand  for  primary metals  is

steady to  up,  with  especially  positive reports from  foundry operators,  a

number of whom are  adding  capacity.  Fabricated metal  sales  are  also growing

and  respondents are  very optimistic  about orders  for the  rest  of  the year.

Slowing  defense-related  activity has  forced  layoffs  and  hiring  freezes  at

aircraft  firms.  Sales  of defense-related  electronics  products  are  also

softening.  Elsewhere in  the electronics  industry,  semiconductor sales  have

shown  little  recent  growth,  but makers  of  other electronics-related  products

cite  upturns  in orders.  Orders  to  construction-related manufacturers --

including  those  in stone,  clay  and  glass  and  lumber and  wood  products --

continue  at  a sluggish pace.  After  adjustment for  seasonal  factors, apparel

producers  have  had  little  recent  sales  variation.  A number of  food  products

firms  have  been  raising prices  lately,  despite little recent  growth  in input

prices,  and  industry  revenues are  up.  Chemical  demand  has  been  leveling  off

recently, but  sales  remain above  a year  earlier.  Capital  spending projects

continue  in this  industry  and  labor shortages  are  becoming  a concern.  Oil

refinery production  is showing  little change  overall.  Paper  industry output

XI-2

continues  near  full  capacity,  but  respondents  note  some  softening  in  the  high

level  of  demand,  as  reflected  in a reduction  in the  backlog  of  new  orders.

Paper  producers  are  concerned  about  the  impacts of  the  rise  in the  dollar upon

their  export  markets.  Although an  increasing  number of  manufacturers  say  that

wage  pressures  are  rising,  such  respondents  are  still  in  the minority.  Firms

citing  upward  wage pressure  say  it has  been  accelerating  in recent  months,

particularly  in the  chemical-producing  areas  of  the Gulf  coast.

Retail  sales  show  strong year-over-year  expansion.  Rates  of  growth  are

particularly high  in  west Texas and  on  the Mexican  border,  but  increases

elsewhere  are  the  rule,  rather  than  the  exception.  Retail  sales  in Houston  are

estimated  as  having  grown between  8 and  10  percent  from  a year  earlier and

sales  in Dallas  have  also  been  increasing markedly.

Despite  a national  slump  in new car  sales,  District  auto  sales  are

growing.  Sales  in Houston for  the  first  four months  of  this year  are  up 9

percent over  a year  earlier and  dealers  expect  this  rate  of  expansion  to

persist.  Dallas  dealers  say their  sales  are  also  growing  and  that,  even

without  the  recent rebate  and  interest  incentive  programs,  they  think  demand

would  have  increased.  One  respondent  said  that  domestic  automakers  are

learning  not  to  take  advantage of  the  appreciation  of  the  dollar  to  push  up

prices,  but  are  now going for  market  share  instead.

Construction activity remains weak,  but  shows  no  consistent  pattern of

either  growth  or  decline.  Nonresidential  contracting  is essentially  unchanged,

while  residential  construction  values  have rebounded  somewhat  from their

weakness  of  early  1989.  Nonbuilding construction, for  such  structures  as  roads

and  public works,  continues  to slide.  Although  existing home  sales  continue to

XI-3

rise,  median  residential  prices  in most metropolitan  areas  are  falling.  An

exception  is Houston, where both  construction  activity and  real  estate  prices

have  rebounded  with the  recovery there.  Office  vacancy  rates  continue to  edge

down  in most metropolitan markets  except  San Antonio, where  vacancies  are  still

rising.  Construction employment  declines  in Texas  have  leveled  off,  but  they

show  little  evidence of  a rebound.

Oil  and  gas  drilling continues  its  recovery.  After  declining  from  June

1988  until  January of  this year,  the  District  rotary  rig  count  increased  in

every month  from February  through  May.  Although the  rig  count  remains  17

percent  less  than  a year earlier,  it has  increased  23  percent  since  January.

In recent  months,  oil  prices  have  remained  relatively  stable  in the  $20  per

barrel  range.  Respondents  believe  that  the  recent  OPEC meetings  are  likely  to

have  little effect on  the  price of  oil  and  that  drilling  should  increase mildly

over the  next  few months.

Rains  have  improved  growing  conditions  for  much  of  District  agriculture,

but  subsoil  moisture remains  low  in large  portions  of  Texas  and  New  Mexico.

Although  the  rain  has  accelerated  the  growth  of  field  crops,  it was  accompanied

by  hail,  wind,  and  flooding  that damaged  some grain and  livestock operations  in

south  central  and  northwest  Texas.  Despite  the  increased  moisture,  a

combination of  continued  dryness  in some  cattle producing-areas  and  high  feed

prices  has  motivated  substantial  herd  liquidation.  The  increased moisture  came

too  late  to  help  the  already damaged  District  wheat crop,  which  is estimated  to

be  the  smallest  since  1978.

XII-1

TWELFTH  DISTRICT  --  SAN  FRANCISCO

Summary

The  pace  of growth  in  the  Twelfth  Federal  Reserve  District  continues  to be  healthy,

with  mixed  signals  regarding  a  possible  slowing  rate  of growth.  Despite  the  relatively  good

condition  of  the  District's  economy,  two  thirds  of  the  business  leaders  contacted  expect

weakening  national  growth  during  the  next  four  quarters.  Consumer  spending  growth  is

reported  to  be  healthy  overall,  despite  weakness  in  sales  of "big  ticket" items  such  as  cars,

furniture,  and  home  electronics.  Manufacturing  activity  continues  to  be  robust,  with  bottlenecks

and  tight  raw  materials  supplies  reported  in  several  sectors.  However,  some  early  signs  of

falling  export  orders  have  emerged.  Agricultural  activity  also  is  strong  overall,  despite  rising

prices  for  many  inputs.  Lumber  production  is  falling  as  log  supplies  continue  to  tighten,  but

capacity  continues  tight  at  many  paper mills.  Real  estate  markets  are  strong  in  the  coastal

states,  although  a  few  respondents  note  heightened  concerns  or  slowing  activity  associated  with

relatively  high  interest  rates.  In  Arizona,  however,  commercial  and  residential  real  estate

markets  continue  to  languish.  Most  western  banks  report  solid  loan  demand,  while  many  banks

are  raising  rates  on  certificates  of deposit  to  attract  sufficient  funds.

Business  Sentiment

Two  thirds  of  the  western  business  leaders  contacted  expect  GNP  growth  to  be  weaker

than  its  historical  average  during  the  next  four  quarters,  although  very  few  anticipate  a

recession.  Most  of the  remaining  third  expect  GNP  growth  close  to  its  average  pace.  District

business  leaders  still  expect  performance  in  the  business  investment  and  home-building  sectors

to  weaken  slightly  during  the  next  year,  although  they  are  more  upbeat  about  these sectors  than

they  were  in  the  previous  survey.

Consumer  Spending

XII-  2

Consumer  spending  continues  to  grow  at  a  healthy  pace.  Nevertheless,  several

respondents  report  a  moderating  rate  of  growth,  which  they  attribute  primarily  to  relative

weakness  in  sales  of such  "big  ticket"  items  as  furniture  and  home  electronics.  Some  retailers

have  expressed  concern  that  inventories  have  gotten  too  heavy,  while  others  report  no  inventory

problems.  Prices  and  wages  are  reported  to  be relatively  stable,  with  prices  held  down  in  part

by  the  recent  increase  in  the value  of the  dollar.

Many  respondents  report  weak  car  sales,  although  sales  in  some  parts  of the  District  are

strong.  No  upward  price  pressure  is  evident,  as  incentives  are  required  to  keep  sales  volumes

up.

Manufacturing

Bottlenecks  continue  in  the  commercial  aircraft  industry.  Supplies  are  difficult  to  obtain,

skilled  labor  is  in  short  supply,  and  commercial  aircraft  ordered  today  cannot  be  delivered  for

about  four years.  Industry  participants  assert  that  these  bottlenecks  are  putting  upward

pressure  on  Seattle-area  wages  and  on  materials  prices.  One  aerospace  executive  reports  that

his  firm's  contracts  with  European  and  Japanese  suppliers  are  priced  in  those  nations'

currencies,  so  the  recent  increase  in  the  dollar's  value  has  reduced  his  costs.  In  contrast,  the

cutbacks  in  defense  spending  are  beginning  to  affect  some  California  firms.  One  firm  recently

announced  layoffs,  and  the  competition  for  engineers  reportedly  has  diminished.

Heavy  machinery  is  selling  well,  with  reports  of increases  in  sales  volumes  of 10  to  15

percent  above  last  year's  levels.  Some  manufacturers  report  that  material  costs  have  risen  5  to

12  percent,  due  primarily  to  higher costs  for  aluminum,  stainless  steel  and  brass.  One

respondent  notes  persistent  shortages  of titanium  dioxide  and  ethylene  glycol,  important  raw

XII  -3

materials  for  paints  and  coatings.  List  prices  for  paints  and  coatings  have  increased  about  5

percent,  but  price  increases  negotiated  for  large  projects  are  closer  to  1 or  2  percent.

A  California  banker  reports  that some  customers  in  Japan  are  starting  to  cancel  orders

for  U.S.-made  manufactured  goods.  Some  of these  customers  have  been  faced  with  price

increases  of about  21  percent  (5  percent  reflecting  US  inflation  and  16  percent  due  to  currency

changes).  Other  Japanese  customers  are  asking  for  price  reductions,  but  because  most

American  companies'  profit  margins  are  too  small  to  make  sizable  price  concessions,  they  are

opting  to  forgo  some  export  business.

Agriculture  and  Resource-Related  Industries

Agriculture  generally  continues  healthy,  although  the  costs  of interest,  machinery,  fuel,

fertilizer,  and  feed  grains  remain  relatively  high.  Few  changes  in  exports  due  to  the  higher

dollar  have  been  noted  as  yet.

Environmental  and  legal  issues  are  combining  with  strong  log  exports  to restrict  log

supplies  and  reduce  lumber  production.  Capacity  continues  tight  at  most  paper  mills.  However,

new  newsprint  production  capacity  and  soft  newsprint  demand  have  forced  producers  to  back

down  from  planned  price  increases  this  year,  and  one  negotiated  discount  reduced  the  effective

price  by  3.5  percent.

Construction  and  Real  Estate

Most  reports  suggest  that  California's  real  estate  markets  continue  strong.  Smaller

California  cities  have  not seen  the 20  percent  increases  in home  prices  common  in  larger  cities,

but  construction  activity  continues  strong.  However,  relatively  high  interest  rates  reportedly

have  caused  builders  to  become  more  cautious  about  committing  to  new  projects.  The  limited

supply  of commercial  buildings  in  the  San  Francisco  Bay  Area  is  causing  values  to  escalate  at

XII  - 4

about  a  5  percent  annual  rate.  In  Southern  California,  a  developer  reports  that  commercial

construction  activity  continues  at  a  strong  pace,  although  leasing  activity  has  slowed  during  the

past  year.  Most  reports  from  Washington  and  Oregon  indicate  that  real  estate  markets  in  the

Northwest  also  are  strong.  Home  prices  are  reported  up, with  strong  construction  activity  as

well.  In  contrast,  reports  from  Arizona  indicate  that  land  values  there  continue  to  drop,  and

sales  of commercial  real  estate  are  deeply  discounted.

Financial  Sector

Most  western  banks  report  strong  profits,  with  solid  loan  demand  despite  relatively  high

interest  rates.  Some  bankers  report  increased  demand  for  commercial  loans.  Several  bankers

report  reduced  balances  held  in  checking  accounts,  passbook  savings,  and  money  market  deposit

accounts.  The  combination  of strong  loan  demand  and  reduced  deposits  is  leading  banks  to

raise  rates  on  certificates  of deposit  in  order  to  attract  sufficient  funds.

Only  a  few  respondents  report  that  high  interest  rates  have  limited  borrowing  activity.

In  Oregon,  for  example,  small  businesses  reportedly  are  borrowing  less  or  not  at  all,  choosing  to

postpone  capital  equipment  purchases  or  expensive  acquisitions  rather  than  pay  the  high  rates.

