SUMMARY  OF  COMMENTARY

on

CURRENT  ECONOMIC  CONDITIONS

BY  FEDERAL  RESERVE  DISTRICT

August  1989

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS

SUMMARY  .................

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . i

First  District  --  Boston  .........

..................... .......... 1-1

Second  District  -- New York  .....

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .. . . . . . . . II-

Third  District  -- Philadelphia  .....

.............................. III-1

Fourth  District  -- Cleveland  ......

.............................. IV-1

Fifth District  -- Richmond  .......

. . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .. . .. . .. . . . . .. . V -l

Sixth  District  -- Atlanta 

........

. . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . V I-1

Seventh  District  -- Chicago 

......

.............................  VII-1

Eighth  District  -- St.  Louis 

......

............................. 

VIII-I

Ninth  District  -- Minneapolis  .....

. . . . . . . .

. . . . . . .. 

. . . . . . . . . . .. 

. . IX-1

Tenth  District  --  Kansas  City  .....

... ................... ........ X -1

Eleventh  District  - Dallas  .......

. . . . .

. . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..  X I-1

Twelfth  District  -- San  Francisco 

. .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X I-1

.~I-i

i

SUMMARY*

Summary

Comments  received  by  Reserve  Banks  from  business  and  other contacts  suggest  that  the

nation's  economy  continues  to  grow  slowly.  Most  Districts  report  slow  growth  in  general

merchandise  sales,  with  strength  in  women's  apparel.  Auto  sales  are  weak  in  a  majority  of

Districts,  although  Dallas  reports  significantly  stronger  sales  than  a  year  ago.  Overall

manufacturing  activity  shows  slow  growth  in  several  Districts  and  declining  activity  in  some  areas.

Oil drilling  activity  has  improved  in  recent  months,  although  it  remains  at  a  low  level.  Demand

for  paper shows  signs  of weakening  from  high  levels  in  some  areas,  while  logging  restrictions  are

limiting  lumber  production  in  several  northern  states.  Farmers  in  many  parts  of the  country

expect  good  harvests,  but  weather  problems  are  hurting  production  in  some  regions.  Real  estate

markets  and  loan  demand  are  strong  or  growing  in  some  Districts,  but  weak  in  others.

Trade  and  Services

Most Districts  report  relatively  slow  growth  in  general  merchandise  sales.  Several  report

that  retailers  are  cautious  and  are  reducing  their  orders  for  the  remainder  of  1989.  Most  report

relatively weak  sales  of home  furnishings,  electronics,  and  appliances.  Women's  wear  is  a  leading

source  of retail  sales  growth  in  many  parts  of the  country.  Texas  retailers  report  "moderate  to

strong" growth  in  retail  sales  compared  with  year-earlier  levels,  but Philadelphia,  Richmond,

Chicago,  and  St.  Louis  report  that  sales  for  many  retailers  in  their  Districts were  flat  or  down  in

real  terms.  Reports  of inventories  suggest  that most  stores  have  satisfactory  stocks,  although

some  unplanned  increases  were  reported  in  the  St. Louis  District.

* Prepared  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank of San  Francisco  and  based  on  information  gathered
before  August  1, 1989.

ii

Auto  sales  are  reported  to  be  below  year-ago  levels  in  most  parts  of the  country.  Dealer

inventories  are accumulating  to  higher-than-desired  levels  in  most  parts  of the  country,  and

several  Districts  report  that  dealers'  profit  margins  have  fallen.  However,  car  sales  in  Texas  have

increased  sharply, with  sales  in  Dallas  up  13  percent  from  a  year  earlier.

Manufacturing

Reports  on  manufacturing  industries  vary  considerably  from  one  District  to  another.

Boston,  New  York,  and  Cleveland  report  declining  rates  of growth  in  orders  for  some

manufactured  products, with  no  growth  in  some  cases.  Manufacturing  conditions  in  the  Atlanta

District  vary  by  product  line, with  chemical  producers  in  Louisiana  planning  plant expansions.

Nearly  a  third  of manufacturers  contacted  by  the  Philadelphia  bank  reported  declining  activity,

while  half reported  no  change.  Dallas  and  San  Francisco  report  softening  orders  for  electronic

components.  Chicago  reports  that  orders  for  cutting  machine  tools,  particularly  from  abroad,  trail

last  year's  levels.  Richmond  and  St.  Louis  report  declines  in  manufacturing  activity.  Some

layoffs  and  plant  closings  associated  with  reduced  auto  production  have  occurred  in  the  Chicago

and  St  Louis  Districts,  with  further  cutbacks  anticipated.  Reduced  auto  production,  seasonal

slowing,  and  reduced  export  demand  have  curtailed  the  demand  for steel,  according  to

manufacturers  in  the  Cleveland,  Chicago,  and  Kansas  City  Districts.  Most  Districts  report  that

manufacturers'  inventories  are  at  satisfactory  levels,  although  Kansas  City  notes  efforts  to  trim

inventories.

Agriculture  and  Resource-Related  Industries

Conditions  in the  resource  industries  are  mixed. 

Increased  oil  drilling  activity  has  boosted

demand  for  oil  field  equipment,  although  activity  remains  below  last  year's  levels.

iii

Strong  foreign  demand  for  lumber  is  buoying  the  lumber  industries  in  the  Richmond  and

Dallas  Districts,  but  logging  restrictions  are  hurting  lumber  producers  in  the  Pacific  Northwest

and  North  Central  regions.  Accumulation  of paper  inventories  were  noted  in  Arkansas  and  in

the  Atlanta  District.  In  contrast,  orders  to  Dallas  District  paper  manufacturers  remain  high  and

prices  for  paper  products  have  been  rising  recently.

Farmers  in  many  parts  of the  country  expect  good  harvests,  but weather  problems  are

hurting  production  in  some  regions.  Harvest  prospects  are  reported  to be  good  in  the

Richmond,  Chicago,  and  San  Francisco  Districts,  and  in  most  of the  Kansas  City  District.  Heavy

rains  have  hurt  production  throughout  much  of the  South.  Much  of North  Dakota  is  suffering

from  a  drought  which  is  expected  to  hurt  wheat  yields.  Kansas  and  Nebraska  wheat  production

is  suffering  from  a  plethora  of weather  and  pest  problems.  Apple  and  grape  producers  in  the

West  report  declining  sales  which  they  attribute  to  concerns  about  food  safety.

Construction  and  Real  Estate

Construction  and  real  estate  market  conditions  are  mixed.  Strong  activity  is  occurring  in

upstate  New  York,  and  in  the  Chicago  and  San  Francisco  Districts,  with  particular  strength  noted

in Seattle.  Exceptionally  strong  markets  in  California  appear  to  have  cooled  off,  although  prices

continue  to  rise.  A  slow  rate  of increase  in  activity  is  reported  in  Texas  and  in  the  Boston  and

New  York  City  areas.  Flat  or  declining  activity  is  noted  in  the  Richmond,  Minneapolis,  and

Kansas  City  Districts.  The  recent  decline  in  mortgage  rates  reportedly  had  a  slight  positive  effect

on  markets  in  the  Boston,  New  York,  and  Richmond  Districts.

Financial  Sector

The  pace  of lending  activity  varies  considerably  by  region  and  by  type  of loan.  Overall

loan  growth  is  reported  to  be  strong  in  the  St.  Louis  and  San  Francisco  Districts.  Demand  for

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

While most First District manufacturers report  good year-to-year

gains  in  sales and orders, half say that  the  pace of  incoming business

has  slowed.  Retail  sales are  generally weak and below expectation.  Auto

sales continue to  decline and are significantly below year-ago  levels.

By  contrast,  demand for  residential real  estate has  improved slightly

since last month in response to  falling  interest  rates  and prices.

Respondents agree that  materials prices have peaked and  that  selling

prices are  rising  modestly at  most.  They expect  slow growth to  continue

and view themselves  and  their customers  as very cautious.

Retail

A sample of First District  retailers  reports  that  recent  sales

are  weak and below expectation.  Reflecting a regional downturn  in home

sales,  building supplies  and appliances  are  moving especially slowly.

But apparel  is  also  soft,  and consumers  seem broadly cautious, spending

less  money per  trip  to  the  store.

Reported price  changes  range  from no  increases  in  building

materials and  electronic equipment  to  a 6 percent  rise  in hardware.  One

discounter lamented a lack of "bargains,"  as  suppliers have avoided

building excess  inventory.  Retail  inventories  also  remain  in line.

Margins are under pressure, however,  as  overhead costs  continue to  rise

and  promotional and  low-margin items make up  an increasing  share  of

sales.  Retailers surveyed  remain profitable, but  earnings are below 1988

levels.

iv

mortgage  loans  has  softened  in  New  York,  while  Chicago  attributes  its  pronounced  upturn  in

residential  loan  applications  to lower  rates  and  refinancing  activity.  Richmond  reports  mixed

mortgage  activity,  with  most  reports  of improvement  attributed  to  refinancing.  Demand  for  home

equity  credit  and  second  mortgages  is  strong  in  the  New  York and  Atlanta  Districts,  and

increasing  in  the  Kansas  City  District.  Commercial  and  industrial  lending  activity  is  reported  to

be  up  in  Chicago  and  Kansas  City, growing  at  a slower  rate  in  Philadelphia,  and  flat  to  down  in

Richmond.

Respondents were uniformly cautious  about  the  rest  of 1989,  and

several have lowered  their  expectations  for  sales  and profits.  Capital

spending plans are generally modest, and  staffing levels  are projected  to

be  flat  to  lower over  the  coming months.

First District  auto  sales  are reportedly slightly  lower than

sales last  month and significantly below year-ago levels.  Although the

extent  of  the year-to-year drop varies,  some  dealers  report  sales  to  be

off as  much as  50 percent.  Layoffs have occurred, and  inventories  are

building despite  previous cutbacks  in orders.  While  the  summer  is

usually slow, dealers cite  two  reasons  for  the  sharp year-to-year

decline.  First, they believe  that  economic uncertainty  is  reducing buyer

confidence.  In  addition, the unusually long-term financing plans

introduced a few years ago have extended the normal buying cycle.

Consumers who usually buy  a car  every two  to  three years now  find that

their remaining car payments exceed  their vehicle's trade-in value;  thus,

prospective buyers needing  finance may delay new purchases.  Many dealers

expect  the  slowdown to  continue until declining  interest  rates or

"creative  financing"  entice buyers back to  the  showrooms.

Manufacturing

Most  First District manufacturing contacts  continue to  report

good year-to-year growth.  Shipments  and orders  are  6 to  18  percent  above

year-ago  levels  at most surveyed firms.  Nevertheless, half the

respondents indicate  that  incoming  orders  are starting  to  flatten  out.

Contacts describe demand  for  products related to  defense,  autos,

computers, and  construction as  relatively weak.  One manufacturer said

that  the government  is  renegotiating contracts while auto  makers are

cutting inventories.  By contrast,  respondents see demand from the

commercial aircraft, paper, packaging, and food  industries  as more

robust.  Two  firms mention strong export  growth, but  one sees  weaker

demand in  Japan, its major market last  year.

Manufacturers describe  employment  levels  as  little  changed  and

wage  increases  as  "noninflationary."  Although several  respondents  report

a softening  in  the  region's labor markets, others  see little  change  above

the  entry level.  Inventories are closely monitored and are  currently

satisfactory.  Contacts agree  that  input prices have peaked.  Their  own

prices are  reportedly stable or rising very modestly.

A majority of manufacturing contacts  expect  capital spending to

be below last  year's  levels,  although one-third project  current  outlays

to  be well above 1988  figures.  Three  optimistic  firms have recently

raised  their investment  plans.  Investment  programs  include bricks and

mortar  as well as  equipment.

Half the manufacturers surveyed  expect business  to  slow somewhat

further.  The others see  little  evidence  of a slowdown in their  own order

books.  Nevertheless,  they describe  themselves  as  "watchful,"  lest

declining confidence  levels prove  self-fulfilling.

Residential Real Estate

First District  realtors  report  that  residential sales have

improved slightly  from  last month.  They credit  lower  interest  rates  and

prices  for  causing the modest  improvement.  Smaller homes  continue  to

sell better than larger units,  and sellers  far  outnumber buyers  in  the

condominium market.  Buyers  appear very cautious  overall,  and realtors

expect sales  to maintain their  current  slow pace.

II-I

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

The pattern of  developments  in the Second District  continued to  be mixed

across sectors.  Some retailers  reported sales well  above plan, while others

experienced demand that met  or  fell below  targeted levels.  Upstate New York  reports on

new orders, production, and general business conditions indicate some  leveling off.

Nevertheless, more  respondents continued to  report gains  in  these  areas  than reported

declines.  Office leasing  activity in the  District has maintained a moderately strong

pace.  The pace of  homebuilaing activity has been  uneven across  the District, and based

on a survey  of  small-  to medium-sized banks, demand for  residential  real estate credit

has weakened.

Consumer Spending

Sales results  at  District department  stores were mixed during June.  While

some retailers  reported sales were well above plan, others experienced demand  that  just

met or  fell  below targeted  levels.  Over-the-year gains  in June  ranged  from 0.2 percent

to  9.5  percent among District  retail contacts.  Women's and  junior apparel,  accessories

and cosmetics continued  to be  in strong demand  and men's departments showed  some

improvement  from their  earlier weakness.  In contrast, home furnishings  and appliances

were generally weak.  Partial results for  the  first half  of  July indicate  some slowing

may have  occurred  in  recent weeks.

With the exception of  one  store which had  stocks well above desired levels,

department store contacts described  their  inventories as being  in good shape.  In one

case,  this  was due  to  unusually heavy markdowns which were being continued in July.

Residential Construction and Real Estate

Homebuilding activity  in  the District  has been mixed  in recent  weeks.  A glut

of  homes  in  the  resale market continues  to be  cited as  a major deterrent to

II-2

homebuilding  in downstate New York and northern New Jersey, but a slight pickup was

noted as a result of  lower mortgage  rates.  Many observers believe that existing home

prices will  need to be lowered considerably more before current owners can sell and

"move up"  to new  homes.  By way of contrast, homebuilders in several upstate New York

communities are currently quite busy after an unusually rainy spring which slowed

things down, and home prices  continue to  rise in response to strong demand.  With

regard to the outlook, projects have  recently been proposed for 4700  new moderate

income residential  units in Brooklyn and  7000-10,000 units in Queens,  and a survey  in

Monmouth County  (N.J.)  projects  the need for  some 33,000 new units to be built  in that

area over  the  next  few years.

Office  leasing  activity has continued at a moderately strong pace  since  the

last report  as Manhattan's largest  lease of the year was signed for  space in a 40-story

miatown building scheduled  for completion  in 1992.  Vacancy rates declined in  several

parts of  the  District including  northern New Jersey and Suffolk and Westchester

counties  (N.Y.).  Rates moved  higher in some  other  areas, however, 

including  downtown

Manhattan where downsizing or merging financial firms are adding to the available

supply of  office space.

Other Reports on Business Activity

June surveys of purchasing  managers in Buffalo and Rochester  suggest some

tendency to  a flattening  out in general business conditions, orders and production with

an  increased majority  reporting  "no change" in these  various categories.  Nevertheless,

improving conditions  are  still reported by substantially more firms than are reporting

a deterioration.  Noticeably  fewer purchasing managers  reported higher  input prices  in

June.  Concerning  the  outlook, both  the monthly Rochester  survey and  a semi-annual

survey  by the  Manufacturers Association of Central New York  showed a large drop  in the

percentage of  respondents  expecting a further improvement  in business conditions over

the  next  three to  six  months.

June unemployment  rates of  4.2 percent  and 5.0  percent  in New Jersey and New

York,  respectively, were again below the national average.  Nonetheless,  the growth  in

11-3

Second District nonfarm employment has  increasingly lagged the national pace since

1986.  In large part this  results from continued declines in manufacturing employment

in the District.  In addition, some nonmanufacturing industries are growing more slowly

than elsewhere in the nation.  As a result of  this and other  developments, much

discussion is going on in government and private circles regarding what can be done for

the region  to maintain its competitive position.

Several  new projects were announced or  undertaken in recent weeks.  In Mahwah,

New Jersey, United Parcel  Service broke ground for a computer and telecommunications

center which will be part of  a $1.4  billion investment in its worldwide operations.  In

Monmouth County plans have been announced for  two  large mixed-use projects which  it is

hoped will revitalize an old resort area.  Ground was also broken in northeastern New

York for  a $50  million mall scheduled to open next year, and downstate plans were

announced for  a major expansion of the New Rochelle mall.

Financial Developments

Based on a survey  of  small-  to medium-sized banks  in the Second  District,

demand for  residential real  estate credit has softened.  While interest in second

mortgages remains strong,  demand for primary mortgages  is modest or  falling  .

According  to  the bankers, adjustable rate mortgages still appear more popular  than

fixed-rate ones, especially  those with first-year  discounts.  Several reasons were

suggested for the softening of  real  estate loans.  Some bankers said that the  real

estate market may have overexpanded and  is now undergoing an adjustment period.  Other

reasons given were:  continued  uncertainty about the outlook for financial markets,

relatively high interest  rates,  and  the slowdown in the national economy.  Most of  the

surveyed bankers characterized their  local economies as strong, however,  and reported

that employment  levels were  very  high.  They forecast continued but slower  growth  in

the future  for  their communities.  In general, the respondents were not worried about

inflation with many  stating that  its current rate is not high enough  to warrant

concern.  Most anticipate that  inflation will continue at  relatively moderate rates

during  the next year.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Economic  activity in the Third District is easing, according to  indications

from businesses  surveyed in July.  Manufacturers reported a drop in business for

the month.  Retailers said sales were flat compared to  last year and auto dealers

indicated  sales were running below  the year-ago pace.  Bankers  said  that  loan

growth for the second quarter eased from the  first quarter's  pace and appeared

to  be  slowing  further  in  July.  Despite  the  slackening  pace  of  business,

employment  in  most  industries  remains  healthy.  Many firms  indicate they  are

raising wages for entry-level employees  in the face of a shortage of qualified

workers;  however, there are not widespread plans  to  boost payrolls  further.

Looking  ahead,  the  consensus  opinion  in  the  Third  District  business

community is that business will  be steady to slightly slower for the rest of the

year.  Manufacturers  expect  activity  to  stabilize  at  about  its  current  pace.

Retailers expect real sales in the second half to run about even with or slightly

below the rate  of the same period last year.  Auto dealers anticipate a further

decline in  sales but not a substantial  drop-off.  Bankers expect  loan growth to

slacken as  the economy slows somewhat and as banks tighten credit standards for

real  estate  lending.

MANUFACTURING

Manufacturing  activity  in  the Third  District showed  signs  of  slowing  in

July, according to  companies polled  during  the month.  Nearly one-third of  the

manufacturers  surveyed said activity was declining, while half  reported steady

business,  and the  rest indicated  some improvement  from  June.  Firms  in  nearly

all the goods-producing industries in the region contacted in July indicated that

business  was  off from June.

III-2

On balance, area firms were receiving  fewer orders  for  their products  in

July than  they did  in  June, and order backlogs were declining significantly as

local  companies  stepped  up  shipments. 

Overall,  area  manufacturers  said

inventories  remained  level,  with  little  change  since  April. 

Measures  of

employment  were mixed:  area firms were  adding marginally  to  payrolls  in July,

but they were trimming the workweek.  Industrial companies reported paying higher

wages  for  new  employees,  both  production workers  and professional  personnel.

On  the price  front,  area manufacturers continue  to  report  more increases  than

decreases; however, the incidence of price hikes--for either  inputs or outputs-

-appears  to  be declining.

Looking  to  the  future,  the  balance  of  opinion  among  Third  District

manufacturers is that  business will  stabilize at about its  current pace for  the

rest  of  the  year.  They  expect  new  orders  to  run  at  a steady  rate  into  the

beginning  of next year, but they anticipate further declines in order backlogs.

Despite  signs  of  slower  business,  area  firms  intend  to  maintain  current

employment  levels  and  working hours, and  they plan  to  boost  capital spending,

on balance, over  the next six months.

RETAIL

Third District  retailers  contacted  in July  said  sales for  June and  July

were about even with the  year-ago pace, in dollar  terms.  Merchants say women's

apparel is selling above last year's rate, while appliances and other big-ticket

items  are weaker.  Discount  stores  are achieving  somewhat better  results  than

other types  of  stores, and merchants describe  shoppers as  very price-conscious

and selective with regard to the quality of  merchandise they are buying.  Nearly

all store executives  contacted in  July said inventories  were at planned levels.

Many retailers  report  they are having difficulty  finding entry-level employees

although plans to  increase staffing do not  appear  to be widespread.

III-3

Overall,  retailers  say real  sales  in  the  second  half  of  the  year  will

probably run about even with or slightly below the same period last year.  Many

merchants  are  trimming  orders  for  fall  merchandise although  womens'  apparel

retailers  are preparing for continued  improvement  in sales.

Third District  domestic auto dealers contacted in  July said both unit  and

dollar sales  were  running slightly  below  the  pace of  last  year.  Foreign  auto

dealers are achieving somewhat  better sales (in unit and dollar terms) than they

did last  summer.  All  dealers report a continuing squeeze on profit margins due

to higher car and parts prices from manufacturers and rising costs  for  financing

inventories.  Locally,  domestic  car  dealers  report  inventories  ranging  up  to

twice desired levels.

FINANCE

Total loan volume outstanding at major  Third District  banks in early July

was  approximately 9 percent above the year-ago  level, as  the pace of growth  in

lending  continued  to  ease  from  the rate  set  in  the first  quarter.  Growth  in

business and consumer lending has  slowed significantly in  recent months.  Real

estate lending has  remained on a strong upward trend during this same period but

bankers  contacted  in  late  July  said  they  have  been  booking  less  real  estate

credit  in  recent weeks compared to the buildup in real  estate loans earlier this

year.

Third District bankers generally expect  loan demand to weaken in the second

half in all credit categories in response to slower economic growth and tightened

credit  standards,  especially for  real  estate loans.

In  general,  bankers  indicate  that  deposit  growth  is  in line  with  asset

expansion  plans,  but net  interest margins  are under  some pressure  because loan

rates  have  declined  while  relatively  high  rates  are  still  being  paid  on

certificates  of  deposit booked earlier this  year.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT  - CLEVELAND

Summary.  Fourth District panelists generally do not  expect a cumulative

decline in  economic activity  this  year, although a few believe  real  GNP could

decline this  quarter.  Many also  believe  that a soft

landing will  not reduce  the core  inflation rate.  They  expect sluggishness  in

consumer spending  to  continue  this  half.  Traditional  capital goods  producers

are  still  operating at  high levels,  although  softening in  some  industrial

markets  is  occurring.  Also, steel  activity  is  easing.  Still-lower  interest

rates  are  expected to  revive  overall  economic  activity.

Output and Inflation.  The  consensus  view among District  respondents  is

still  that  real  GNP growth will average  about  1% to  1.5%  over the  next  few

quarters.  Nevertheless, a few believe that  the  odds  for  a recession have

increased  in  recent  weeks.  They expect  that real  GNP will  either slightly

increase  or  decline  this  quarter,  but do  not expect  a cumulative  decline in

overall economic  activity.  A few others  still  believe  that  real  GNP growth

will  average  about  a 2% annual  rate  this  half.

Most  of  the  respondents  doubt  that  a soft  landing will  succeed  in

reducing the  inflation rate.  They expect  that  inflation will  remain sticky  in

a 4.5%  to  5% range,  even though  the  growth rate  of  real  GNP  is  expected  to  be

below the  growth rate of  potential output  for  the  next  several quarters.  Most

expect  that  inflation  in  the  second half of 1989  will be  less  than  in  the

first  half  because of improving  supplies  of farm products  and  energy. An

IV-2

energy economist expects  petroleum prices will ease  in  the  second half, and

that  crude  oil  prices will  fall to  the  low end of an $18  to  $20  per barrel

range.  All but two  respondents  believe  that a 4.5%  inflation rate  is  too  high

and are concerned that  further easing  in  interest rates  might revive  economic

growth and fuel  accelerating inflation.

Consumer Outlook.  Producers  of consumer goods  and  retailers  generally

expect continued sluggishness  in consumer spending during  the  second half.

Some  expressed a view that  the  slowdown in  consumer  spending in  the  first

half was  not an aberration, and that  continued slow growth  in  the  second half

will  lead to  extensive financing  incentives by auto  producers.  An auto

producer  expects domestic  new car sales  to  fall  to  about  a 6.5 million annual

rate  this  half, and a tire  producer expects  a relatively  flat volume  of  sales

and production of tires.

A major retailer expects  real  consumer spending will  increase  at  about  a

1.5%  annual  rate  this  half, and  that more  "specials" will be  offered  in order

to  stimulate  sales.

A major appliance  producer expects  sluggishness  in  consumer spending  for

major household goods  in the  second half  in response  to  the  softening  in

housing.  He  also  noted no  favorable  consumer  response yet  to  the  decline  in

mortgage rates.

Capital Goods. Traditional capital goods  producers  report continued high

levels  of production for most types  of  machinery and  equipment, although

easing  in orders has  occurred  in some  industrial markets.  Demand from  the

electric  utility  industry shows  no  letup,  lead times  have  not changed much,

IV-3

and prices are  holding firm. Demand for  some  types  of standard industrial

equipment has  softened, possibly because of  seasonal  factors.  A producer of

small motors  expects  that second-half business will not be  quite  as  strong as

in  the  first half.  He  expects  that even with a real GNP  growth rate  of 1% to

2% over the  next few quarters,  capital  goods  will  grow at  twice  that  rate.

Bearing orders  from some  capital goods  producers,  especially machine  tool

builders, have  slowed, and  the number of bearings  still on allocation has

shrunk.

Steel  producers foresee  a larger  than  seasonal decline  in  their business

during the  third quarter,  mostly because of production cutbacks  in  the  auto

industry.  They believe  that  the  boom in steel  is  over.  Flat-rolled steel

products  remain on allocation by at  least  one  major producer,  although

conditions  are  not as  tight  as  they  were earlier this  year.  Another producer

removed all  steel  from allocation.  Second-half steel  shipments  and production

are  expected to  soften from  the  first  half.

Financial  Conditions.  Bank and financial  economists  expect  further

declines  in  interest  rates  this  summer.  Lower rates  so  far  have not had  an

effect  on loan demand, although most lending rates  have not  fallen much.

However,  a bank economist expects  that  lower  mortgage rates,  now common at

about  9.5%  for  a 30-year  fixed-rate  mortgage, will  soon begin to  stimulate

demand for mortgages.  Lower interest  rates  later  this  summer  are  expected by

some  of the  economists  to  revive  economic  growth in  a 2% to  3% range.  The

recent  surge  in  demand deposits was  described by  one bank economist as  due

largely to  rebuilding of compensating balances  by  their business  accounts.

FIFTH  DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview

After moderating  for  several  months,  growth  in the  District  economy

softened  further  in July.  Activity was  flat  in some  sectors  and  actually

declined  in others.  Retail  sales  were  weak on  balance,  and manufacturing

activity  decreased.  Home  sales  were  below their earlier  level,  and  tourism

and port  activity  were  mixed.  On  the  financial  front,  loan  demand was

generally weak.  Despite  the  current sluggishness  in their sectors,

manufacturers,  retailers,  homebuilders  and  bankers  are  optimistic that  their

own  business  activity  will  increase  in the  next  six  months.  Agriculture  and

forestry  offer  the  brightest  prospects  for growth,  as  a good  season will

likely boost  farm  receipts,  and  strong  foreign demand  is supporting  lumber

sales  and  prices.

Consumer  Spending

About half  of  the  retailers  responding  to  our  regular mail  survey

reported  lower  sales  in July while only  a few  reported  increases.  Most

retailers,  however, expect  their  sales  to  rise  over  the  next  six  months.

Retailer  responses  to  our July  survey were  generally unchanged  from May.

Most  car  dealers  again  indicated  slower sales,  while  department  store  volume

increased  slightly,  as  sales  of big  ticket  items  apparently  improved.

Manufacturing

District  manufacturing  activity,  which  has  been weakening  in recent

months,  fell  in July  according  to  our  regular mail  survey.  Reports  of

declines  outnumbered  reports  of  increases  in shipments,  new  orders,  and

unfilled  orders.  Export orders,  employment,  and  the  length of the  workweek

were  largely  unchanged.  Inventories  of materials  evidently  declined,  while

inventories  of  finished  goods  were unchanged.  Prices  for both  finished

products  and  raw materials  apparently continued  to  rise,  but at  a slightly

slower  rate  than  was  reported  in May.

District manufacturers  continue  to  be more  optimistic  about  prospects

for  their  own  businesses  than  for general  business  activity  in the  nation.

Respondents  who expect  increases  in sales  and  unfilled orders  in the  next  six

months  slightly  outnumbered  those who  expect declines.  The majority  look  for

employment  and  the workweek at  their respective plants  to  remain at  current

levels.  Only  one District producer in five,  however,  expects  the  general

economy  to  improve  over  the  next  six  months, while  two  in five expect  it to

decline.

Expectations  of  Inflation  and  Foreign  Trade

In their responses  to  our  July mail  surveys,  District manufacturers  and

retailers  also  indicated  their  expectations  about  U.S.  prices,  wages,

exports,  and  imports.  As  in our  previous  survey,  most  respondents  expect the

rate  of  increase  in prices  and wages  to  stabilize  or  slow  in the  next  six

months.  Slightly  more  July  than May  respondents  look  for the  trade  deficit

to  widen.  The  July  survey  results  are summarized  below.

Prices 
Wages 
Exports 
Imports 

Expecting  Rate of  Increase  to: 
Not  Change 
53% 
71% 
49% 
46% 

Rise 
9% 
10% 
14% 
18% 

Slow 
31% 
19% 
22% 
29% 

Expecting
a Decline
7%
0%
14%
7%

Ports

Reports  received  from the  three major  District ports--Hampton  Roads

(Norfolk),  Charleston,  and  Baltimore--show that  import  volume  was  unchanged

in July  from June.  The export  picture  was  mixed,  with shipments  higher  at

Charleston and  Hampton  Roads  but  about the  same  at  Baltimore.  Compared to  a

year  ago,  increases  in  export  activity exceeded  increases  in import  activity,

and  representatives  expect  this  trend  to  continue during  the  next  six  months.

At  Hampton  Roads,  the  largest  coal  port  in the  nation,  coal  exports  have

reportedly  been at  normal  levels  in recent  weeks.

Financial

According  to  our  telephone  survey  of  financial  institutions,  commercial

and  industrial  loan  demand  was  generally  flat  to  lower  in July.  Mortgage

demand  was  mixed with  half  of  those  surveyed  reporting  higher  demand  and  the

other  half  lower  demand.  Of those  reporting  higher  mortgage demand, most

attributed the  strength  to  refinancing  activity.  Auto  loan  demand  was

sluggish  at  banking  institutions,  and  respondents  felt  that  more  dealer

financing  was  the  cause.  Many  bankers  expect  loan  demand  to  firm  once

borrowers  perceive  that  interest  rates  have  bottomed  out.

Housing

Housing  activity  in the  District was  reported  as  mixed overall,  but

still  well  behind  last  year's  levels  according  to  our  telephone  survey  of

builders  and  realtors.  The  suburban  Washington,  D.C.,  market  has  been

especially  slow  recently,  primarily  because  of large  inventories  of

higher-priced  homes.  Most  respondents  noted  that  lower  mortgage  rates  had

begun  to  have  a small  positive effect.  Several  respondents  said  reduced

V-4

mortgage rates  had  not  resulted  in  heavier  customer traffic  but  had  allowed

buyers  to  purchase more  expensive homes.

Tourism

District  hotel  and motel  representatives  contacted by  telephone

indicated  that tourist  activity  was mixed  compared  to  last  summer.  About

half  reported  that  bookings  were  higher  than  last year at  this  time,  which

they  attributed  to  more  repeat  customers,  better convention  business,  and

better weather.  About one-third  reported  lower  bookings.  Our  contacts  gave

mixed  views  on  prospects  for  tourism for  the  rest of the  summer,  40  percent

expect  increases,  and  33  percent expect  decreases  from  last year.

Agriculture

Abundant rainfall  and moderate temperatures  throughout much  of the

District  during  July  have  raised  optimism that  fall  yields  will  be  strong.

The  apple  crop  is in generally good  condition.  The  harvest  of  early  peaches

has  begun,  with  that  crop  also rated  as  good.

The  District's  lumber  industry  has  apparently  benefited  from  strong

foreign  demand  that  has  largely  offset  the  weakness  in domestic  demand  due  to

softness  in construction.  Foreign  buyers  of  lumber were said  to  have bought

all  grades  and  to  have paid  top  prices.

VI-1

SIXTH  DISTRICT  - ATLANTA

Overview:  A  number  of  contacts  at  businesses  headquartered  in  the  Southeast

have  revised  their expectations  of business  activity downward  in  light of  either  reports  of

a  general  economic  slowdown  or  an  actual  slowdown  in  their  sales.  Few  have  indicated

that  they  were  going  to  change  their  capital  investment  plans  as  a  result.  Businesses

related  to  the  housing  and  construction  industries  have  reported  significant  slowing,  and

the  trucking 

industry  also  reports  that  business 

is  down. 

Recently,  oil  and  gas

exploration  has  been  showing  some  strength, and  this  has  in  turn  been  helping  suppliers  to

this  industry.  There  are  a  few  reports  of  localized  pressure  on  wages,  particularly  for

unskilled  workers. 

Input  prices  are  being  reported  as  stable,  and  in  a  few  cases,  falling

slightly.

Reports  of  Business  Activity:  Although  economic  activity  continues  to  expand  in

the  Southeast,  several  areas  of  softness  have  become  apparent. 

The  slowdown  in

residential,  office,  and  retail  construction  continues,  and  the  effects  are  now  being  felt

in  several  related  industries.  A  furniture  retailer  notes  that  sales  have  slowed  recently

and  that  he  expects  some  further  slowing.  A  supplier  of  building  materials  reports  that

sales  in  Florida  are  down  and  that  his  firm  is  introducing  lower-priced  materials  for cost-

conscious  contractors.  Some  slowing  in  the  paper  and  pulp  industry  is  also  apparent.

Several  contacts  report  that  order  backlogs  have  decreased  recently.  A  warehouse

operator  reports  that  most  goods  continue  to  move  through  normally  but  certain  items,

especially  paper  goods,  are  said  to  be  accumulating.  The  transportation  and  freight

industry  is  reporting  a  general  slowdown  in  business.  Several  large  trucking  firms  report

that  their  volume  of  shipments  has  decreased,  in  some  instances  dramatically.  Two

operators,  one  in  Florida  and  the  other  in  New  Orleans,  note  that  shipments  of  building

materials  have  been  off  substantially.  Although  rail  sources  have  not  revised  their

business  expectations  downward  any  further,  truck  operators  report  that  in  general  their

outlooks  have  been  revised  down  recently.

VI-2

Several  industries,  however,  have  stated  that  their  business 

is  starting  to

improve.  Oil  and  gas  drilling  is  up.  The  increase  has  been  strongest  in  natural  gas

exploration  in  the  Gulf,  but  one  contact  says  that  the  recent  stability  in  oil  prices  has

begun  to  restore  some  confidence  among  oil  drillers.  This  is  showing  up  in  increases  in

orders  for  drilling  equipment  from  Louisiana  suppliers. 

A  manufacturer  of  air

conditioning  equipment  reported  that  his  firm  has  been  running  close  to  capacity recently

with no  sign  of  slowdown  anticipated.  He  attributed  the  strength  in  orders  to  remodeling

and replacement  rather  than  to  new  building  construction.  Producers  of  communications

and  electronic  equipment  in  Georgia  state  that  business  is  still  strong  and  that  they  do

not  expect  much,  if  any,  slowing  in  their  industry.  The  one  weak  spot  in  communication

and electronic  equipment  sales  has been  in  federal  government  orders.

Several  financial  institutions  pointed  out  that  because  of growth  in  home  equity

lines  of  credit,  consumer  loans  have  increased  recently.  Two  lenders  noted  that  there

has  been  some  increase  in  ARM  mortgage  lending,  although  they  remain  somewhat

cautious  in  their  outlook.  A  few  other  bankers  noted,  however,  that  borrowers  seem  to

have  become  more  hesitant  to take  out  new  loans  in  light of  general  reports  of  a slowing

economy.  Auto  loans  are  widely  reported  being down.

Wages  and  Prices:  Reports  of  tight  labor  supplies  and  greater  than  expected

wage  pressures  are  rare  in  the  Southeast.  Five  percent  seems  to  be  the  upper  limit  to

reported  wage  increases,  although  the  cost  of  benefits,  particularly  medical  care,  is still

increasing  more  rapidly  than  wages.  A  hotel  chain  operator  reports  that  it 

is  still

difficult  to  get  workers  at  or  slightly  above  minimum  wage  and  sees  few  signs  of  slowing

business  activity.  A  spokesman  for  a ship  repair  yard  in  Louisiana  said  that  pressures  on

crew  wages  and  charges  for  repair  work  have  been  building  with  the  increased  demand

for  offshore  drilling. 

Several  manufacturers  said  that  materials  prices  have  been

essentially  steady.  Rolled  steel  and  copper  prices  have  remained  constant  for  the  past

few  months,  and  prices  for  some  grades  of  paper  have  actually  come  down  recently.

VI-3

Feed  costs  have  remained  stable  owing  to  recent  rains  in  the  Midwest,  although  District

fertilizer  demand  and  costs  have  fallen  because  heavy  rains  in  the  Southeast  have

reduced planting  substantially.

Inventories  and  Investments:  Even  though  several  businesses  reported  that  they

had  revised  their  economic  outlook  down,  few  have  reported  any  changes  in  planned

inventories  or  investment  plans.  A  furniture  distributor  intends  to  reduce  already  low

inventories  because  of  expectations  of  further  slowdowns  in  sales.  On  the  other  hand,

several  chemical  producers  in  Louisiana  announced  plant  expansions  recently.  A  number

of  automobile  parts  producers  in  Tennessee  have  recently  announced  large  expansions  or

plans  to  construct  new  plants  altogether.  The  firms  produce  parts  for  domestic  auto

makers.  A  paper  and  lumber  producer  noted  that  several  new  plants  currently  under

construction  will  bring  substantial  capacity  on  line  in  the  next  two  years  during  a  period

in  which  he  is  now  expecting  slowing  sales.  An  assembler  of  offshore  drilling  equipment

and  rigs  has  opened  a  previously  idle factory.

VII-1

SEVENTH  DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.  Several  reports  suggest  slower growth,  overall,  in economic  activity

in the  District,  with declines  in some  sectors.  Chicago  purchasing managers

indicating  rising  production  continued  in June  to  outnumber  those  noting declines,

though  by  a smaller margin than  in earlier  months  over  the  past  two  years.  Orders

are  showing  no growth,  however,  and  backlogs  are  falling.  Milwaukee  purchasers  say

production  and  orders  were about  unchanged  in June  and  backlogs  were  beginning  to

soften.  Manufacturing employment  in District  states,  seasonally  adjusted,  peaked

in January.  A number  of  manufacturers  in the  region  note  a slowing  in activity or

orders  at  their  firms--slower growth  for  some,  declines  at  others.  Real  estate

markets,  both  nonresidential  and  residential,  appear to  be  picking  up  in response

to  lower  interest  rates.  Consumer  spending  continues  sluggish.  Favorable  weather

has  enhanced  crop  prospects.

Motor Vehicles.  Though  auto  production  cuts  through  the  third  quarter  have

been  limited,  preliminary  indications are  that  automakers  will  reduce output more

substantially  in the  fourth  quarter.  Sales  incentives  have  been  enhanced  further

in an  effort  to  sell  excess  inventories.  Expectations  for  1990  sales  have  been

revised  downward.  A Big  Three  automaker  announced  a major  cost-cutting  program,

involving  substantial  reductions  in white-collar  staffing.  Sales  of  larger  trucks

are  showing  varying  degrees  of  softness,  with  deliveries  of  medium-duty  trucks

below last  year  and  orders  for  heavy  trucks  easing  though deliveries  are  higher.

An  Indiana  truck  trailer manufacturer  recently  halted  second-shift  production  and

laid  off  350 workers.

Machinery.  Markets  for  a variety  of  types  of  equipment continue  to  expand,  but

there  appear  to  be  an  increasing  number  showing  indications  of  weakness.  Although

shipments  of  metal-cutting machine  tools  this  year  have  been  sharply  higher  than  in

VII-2

1988,  orders have  trailed  last  year,  particularly  from abroad,  and  backlogs  have

fallen  since  February.  Smaller  pieces  of  earthmoving  equipment  used  in residential

construction continue weaker,  as  has  been  the  case  for  many  months.  Softening  has

been  noted  recently  in marine  and  recreational  vehicle markets.  A maker of

industrial  machinery has  seen  weakening  in orders.  On  the  other  hand,  a producer

of  electrical  controls  and  power  supplies  used  in a wide  range  of  types  of

industrial  equipment  expects  continued  strength  in these markets  through  year-end.

Markets  for mining equipment  are  strong,  including  robust  demand  from abroad.  Road

maintenance  equipment  buying  is also  strong.  Demand  for  agricultural  equipment

continues  to  improve.

Construction.  Lower  mortgage  interest  rates  reportedly are  generating  a

pronounced upturn  in inquiries  and  loan  applications,  both commercial  and

residential.  Part  of  this  increased  activity reflects  refinancing  by  current

property  owners,  including  shifts  from adjustable-rate  to  fixed-rate  loans.  Part

is expected  to  give  rise  to  added  construction.  Thirty-year  fixed-rate  residential

loans  are  being  offered  in the  Chicago area  generally  in a 9.5-9.75  percent  range,

down  from  10.75-11  percent  common  in March.  Measures  of  construction  activity

continue  stronger  in this  part  of  the country  than nationwide.  Year-to-date

shipments  of  portland  cement,  for  5 months,  were  5 percent  higher  in the  East  North

Central  states  and  1 percent  lower  in the  nation.  Year-to-date gypsum board

shipments were  8 percent  higher  than  a year  earlier  in District  states,  against

only  a 4 percent  rise  nationwide.  Nonresidential  and  residential  construction

contracts  are  above  a year  ago  in District  states  and  lower  nationwide,  suggesting

relative  strength  in future  construction activity  in this  region.

Steel.  Demand  for  steel  has  slowed,  but  perhaps  mainly  seasonally.  There

appears  to  be  an  unusual  concentration  of  shutdowns  among  the  steel  industry's

customers  in July.  Unwinding  of  inventories  accumulated  earlier,  to  guard  against

VII-3

the  risk  that  negotiations  over expiring  labor  agreements  at  steel  mills  might have

been  unsuccessful  and  led  to  strikes,  is also  thought  to  have  contributed  to

slackened  demand  for steel.  Planned  auto  production  and  related  demand  for  sheet

steel  is strong  again  in August,  following  July  shutdowns,  but  production cutbacks

expected  at  automakers  later  this  year  would curtail  this  market  for  steel.

Construction markets  for  steel  were  strong  in the  first  half,  and  additional

projects  are  coming  up  for  bidding,  but  some  other  projects  have  been  delayed  for

various  reasons.  Machinery markets  for  steel,  as  noted  above,  are  turning

increasingly  mixed.  Steel  exports  in 1989 have  been  up  sharply,  from  a very  low

level,  while  imports  have  declined.

General  Merchandise.  A large  retailer  noted  weakness  in sales  of  durables,

particularly  furniture  and  draperies.  Appliance  sales  are  holding up  a little

better.  Sales  growth  in nondurables,  mainly  apparel,  has  increased  after weakness

last  year.  A June  survey  of  a large  number  of  small  Michigan  retail  stores

indicated  that  year-to-year  sales  increases  were only  about  keeping  pace with  the

rise  in prices.

Agriculture.  Widespread  rains  and  cooler-than-normal  temperatures  since

mid-July  led  to  enhanced  harvest  prospects  and  lower  crop  prices.  Since  the

favorable  weather occurred  during  the  critical  pollination  period,  corn  yields  this

year are  now expected  to  equal,  or  exceed,  the  average for  non-drought  years.

Prospective  soybean  yields,  while  benefiting  from  rapid  plant  growth  recently,

still  hinge  heavily  on  weather  patterns  during  the  pod-filling  stage  in August.

Preliminary  results  from  our  latest  survey  of  District  bankers  suggest  that

farmland  values  continued  to  edge  up  in the  second  quarter, but  at  a slower pace

than  in earlier periods.  The  second  quarter  rise of  1 percent  compares  to  gains  of

about  3 percent  in each  of  the previous  three  quarters.  The  slowing was

particularly  evident  in Illinois  and  Iowa  where  lingering  drought  concerns

prevailed  throughout  the  second  quarter.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT  - ST.  LOUIS

Summary

A  gradual  reduction  in  the  growth  rates  of  employment  and  consumer

spending  has  continued  in  recent  months  and  led  to  layoffs  in  several

durables  manufacturing  industries.  Nonresidential  construction  contracts

rebounded  in  the  second  quarter,  but  residential  contracts  were  flat.

Although  recent  rains  have  helped  to  ease  drought  conditions  in  northern

Missouri,  excessive  rainfall  has  caused  production  losses  in  other  parts

of  the  District.

Employment

average  District  payroll  employment  in  the  three  months  through  May

was  virtually  unchanged  from  the  previous  three-month average,  following

moderate  growth  earlier  in  the  year.  Employment  growth  slowed  in  services

and  wholesale/retail  trades  in  recent  months  while  employment  declined  in

construction and manufacturing.  Compared with  a  year  earlier,  May payroll

employment  was  up  1.4  percent  in  the  District while  rising  3.1  percent  in

the  nation.  There  has  been  little  evidence  of  excessive  wage  pressures.

In  Arkansas,  for  instance,  nominal  hourly  wages  for  manufacturing  workers

were  only 0.7  percent higher  in May  than  a year  earlier.

Manufacturing

District  manufacturing  employment  in  the  March-May  period  fell  at  a

0.6  percent  rate  compared  with  the  previous  three  months,  with  employment

declines  in  most  industrial  sectors. 

Sluggish  sales  of  light  trucks

prompted  a  one-week closure  of  a  Louisville  assembly plant,  the  first  such

VIII-2

shutdown 

in 

six  years. 

Weak  sales  of  refrigerators  and  computer

peripherals  led  two  Arkansas  producers  to  announce  major  layoffs.  Rising

worldwide  inventories  of  coated  paper,  used  in  magazines,  caused  a  major

layoff  of  Arkansas  paper  mill  workers. 

In  a  June  survey  of  Missouri

purchasing  managers, 

48  percent  of  respondents  reported  increases  in  new

orders  in  the  second  quarter,  a response  slightly below  that  of  a year

earlier.  Delivery  lead  times  increased 

in 

the  second  quarter  for  28

percent  of  respondents  compared  with  38  percent  in 

the  first 

quarter  and

68  percent a year earlier.

Construction

Although  construction  employment  continued  to  fall, 

the  value  of

construction  contracts  rebounded  in 

the  second  quarter,  suggesting  future

strengthening. 

The  value  of  District  nonresidential  construction

contracts  rose  23.2  percent  in 

the  second  quarter,  after  falling  at  a

similar  rate  in  the  first  quarter.  District  residential  contracts  rose

marginally  in 

the  second  quarter  (0.8  percent), 

returning  to  the  level  of

a year  earlier.  Contacts  suggest  that  recent  mortgage  rate  declines  have

not  caused  substantial 

increases 

in  homebuilding  as  consumers  expect

further  rate  declines.

Consumer Spending

Retail  sales  growth  has  weakened 

in  recent  months. 

Non-auto  sales

since  May were  2-5  percent  higher  than a year  earlier  compared with  4-7

percent  gains  earlier  in 

the  year.  Women's  apparel  and  accessories  are

reported  to  be  selling moderately well,  but  sales  of men  and boy's  goods,

and 

in  most  cases,  of  home  furnishings  and  appliances,  are  weakening.

While  inventories  are  near  desired  levels  at  most  outlets,  some  retailers

in  Arkansas  report  unplanned  increases.  Car  sales  generally  have  been

VIII-3

slow, with inventories  remaining  at  high  levels.  Tennessee  contacts  report

new car sales  are  slow, while used cars  sales  are moderate  to  strong.

Agriculture  and Mining

Most  District  crops  are  in  fair  to  good  condition.  Rains  helped

ease  drought  conditions  in  northern Missouri,  although  subsoil  moisture

and  livestock  water  supplies  remain  deficient. 

Cotton,  soybean,  and

tobacco  growth  is  being  hampered  by  excessive  rains  in  the  District's

southern states.  By  limiting access  to  cutting sites,  the  rains  have  also

reduced  the  supply  of  logs  to  some  District paper  mills.  Compared with

the  same  period  last  year,  coal  production  fell  8.5  percent  in  the

District  and 3.4  percent  in  the  nation in  the  six-week period through July

15. 

Sympathy  strikes,  industry-wide  vacations  and  stockpile  drawdowns

affected the coal  production figures  during  this  period.

Banking

Total  loans  at  the  District's  weekly-reporting  banks  grew  at  an  11

percent  annual  rate  for  the  second  quarter,  somewhat  higher  than  the  7.7

percent  rate  reported for  the  same  period  in  1988.  Most  of  the  overall

growth  can  be  traced  to  real  estate  loans  (primarily nonresidential),

which  increased at  a 24.7  percent  annual  rate,  more  than  twice  that  for

the  same period in  1988.  Consumer  loans  continue  to  be  weak, growing at  a

1.6  percent  rate.  Total  deposits  at  these  same  institutions  declined

considerably  during  the  second  quarter,  falling  at  a 2.5  percent  annual

rate  compared with a 3.0 percent  rate  of  increase  for  the  same period last

year. 

Weakness  in  business  demand  deposits  and  unusually  large  tax

payments by households  are  cited as  possible explanations  for  this  overall

decline.

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

Ninth  District  economic  conditions  have  been  mixed. 

While  the

Minnesota  labor markets  have  shown  signs  of  weakening,  those  in  other  states

have not.  Consumer  spending  has  been  fairly  strong,  but housing  activity has

been  weak  and  automobiles  sales  have  been  flat. 

Conditions  in  resource-

related industries  have been mixed.

Employment

The district  employment  situation has been mixed,  with some  signs of

increased  unemployment 

in  Minnesota. 

The  unemployment  rate  in  Minnesota 

in

May  was  4.9  percent,  0.6  percentage  points  higher  than  in  April  and  0.8  per-

centage  points  higher  than  in  May  1988. 

The  unemployment  rate  in 

the  Minne-

apolis-St. Paul  metropolitan area was  3.8  percent  in  May,  unchanged from  April

and  0.6  percentage  points  higher  than  in  May  1988.  A director  reports  that

turnover  among  employees  was  lower  than  earlier  in  the  year  and  that  it  had

become  easier  to hire  employees  in  the  last  two  months.  A major  manufacturer

of  electronics,  control  systems,  and  defense  items  headquartered  in  Minne-

apolis  announced  a  restructuring  which  would  eliminate  about  4,000  jobs

worldwide  out  of  its  current  total  of  78,000  employees. 

The  4,000  jobs

include  300  that  were  already  cut  earlier  this  year  from  its  corporate  head-

quarters.

The  unemployment  rate  in  North  Dakota  fell  to  3.7  percent  in  May

from  4.5  percent  in  April  and  4.6  percent  in  May  1988.  The unemployment  rate

in  South  Dakota  in May was  3.7  percent, a slight  increase  from the  3.5  percent

rate  in  April  and  unchanged  from  the  3.7  percent  rate  in  May  1988.  The unem-

ployment  rate  in  Montana  dropped  sharply  in  May  to  5.5  percent  from  7.2  per-

cent  in  May  1988,  and  in  the Upper Peninsula  of Michigan  the  unemployment rate

IX-2

in  April  was  9.3  percent  compared  to  10.3  percent  in  April  1988.  A director

reports  tight labor markets  in  Western Wisconsin.

Consumer Spending

Consumer  spending on  general  merchandise  has  continued  to  be  fairly

strong.  One retailer  reports  that  sales  in  June  were  14.2  percent  higher  than

in  June  1988.  Some  of  the  increase was  due  to  opening of new  stores;  stores

which  were  in  operation  last  year  had  6.1  percent  higher  sales  in  June  than  a

year ago.  Inventories  remained at acceptable  levels.  A retailer  reports  that

it  reduced  the  number  of  sales  promotions  and  sold  more  items  at  full  price,

thereby helping profit margins.

Automobile  sales have  recovered from low levels  in  the  first  quarter

but  have been  generally  lower  than a year  ago.  A domestic  manufacturer closed

its  truck-building facility  in  St.  Paul  for  two  weeks  because  of slack demand

for  pickup  trucks.  Dealers  report  sharply  lower  profit  margins  from  a  year

ago. 

A  director  remarked  that  sales  of  recreational  vehicles,  boats,  and

campers,  which  are  usually  strong  at  this  time  of  the  year,  "have  completely

dried up."

Housing activity has been  sharply  lower  than a year ago.  The  number

of new housing permits  issued  in  Minnesota  in  May was 27  percent  lower  than  in

May  1988. 

The  number  of  new  housing  permits  issued  in  the  Minneapolis-St.

Paul  metropolitan area  in May  was 32  percent  lower  than  a year  ago.  June home

sales  in  the  Minneapolis-St.  Paul  area  were  7.6  percent  higher  than  in  June

1988  but  7.3  percent  lower  on  a year-to-date  basis.  The  decline  in  residen-

tial  construction  was  offset  to  some  extent  by  an  increase  in  nonresidential

construction.  The  dollar  value  of contracts  for  future  residential  and  non-

residential  construction in  the  Minneapolis-St. Paul area was unchanged  in  May

from a year ago.

IX-3

Tourist  spending  has  been  fairly  strong.  Contacts  in  Western  Wis-

consin  report  that  the  bed-and-breakfast  business  is  booming  and  that  many

resorts  are  booked  into  the  fall. 

The  number  of  tourists  visiting  the  Upper

Peninsula  of  Michigan  was  reported  to  be  5  percent  higher  on  a  year-to-date

basis  than  a  year  ago. 

A  director  reported  that  the  number  of  tourists  in

Montana was  12  percent  higher this  year than  the  same period  last  year.

Resource-Related  Industries

Conditions  have  been  mixed  in  resource-related  industries.  North

Dakota,  which  earlier  was  expected  to  have  a  record  grain  crop,  has  now

declared a large  part  of the state  as a drought area.  However,  the  barley and

sugar  beet  crops  in  North  Dakota  were  reported  to  have  been  doing  well.  In

western Minnesota,  millions  of honeybees  were  killed  by  spraying  intended  for

grasshoppers,  creating  potential  losses  not  only  of  honey  but  also  of  crops

that  bees  pollinate. 

The  mining  industry  was  reported  to  be  doing  well

throughout the  district.  A Colorado  company plans  to buy  a bankrupt  Minnesota

mining  firm  and  reopen  an  iron  mine  and  a  taconite  processing  facility  in

Minnesota by  early  1990.  Reports  from  the  lumber  industry were  somewhat mixed

with  some  signs  of  slackening  demand  and  continued  raw  material  shortages

attributed  to  environmental problems.

X-1

TENTH DISTRICT - KANSAS  CITY

Overview.  The  Tenth District  economy continues  to  grow moderately.

Overall  retail  sales  continue  to  increase, although new car  sales  are  weak.

Increases  in manufacturers'  input  prices are moderating and most materials are

readily available.  Retailers  and manufacturers  are  both trimming  inventories.

Drilling activity, while variable from month to month, is  below its  year-ago

level.  Housing activity remains  weak,  with  the effect  of  slightly  lower

mortgage  rates  not  yet  evident.  Loan  demand at  commercial banks  is  flat  to

somewhat  stronger for most  loan  categories.  Lower yields likely held winter

wheat  production below average despite acreage increases.

Retail  Sales.  Most  Tenth District  retailers  report  sales  increases over

last  year  and over the  last  three months.  However, merchandise sales  are

expected to  be  flat  over  the 

of  this year  and most  respondents  are
rest 

reducing their  inventories.  Prices  have been  steady and are  expected to

remain  so  in  the near  future.  Tenth District  automobile dealers  report  weak

new car sales  over  the  last month.  Dealers expect  1989  sales  at  or  below  1988

levels  and are trying to  trim inventories.

Manufacturing.  Most  respondents  report  that  input  prices  rose

moderately over the  last  year.  However,  input  prices  changed  little  over  the

last  three months,  and only small  increases  are  expected over the  next three

months.  Although some  lead times  have  lengthened, most materials  are  readily

available.  Nearly all respondents  are  trimming their inventories  and plan  to

trim further  in  coming months.  The  inventory  reductions  reflect  a recent

build-up  of  excess  inventories  at  some  firms  as  well  as  long-term efforts  to

reduce  normal  inventory levels.  Most  Tenth District  manufacturing plants  are

operating near full  capacity.  However,  one  steel manufacturer  reports  that

X-2

the  recent  strength  of  the dollar has  hurt  sales  of  U.S.  produced pipe and

rails.  Several  firms  report  problems  in  finding skilled  labor.

Energy.  Volatility in  oil  prices appears  to  be contributing to month-

to-month variability in  district  drilling activity.  Drilling activity also

remains  below year-ago levels.  After falling in  June to  225,  the  average

number of  active drilling rigs  in  the  district  increased sharply to  246  in

July.  Exploration and development  activity, therefore,  stands  about  8 percent

below the level  of  one year ago.

Housing Activity and Finance.  District housing activity  is  down  from a

year ago, and most  homebuilders report  a slight  decline  in  starts  from a month

earlier.  New single-family home sales  and prices  have been  steady and

multifamily  construction is  virtually at  a standstill.  Most  respondents

expect  little  change  in  housing activity for  the  rest  of  the year.

Deposit  inflows at  district  savings  and loan  institutions  are  slightly

higher than  a month  ago but  lower  than  a year ago.  However, deposit  inflows

vary substantially from one institution  to  another.  Some  respondents

attribute  the  recent behavior  of  deposit  flows  to  uncertainty about  the  new

savings and  loan  legislation.  Although mortgage  demand has  been mixed, modest

growth  is  expected  in  the near future.  Nearly all  respondents  report  slightly

lower mortgage  rates,  but  most  expect  stable  rates  in  coming months.

Banking.  District  commercial bank  respondents  report  more increases  in

loan demand than decreases.  Increased  demand is  reported to  be most  apparent

for commercial  and industrial  loans,  home equity loans,  and agricultural

loans.  Decreased demand  is  evident  for home construction and commercial  real

estate  loans.  Demand for  other types  of  loans  is  said to  be generally

unchanged.  Among responding banks,  loan-to-deposit  ratios  are  about  the  same

X-3

as  a month ago  but somewhat  higher than  a year ago.  At  most banks,  lending

rates  both  to businesses  and consumers  have  either fallen  in  the  last month  or

are  expected to decline in  the near future.  Deposit  levels are generally the

same  or somewhat  higher than a month ago.  Demand deposits  and small  time and

savings  deposits  have shown the  greatest  strength.

Agriculture.  Winter wheat  yields  and quality vary widely  across  the

district  as  the harvest nears  completion.  Some  fields  in Kansas and Nebraska

were  not  harvested due to  crop  damage from cold weather, drought,  insects,  or

hail.  Wheat  quality in  Kansas  was  reduced by harvest delays due  to  late

season  rainfall.  In  other parts  of  the  district,  however, wheat yields  and

quality were  average or above  average.  Overall,  yields  likely held  winter

wheat production below average  despite acreage  increases.

The district  corn, soybean,  and milo  crops  are  generally in  good

condition.  Across most  of  the  district,  recent  rainfall  has  improved crop

growing conditions,  and good yields  are  likely if  further timely  rainfall  is

received.  But  in  some  areas,  where  planting was  delayed last  spring, crops

could be  threatened by an early frost.

Little expansion  in  district  cattle  and hog numbers is  expected this

year.  District  fed cattle  prices  remain  strong, but  cattle  feeding margins

are being  squeezed by  the  high price  of  feeder  cattle.  High feeder  cattle

prices,  in turn,  are  contributing to  large  profit margins  for cattle  ranchers.

Although  such profits  would typically result  in  an  expansion of  cattle  herds,

drought-diminished  feed supplies  are  likely to  restrict  herd expansion this

year.  Slaughter hog prices  are  higher, but  little  expansion in  hog-feeding

activity  is  likely because  feeding margins  remain  near break-even  levels.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

The District economy  is  expanding at  a modest pace.  Manufacturing

growth is  slow.  Retail sales  continue  to  increase at  a moderate  to  strong

rate.  Buyer incentive  programs  have helped to  push up auto  sales.

Construction activity shows  signs  of a modest recovery.  The  oil  and gas

drilling upturn, which began in the  first quarter,  is  still  on track. 

Prices

paid to  District farmers  in June were  up  slightly on a year-over-year basis,

but down a little  from May.

Manufacturing  is  growing slowly, but the  recent performance of

individual  industries  varies widely.  Following declines  that  carried  into  the

first  quarter of 1989,  demand for  oilfield equipment has  expanded lately,  but

sales  have  not pushed above  year-earlier levels.  Orders  to  District  lumber

producers  are  up and selling prices  are  said to  be  the highest in  eight years.

The  increased demand  is  coming from areas  outside  the  District.  Part  of  the

expansion in  sales  is  said to  stem from environmentally-related production

problems  elsewhere  in  the  nation.  Demand for  stone,  clay and  glass  remains

sluggish.  The major geographic  exception is  the  Houston area, where  increases

in  construction activity have stimulated purchases of building-related

concrete and glass  products.  Orders  to  fabricated metals producers  generally

are  rising, but firms  that  serve  the  construction  industry  say  their  sales  are

weak.  Demand for primary metals varies widely among products but overall

sales have  shown little  change  recently.  Electric  and electronic equipment

orders  are  softening.  Semiconductor sales  are  down.  Demand for lower-end

computers  is  also weakening, but demand  for upper-end products  remains strong.

XI-2

Apparel  orders  are  growing  from first-quarter levels.  The  demand for  casual

clothes is  showing a particularly strong expansion.  Food processing firms

cite unexpectedly slow increases  in sales.  Some  meat processors  say they are

hedging against expectations  of higher input prices.  Orders  to  District paper

manufactures  remain high and prices  for paper products have been rising

recently.  Nevertheless, some  paper firms  are  concerned about the  rising value

of the  dollar.  Chemical  producers report that  demand is  declining slightly

and productive capacity  is  increasing, while sales  by petroleum refiners  are

up.

District retailers  continue  to  show moderate  to  strong growth

year-over-year.  The expansion appears  to  be focused  in department  store

sales.  Apparel marketings are  said  to  be  strong and  some  firms  also  report

increases  in  demand  for consumer durables.  Growth rates  in  retail  sales  are

particularly high  in south Texas.  Although expansion also  has been strong in

Houston for  much of  this  year, severe  weather  is  said  to  have  discouraged

purchases  during June.

Auto  sales  have been strong, but a significant portion of recent

growth is  said to  be  linked to  temporary  incentive programs.  In June,  auto

sales  in  Dallas were  up  13  percent from a year earlier.  Expansion was  also

strong in  Houston -- despite some  declines  in  import sales.  In San Antonio,

growth has been somewhat  weaker than  in the  District's  two  major cities.

District construction activity  is  beginning to  show signs  of  a

recovery, albeit  a  weak one.  For  the  first  time  in almost two  years,  the

value  of  total  construction contracts  has  risen above  a  year earlier.

Nonresidential building is  the  strongest component  of construction  growth, but

XI-3

residential contract values are  also  increasing.  Single-family homebuilding

is  expanding, but multifamily building remains  at very low levels.  Although

office vacancy rates  remain high, they have been declining in  several  of the

District's  largest cities.

Oil and gas  drilling  continues  to  recover.  Although the

District's  rotary rig count remains  below mid-1988 levels,  it  is  nearly 30

percent above  the  January 1989  count.  Respondents  note  that  they are

expanding drilling cautiously.  Although they are  pleased with reports  showing

strong worldwide petroleum consumption,  they  fear  that Kuwait  and debt-

burdened Iran and Iraq  could  increase  production significantly, causing prices

to  fall.  Some  producers say  they are  using revenues  from higher oil prices  to

improve  their balance  sheets  rather  than to  increase exploration.

Weather and prices are  the chief concerns  in  agriculture.

Increased soil  moisture has raised crop  and  forage potentials  in much of  the

District, but  drought remains  a concern  in  south Texas,  the  Panhandle, and New

Mexico.  Furthermore, rain has been accompanied by hail and flood damage  in

some  areas.  Excess  moisture has become a problem in Louisiana and eastern

Texas.  In  June,  prices paid to Texas  farmers  averaged  2 percent above  a year

earlier,  chiefly as  a result  of  a 6 percent  increase  in  livestock prices.

Crop  prices are  7 percent below a year earlier.  Lower  prices  for  corn, oats

and grain sorghum more  than offset higher prices  for cotton, hay, potatoes  and

wheat.  Both crop  and livestock prices were slightly  lower  in June  than  in

May.

XII-1

TWELFTH  DISTRICT  - SAN  FRANCISCO

Summary

Overall  economic  conditions  in  the  Twelfth  Federal  Reserve  District  continue  healthy,

although  the  pace  of  growth  appears  to  have  slowed  from  that  seen  earlier  this  year.  Retail

sales  growth  is  satisfactory  but not  robust,  with  weakness  in  "big-ticket" items  including

automobiles.  Manufacturing  activity  continues  healthy,  with  strength  in  commercial  aircraft  and

relatively  slow  growth  in  electronics.  Most  western  fruit  and  vegetable  producers  are  having  a

good year,  although  concerns  about  food  safety  have  hurt  sales  of  apples  and  table  grapes.  Log

shortages  in  the  Pacific  Northwest  have  resulted  in  higher  prices  for  lumber  and  wood  chips.

Construction  and  real  estate  activity  continue  healthy  in  most  parts  of the  District,  with some

cooling  noted  in  California,  while  the  market  is  heating  up  in  the  Seattle  area.  Western

bankers  report  strong  loan  demand,  but  slow  deposit  growth  and  stiff  competition  for  deposits.

Business  Sentiment

Twelfth  District  business  leaders  polled  during  July  expect  the  economy's  growth  rate  to

slow  during  the  next  year.  Almost  three  quarters  of  those  questioned  expect  GNP  to  grow

more  slowly  during  the  next  year  than  its  2  1/2  to  3  percent  historical  rate.  A  majority  of

respondents  foresee  weakness  during  the  next  four  quarters  in  consumer  spending,  business

investment,  and  housing  starts.  Over  half  expect  the  inflation  rate  to  fall  during  the  next  year.

Trade  and  Services

Sales  at  most  department  stores  are  reported  to  be  satisfactory,  not  especially  strong but

strong  enough  that  retailers  are  not  particularly  concerned.  However,  uncertainty  about  the

future  of southern  Oregon's  lumber  industry  has  caused  a  slump  in  retail  sales  there.  In  recent

months,  District  sales  of  women's  apparel  have  improved,  but  the  men's  clothing  market  has

XII-2

weakened.  Weak  sales  continue  for  "big-ticket" items,  such  as  electronics,  furniture,  and

appliances.

Auto  sales  continue  weak  in  most  parts  of the  District,  as  rebate  programs  have  not  yet

reduced  excessive  inventories  to  acceptable  levels.  One  banker  notes  that  many  customers

attracted  by  the  discount  programs  cannot  obtain  financing  due  to  their  poor  credit  histories.

Wage  trends  in  the  trade  and  service  industries  are  mixed.  Retailers  report some  wage

pressures,  particularly  at  the  low  end,  although  one  notes  that  these  pressures  are  "manageable."

A transportation  services  firm  recently  negotiated  a  new  four-year  contract  that  includes  annual

wage  hikes  of only  3  percent.  However,  wage  pressures  are  intense  in  the  health  services.

Nurses  in several  parts  of the  District  are  seeking  double-digit  wage  increases  in  their  new

contracts,  and  strikes  have  begun  at  some  hospitals.

Manufacturing

Bottlenecks  in  the  commercial  aircraft  industry  seem  to  have  stabilized,  as  gradual

progress  is  being  made  on  increased  output.  A  Seattle-area  avionics  subcontractor  reports

"extensive" pressure  on  wages,  while  in  southern  California,  the  downturn  in  defense  spending  is

releasing workers  and  making  them  available  to  support  commercial  production.

Some  softness  in  orders  for electronic  components  is  reported.  One  manufacturer

reports  that  his  sales  grew  by  15  to  25  percent  in  each  of  the  past  three  years,  but  growth

currently  is  running  at  only  a  3  percent  pace.

Agriculture  and  Resource-Related  Industries

Most  western  fruit  and  vegetable  producers  are  having  profitable  years.  Pacific

Northwest  food  processors  report  that  they  have  already  booked  1989  orders  that  exceed  1988

totals.  Most  frozen  fruits  and  vegetables  are  now  in  short  supply,  with  inventories  of  frozen

XII-3

peas, green  beans,  and  sweet  corn  the  lowest  in  ten years.  Prices  of most processed  vegetables

have  jumped  15  percent  or  more  in  the  past  year.  Wet weather  on  the  East  Coast  has  hurt

tomato production  there,  which  has boosted  California  sales.  However,  grape  and  apple

producers  report  declining  sales  which  they  attribute  to concerns  about  safety.  The  inventory  of

unsold  apples  currently  stands  at  a  record  6.7  million  boxes,  double  the  amount  a  year  ago.

Limited  log supplies  have  boosted  the  prices  of  Northwest  lumber  products  dramatically

in  recent  months,  despite  reduced 

lumber  demand.  The  price  of  a  Northwest  two-by-four  rose

14  percent  between  the  second  quarter  of  1988  and  the  second  quarter  of  1989.  The  reduced

supply  of timber  also  has  doubled  the  price  of wood  chips,  a  key  input  to  pulp  and  paper

manufacturing.

Construction  and  Real  Estate

Construction  and  real  estate  activity  continue  strong  in  most  parts  of the  Twelfth

District.  In  California,  the  frenetic  pace  of the  past  year  appears  to  have  cooled  somewhat,  as

fewer  sales involve  bidding  wars.  As  a  result,  homes  are  staying  on  the  market  longer  and

prices  are  rising  more  slowly.

At  the  same  time,  Seattle's  real  estate  market  has  taken  off, with  reports  of  double-digit

annual  price  increases.  Construction  activity  also  is  booming,  and  some  contractors  are  so  busy

that they  are  declining  opportunities  to  bid  for  new  work.

Financial  Sector

Most  western  bankers  report  strong  loan  demand  and  slow  deposit  growth.  Many

institutions  report  that  their  profits  have  risen  in  recent  months.  However,  several  bankers  note

that  stiff competition  for  deposits  is  forcing  them  to  raise  deposit  rates,  so  they  expect  profit

margins  to  fall.

