SUMMARY OF  COMMENTARY

ON

CURRENT ECONOMIC  CONDITIONS

BY  FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICT

September  1989

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY  . . . . . . . . . . . .

First  District  --  Boston  . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I-

Second District  -- New York  . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

II-

Third District  -- Philadelphia

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

III-

Fourth District  -- Cleveland

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IV -1

Fifth District  -- Richmond  . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

V -I

Sixth District  -- Atlanta  . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. VI-1

Seventh District  -- Chicago  . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. VII-1

Eighth District  -- St.  Louis

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. VIII-1

Ninth District  -- Minneapolis

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. IX -1

Tenth District  -- Kansas City

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

X -l

Eleventh District  -- Dallas  .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XI-1

Twelfth District  -- San Francisco  .

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

. XII-1

SUMMARY

Summary

Most  Federal  Reserve  districts  describe  the  growth  of  economic

activity  as  modest  or  slow,  although regional  variation  in  activity  is

substantial.  Consumer  spending has been mixed, but most  districts  report

strong  sales  of  apparel  and  cars  recently.  Manufacturing  conditions  are

generally  satisfactory  or  improving 

in 

the  nation's  Southern  and  Western

regions,  but  some  weakening  was  noted  in  New  England  and  much  of  the

Midwest.  Construction  activity  is  mixed. 

Agricultural  conditions

continue  to  improve over much of  the nation.

Consumer Spending

Merchandise  sales  have  been  mixed  across  the  country. 

Retail

sales  have  expanded  at  satisfactory  rates  or  above 

in 

the  New  York,

Philadelphia,  St.  Louis,  Minneapolis,  San  Francisco  and  Kansas  City

districts.  Boston, Richmond and Dallas  all  report  that  retail  sales  have

softened  in  recent  months,  while  Cleveland  reports  mixed  sales  patterns.

In  several  districts, 

increased  sales  of  women's  apparel  have  spurred

overall apparel  growth.

Inventories  appear 

to  be  under  control 

in 

the  New  York,

Philadelphia, St.  Louis,  Minneapolis  and Kansas  City  districts,  while  in

Boston and Cleveland, inventories  are  a bit high.  The  sales  outlook for

Prepared  at 
the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  St.  Louis  and  based  on
information obtained before  September 12,  1989.  This  document  summarizes
comments  received  from business  and other  contacts  outside  the  Federal
Reserve  and 
the  views  of  Federal  Reserve
officials.

is  not  a  commentary  on 

the  remainder  of  the  year  is  optimistic  in 

the  Richmond,  Minneapolis,

Dallas,  Cleveland and Kansas  City  districts.  St.  Louis  retailers  expect

sales  to be  flat  or  slightly higher, while  Philadelphia  retailers  believe

a  slackening 

in 

demand 

through  next  spring 

is  more 

likely  than  an

acceleration 

in 

spending. 

Boston  notes 

that  retailers  are  split

half-and-half over  sales  potential  for  the  rest of  1989,  while  Chicago

reports  that  retailers  expect  further  weakness 

in  spending  on  durables.

A surge  in  auto  sales  has helped reduce auto  inventories  over most of  the

nation. 

In 

several  districts, 

dealers  are  worried 

that  recent

incentive-boosted  sales  may  cut  into  1990 model  sales.

Manufacturing

The  performance  of  manufacturing is  mixed, varying significantly

among  districts  and  across  industries. 

Increased  activity  was  reported

by  New York, Richmond, Atlanta, Kansas  City and  Dallas.  Weak  or  slowing

activity was  reported by Boston,  Philadelphia,  Chicago  and Minneapolis

and  St.  Louis.  Although  manufacturing  conditions  in  the  San Francisco

District 

are  generally 

satisfactory, 

some  sectors, 

such  as

defense-related  production,  continue  to  decline. 

Cleveland  also  reports

that  manufacturing  activity  remains  at  a  high  level,  but  some  softening

is  apparent  in  the  production of steel  and capital goods.  Manufacturers'

inventories  are  generally  at  satisfactory  levels,  but  are  being  reduced

from  relatively  high  levels  by  producers 

in 

the  Kansas  City  District.

Five  districts  report  that  input  pricing  pressures  have  eased,  while  the

Kansas  City District reports  an  increase  in such  pressure.

The  outlook  for manufacturing  is  mixed.  Of  the  districts  that

mentioned  an  outlook,  Philadelphia  and  Richmond  contacts  generally

anticipate 

a  weakening 

in  conditions  while  Boston  contacts  expect

activity  to  continue  at  its  current  pace  through  the  end  of  the  year.

Several  manufacturers  in  the  Atlanta  District,  primarily  in  the  chemical,

textiles 

and  primary  metal 

industries, 

recently  have  revised 

their

expectations  for  the  near future  upward.

Construction and Real  Estate

District 

reports  indicate  substantial  variation  in 

the  strength

of 

construction 

and 

real 

estate 

activity. 

Recent 

strength 

in

nonresidential  construction was  reported by  the  Richmond,  Chicago,  St.

Louis,  Dallas  and  San  Francisco  districts, 

while  nonresidential  activity

reportedly  weakened 

in 

the  Minneapolis-St. 

Paul  area.  Residential

construction 

activity, 

though  generally  weak  compared  with  a  year  ago,

picked  up 

in 

the  Richmond,  St.  Louis  and  Minneapolis 

districts 

and

remained  strong  in  the  San  Francisco  District.  New  York  reports  that

homebuilding  in  parts  of  its  District has  been  deterred by  an  oversupply

of  existing homes.  Home  sales  picked up  in  the  Boston, Richmond, Chicago

and Minneapolis  districts  and  remained  strong  in  the  Far  West,  but  are

slow  in  the Kansas  City District.  Several  districts  report  that  declines

in  mortgage  rates  stimulated  the  construction  and  sales  of  existing

homes.

Labor Markets

Three  districts 

report  labor  shortages.  Boston  reports  that,

although manufacturing  labor  market  conditions  are  generally unchanged or

softer, 

some  types  of  labor  continue 

to  be  hard  to  find.  St.  Louis

reports  a  reduction  in 

the  availability 

of  skilled 

labor  in 

several

sectors,  while  San  Francisco  noted  shortages  of  retail 

and  construction

workers  in  some  areas.

Financial  Markets

The  demand  for  loans  continues  to  vary  considerably  by  region

and type  of  loan.  Overall  loan volume  is  reported up  in Philadelphia and

San  Francisco.  Commercial  and industrial  loan growth  has  been  good  in

Philadelphia,  and  Richmond  and  Kansas  City  report  steady  demand.

Cleveland, 

however, 

notes  a  continued  softening 

in 

commercial  and

industrial loans.  Consumer  loan demand has fallen  off since  last year  in

the  New York District, but  Philadelphia  reports  that  consumer loan growth

has  strengthened.  Auto  loans  appear  to  be  a  major  factor  in  determining

consumer  loan  growth  rates.  Real  estate  lending  is  growing  at  a strong

pace  in  Philadelphia,  with  San  Francisco  also  reporting  expanded  loan

volume.  Bank earnings  are  growing  significantly  in  San Francisco,  while

in  St.  Louis  earnings  declined  in 

the  second  quarter  with  particular

problems  in  real  estate  loans.

Agriculture  and Natural Resources

Agricultural  conditions  have 

improved  over  much  of  the  country.

Recent  rains  have  helped  crops  and pastures  in  the  Chicago,  St.  Louis,

Kansas  City,  Minneapolis  and  Dallas  districts. 

Despite  the  improved

conditions,  weather-related  stress  has  damaged  crops 

in 

the  Plains

States,  Iowa,  Oregon, Utah  and  Idaho.  Dallas  reports  that  central  and

southern  Texas  remains  dry. 

In 

the  Dallas  and  Richmond  districts,

agricultural  prices  for  most  commodities  are  relatively  strong. 

The

mining industry has  showed  increased activity  in  the  Minneapolis,  Dallas,

Atlanta  and  Kansas  City  districts  in 

recent  months. 

Lumber  industry

contacts 

in 

the  Minneapolis  and  San  Francisco 

districts 

report

difficulties  in  securing  timber  for mills.

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

Economic  activity continues  at  a modest pace  in the  First District.

Manufacturing sales  are  flat to  rising  modestly, while  retailers  are

experiencing  sales  declines as well  as  increases  compared with last year.

Capital spending plans  are mixed.  The  commercial  real  estate market has

softened, while  residential realtors are  seeing  improvement.

Retail

Retail  sales activity was generally soft  through  the month of

August,  according to  a panel of First  District  retailers.  Receipts were

sluggish at  department  stores,  both up-scale  and discount  chains.  Building

materials did  somewhat better, and sales  at novelty and sundry  outlets were

satisfactory and  on plan.  With  this  general softness,  inventories are

reported  to  be  a bit high.

Retail prices were generally stable but  rose as  much as  6 percent

for novelty goods.  Margins slipped  a bit  in August.  Weak sales and

increased  competitive pressures  forced merchants  to  absorb  some  increases

in  the  cost  of goods sold.  Rising  expenses,  especially health insurance

premiums,  also  cut  into  retail  revenues.  Profits  are  thus  down from last

year,  and some  firms  are  operating at  or below break-even.

Despite  the  recent weakness, half of  the  retailers  surveyed are

optimistic about  the  rest  of 1989  and  plan to  enlarge  their  operations  over

the next six to  twelve months.  The  remaining  half are  less  sanguine and

are  not  planning significant  expansion.

Manufacturing

Sales  and  orders  exceed  year-ago  levels  at most  First District

manufacturers  contacted.  Reported gains  range  from  zero  to  8 percent  and

order backlogs  are  at  record  levels  in  a few cases.  Nevertheless, the  pace

of  growth is very modest  at most  firms,  and almost  half the  respondents

experienced  some  slowdown  in June and July.  Several  contacts mentioned

that  activity has  picked up very recently, however.  Firms  serving the

defense,  construction and auto  industries  continue to  experience weak

demand, while  respondents producing  specialty textiles,  paper  and consumer

products  found  demand  to  be more  robust.  Foreign markets are  said to  be

stronger than their domestic  counterparts.

Manufacturers  continue to  monitor inventories  very carefully and  are

generally satisfied with their  current  levels.  Employment levels  are

reportedly stable or  declining  slightly.  Labor market  conditions  are

generally described as  unchanged or  softer, but some  types  of  labor

continue to  be hard  to  find  in parts  of Connecticut and New Hampshire.

All manufacturing  contacts report  that  materials prices  are

unchanged or falling.  Their own pricing behavior varied, however.  One

third said that  their own sales  prices are  unchanged, but  another  third

mentioned recent  or anticipated  increases  ranging  from  less  than  1 percent

to  5 percent.  Prices  for  computer-related products remain under pressure,

and machine tool  prices have become  "negotiable."

Capital spending plans  are  also mixed.  Some  firms  expect  1989

expenditures to  exceed  their 1988  levels by as  much as  25  percent while

others  anticipate  declines  of a similar size.  One  firm has reduced  this

I-3

year's  capital spending budget  by  15  percent because of a weak  first half.

One-third  of  all  respondents  plan new or  expanded facilities  in New England.

Manufacturing contacts describe  their outlook  as  "cautious,"

"guarded" and "healthy."  They generally expect economic  activity to

continue at  its  current  pace with no  further softening or  real  pick-up  in

the  current  year.

Real  Estate

According to  local  real  estate  consultants and brokers,  commercial

real  estate markets  in Boston and  its  suburbs are  softening.  While vacancy

rates  remain lower than  in the  rest  of  the  country,  the  absorption of

available  space continues  to  slow.  Developers are  finding  financing harder

to  get  as  lenders  become less  optimistic  about  the  economy.  Furthermore,

as  the  amount  of space  available  for  subleasing has  increased,  prime real

estate  rents have  fallen.

By contrast,  First District realtors sound more  positive than  in

recent weeks  about  the  residential  real  estate market.  Realtors  surveyed

all  report  that  current  sales are  comparable  to  or higher than  last month's

levels but  remain sluggish compared with year-ago  activity.  A majority of

realtors contacted said  that  small  and large homes  are moving  quickly.

However, midsized homes  (in  the  $150,000 to  $200,000  range) are  staying on

the market  longer  than  last year.  Several  respondents believe sales will

continue at  about  the same  rate, while  a few expect  lower interest  rates  to

lead  to  a busy autumn despite  large  inventories.

II-1

SECOND  DISTRICT--NEW  YORK

District activity continues  to be basically mixed but  with some  recent

signs of  strengthening.  Retail contacts reported over-the-year sales gains  during

July  ana August  that,  for  the most  part,  were on or above  targeted levels.

Unemployment  rates  in  the District  have bouncea around in recent months but  remain

slightly below the national average.  Buffalo  purchasing managers report  improved

business conditions.  In contrast,  demand for  new housing continued mixed, with some

areas  noting price declines, and otfice leasing  activity slowed somewhat  in  its

usual summer  pattern.  Most  small- and medium-sized banks stated that  they have  not

lowered rates  on consumer  loans  since  the  latest  decrease  in the prime  rate.

Consumer  Spending

District  retail  contacts  reported a wide range of  over-the-year  sales gains

during July and August,  but  they were,  for  the most  part, on or above  targeted

levels.  July gains  ranged  between 2.5 percent and  13.0 percent while  the August

range was  even wider:  from 0.5 percent  to 19.0 percent.  Most  respondents described

their  July  results as on or  above plan though a couple  found them to be

disappointing.  Two chains characterized their August  sales as  "well above plan",

and  a third posted  higher-than-targeted  results for  the first time  in several

months.  Women's apparel  remained in strong  demand at  all  stores  during both July

and August,  and  in August  back-to-school  departments also farea well.  Reports on

the demand  for  items  such  as  men's  clothing,  furniture, and home  furnishings  were

mixed,  however.

Inventories  at  the  end of  August  were generally described  as satisfactory.

One  retailer  continued  to have stocks above desired levels,  but greatly  reduced from

II-2

the previous two months, while another reported an actual  shortage of  fall

merchandise which he expected  to be  rectified  in September.

Residential Construction  and Real  Estate

Demand for  new housing in  the District  remained mixed  in  recent weeks.  An

oversupply of  homes  in  the resale market continues to be cited as  a major  deterrent

to  new construction activity in downstate  New York and New Jersey where price

cutting by both homeowners and developers has been  noted lately.  Some developers on

Long  Island,  for  example,  have reportedly been  reducing home prices by more  than 10

percent  in  order  to  reduce swollen inventories and pare carrying costs.  However,  in

several  upstate communities where prices continue to  rise, homebuilders  are quite

busy and report  an upturn  in demand as a result of  lower mortgage rates and an end

to  exceptionally  rainy  weather.  Observers  in these communities anticipate  that

construction activity  in  1989 will come close  to  the  high  level  attained  in  1988.

Office leasing  activity slowed  somewhat  since  the last  report  in  its usual

summer  pattern.  Several new buildings were completed in midtown Manhattan which had

tenant commitments for  less  than half  their  space, while in downtown Manhattan a

sizable amount  of  existing prime office space was also placed on the market.  As a

result,  the vacancy  rate  for prime  space has  increased  somewhat  in  both  these areas,

though  the  rates  remain below the national  average.  Office vacancy rates in most

other  District  areas showed  little change  in  recent weeks.

Other Reports on Business Activity

District  unemployment  rates  have bounced  around in  recent months but  remain

slightly below the  national average with August  readings  of  5.0 percent  in New York

and  4.5 percent  in  New Jersey.  In contrast  to  the national pattern of  an

over-the-year decline,  though,  unemployment  rates in  both New York and New Jersey

have  risen  since  last  year.

The August survey of  Buffalo purchasing managers reversed  the July pattern,

showing a sharp rise  in firms with improved orders and production and a decline in

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT  - PHILADELPHIA

Overall economic activity  in the Third District is  advancing modestly  in

September,  although  the  manufacturing  sector  continues  to  soften,  with  area

industrial  firms  reporting  declining  business  activity  edging  out  those

indicating improvement for the third month in a row.  Retailers, however, report

moderate  growth  in  line  with expectations, and  auto sales  picked  up  in  August

as  manufacturers  offered  more  generous  incentives. 

Banks  benefitted  from

improved auto  sales  in  the consumer  lending area, while  the growth of  business

lending has  slackened.  Real  estate  lending  remains on  a strong  upward trend.

Third  District  business  contacts  generally  foresee  a  continuation  of

current  trends.  Manufacturers predict  some further  declines  in  business over

the next six months.  Retailers expect  sales to grow at about their current pace

but they are being cautious  in  their planning  for the fall and winter.  Bankers

anticipate slower  growth in  lending of all  kinds during the rest of the  year as

a result  of  the  slower  economic  activity  they  forecast,  as  well  as  the  more

stringent  credit  standards  they are  implementing.

MANUFACTURING

Third District manufacturing activity continued to slow in August and early

September, according  to firms  contacted for  this report,  as  the region's goods-

producing  sector  experienced  a  third  consecutive  month  of  slowing  business.

Overall, while about half the companies surveyed indicated they were maintaining

steady  operations,  nearly  one-third  said  they  were  experiencing  a  drop  in

activity. 

Durable goods producers, particularly those  in heavy manufacturing

industries,  indicated  the  sharpest  drop  in  activity  while  nondurables

II-3

those  experiencing  a worsening.  August  data for  Rochester are not yet  available but

in July, 90  percent  of  surveyed managers there  anticipated stable  to  improved

conditions over  the next  three months after  some deterioration from June to July.

Eastman KodaK  recently announced  that  it  will lay  off  an additional  4500

workers  this year,  but  it  did not  specify how many would be affected at  its

Rochester, New York  headquarters.  On  Long  Island  a final  decision has not  yet  been

made public with  regard to  the Pentagon's plan to cancel Navy aircraft contracts at

the Grumman plant.  Among other  recent  developments which could have  an  adverse

impact  on  the District's economy, two of  New York's oldest  retail chains--B. Altman

ana  Bonwit  Teller--filed  for  Chapter  11  bankruptcy protection as  a result  of  their

parent  company's  financial difficulties, and a large furniture chain was unable to

meet  its interest  payments  and  began discussing debt  restructuring with  its  lenders.

Financial  Developments

Most  senior officers  contacted at  small- and medium-sized banks  in the

Second District  stated  that  they have not  lowered  their  rates on consumer loans

since  the  decrease  in  the prime  rate on July  31  nor  do  they plan to although many

said  other  loan  rates have  been reduced.  The majority of  respondents noted  that

consumer  loan demand  has  fallen off  since  this  time  last year.  Those who have not

experienced a decline  in demand for consumer loans ascribed  their success to

aggressive  marketing campaigns.  Auto loan  demand was perceived as  very  weak

compared to  this  time  last year due to a slowing of  auto sales and to  increases  in

dealer  financing  incentives.  Respondents  also stated that  delinquency  rates on

consumer  loans were  slightly nigher  than a year  ago.  One banker said that  their

collection department  has  been expending increasing effort  in order to keep

delinquency  rates  from rising above acceptable  levels.  Most  respondents believed

that consumer  loan demand will  remain  soft  in  the near  future due  to a weakening

economy  and two  bankers said  that  consumers were far too extended  to  incur more

debt.  Some  respondents  indicated  that  if  demand falls further,  they may be  forced

to  lower  rates.

III-2

manufacturers  generally reported steady or  improving business  conditions.

On balance, area firms were stepping up shipments in August and September,

but  they were  obtaining new orders  at  just a steady rate,  leading to  a drop  in

order  backlogs. 

Employment  also  showed  some  weakness,  as  area  firms  were

reducing both payrolls and working hours;  many firms that had been running double

shifts have now pared  second shift  hours.  Industrial  contacts noted continued

slackening  in  the pace  of price  increases for  both inputs  and outputs.

Looking ahead, managers at  area plants  generally expect a further decline

in  business.  Among firms  polled  for this  report, pessimistic  forecasts  for the

next  six months  edge  out  optimistic  predictions.  On  balance,  area  companies

expect a pickup  in  both  orders and  shipments  while order  backlogs  continue  to

fall.  With some  further slippage on  the horizon,  local  firms plan  additional

cuts  in  payrolls and working hours  between now and next  spring.

RETAIL

Third  District  retailers  generally described  sales  as  having  run  at  a

satisfactory rate  in  August and  into  September.  Department store sales  showed

a  year-over-year  increase  of  approximately 6 percent,  in  dollar  terms,  while

discount  and  specialty  stores  achieved  somewhat  better  gains.  However,  some

local specialty chains that have been expanding locations aggressively indicated

that  results at new  stores were not meeting expectations.

Nearly all retail  contacts reported that  inventories were under control.

Auto  dealers  trimmed  inventories  as  sales  picked  up  in  August  with  new

manufacturers'  incentives to  clear out  1989 models.

Area merchants  said they are being cautious  in their planning for the rest

of  the  year.  Orders  to  suppliers  are  conservative  and  promotional  plans are

modest.  Store officials  generally do  not  anticipate a consumer pullback in the

months ahead but they believe that some slackening in demand through next spring

III-3

is  more  likely than an  acceleration  in  spending.

FINANCE

Outstanding  loan volume at  major Third District  banks  in  late  August was

approximately 12 percent above the level at the  same time last year.  Commercial

and  industrial  loan  growth  was  described  as  good  by  bank  lending  officers

contacted in  early September, but several noted that  growth has been easing over

the  summer  and they believe  it  is  likely to  slacken  further as  the  year comes

to a close.  The slower growth  is predicted by area bankers as a result of easing

demand  as  well  as  a  tightening  of  credit  standards.  Besides  taking  a  more

restrictive stance with regard  to new applicants for business  loans, some banks

indicated they were winding down relationships with current borrowers who do not

meet more rigid  credit  standards.

Consumer  loan growth picked up  in August, primarily due to  increased auto

loans  as  consumers  took  advantage of manufacturers' rebates.  Other  categories

of consumer  lending were showing only slight growth, according to local bankers.

As with business lending,  personal loan  credit standards are being tightened by

several banks  in the region;  lending officers said this move is  being taken even

though they  do  not expect  strong  loan  demand from consumers.

Real  estate  lending  continued  to  grow  at  a  strong  pace  at  most  Third

District banks.  However,  bankers noted  that weakness  is  developing  in  office

leasing in some suburban areas and they plan to limit the expansion of commercial

real  estate  lending.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT  - CLEVELAND

Summary.  Retailers  appear  more optimistic  about sales  prospects  for  the

balance  of this  year,  although sales  patterns  have been mixed.  Manufacturing

activity remains  at high  levels, but softening  is  apparent  even in  some

capital  goods  industries.  Steel  operations  have been reduced largely because

of  inventory liquidation.  Commercial  and  industrial  loans  continue  to  soften.

Money market  rates  are  expected to  ease  over  the next  few months,  and the

thrift bailout has  resulted in  lower  rates  on CDs  issued by  thrifts.

Retail  Sales.  Department store  retailers  have become more  optimistic

about  fall  and holiday-season sales prospects  apparently because  of

better-than-expected  sales  so  far  this  summer.  Apparel  sales  in particular

revived from  the  slump  in  1988,  and profits  and profit margins  improved  last

quarter without more  than usual  sales  promotions.  Retailers plan to  hold

larger  inventories  than they did  late  last year.

A chain department  store,  however, believes  that  retailers  are  too

optimistic  and that  inventories  will become  a growing problem over  the  next

few months.

Another major  chain retailer  reports  a spurt  in July  and August sales  of

household furnishings  and home  improvement products,  but  large  inventories

will  require  cutbacks  in  orders  from some  manufacturers.  This  retailer  also

expects  a better  fall  and Christmas  sales  season this  year than last.  It  has

been attempting  to hold the  line  on prices  for  imported goods  by shifting

sources  of  supply,  and,  in  the  case  of  apparel, by  increasing purchases  from

domestic producers.

IV-2

A  surge  in car  sales  in  late July  and August helped to  cut  inventories,

but  current  levels  of  stocks  of  1989  models  are  still  slightly  above  normal

for  this  time  of  the  year,  according to  auto  dealers.  The  latest round of

incentives  and public  awareness  of  excess  stocks boosted sales,  especially  of

domestic  luxury cars.  Dealers  are  concerned, though,  that  the  high  level  of

sales will borrow from future  markets.  Most  dealers  report  that  their  initial

orders  for  1990 models will  be well below the  level  for  1989  models at  a

comparable  period.

Manufacturing.  District respondents  report high levels  of  operations  in

manufacturing, but  slowing  is  apparent  even  in  some  capital  goods  industries

and  in  steel.  Purchasing  agents  in Cleveland report  that  industrial  activity

continues  to  soften.  Production and new orders  declined  in August, but  the

number of  managers who  reported price  increases was  half  as  large  as  those  who

reported decreases.  Cincinnati  purchasing agents,  however,  report  that new

orders  and production  rose, but backlogs, vendor  performance,  and commodity

prices  all  suggest  that  industrial  activity in  that  area  is  softening.

A  machine  tool  builder  reports  that both its  domestic  and  export  orders

have been holding up better  than  for  the  industry.  Lead  times,  therefore,

have not  shortened.  The builder  is  neither hiring nor adding capacity because

of  the  highly cyclical nature  of  the business.

Heavy-duty  truck shipments will  likely remain at  peak  levels  through the

balance  of this  year, but new  orders  in  recent  months  have not  revived as  much

as  expected by  some  suppliers.

IV-3

The  decline in  steel  production in  the quarter  is  a little more  than

seasonal,  according to  steel  producers.  Lead times have  shortened and

allocation of steel products  has  largely ended, except for  some  selected

products,  such as  galvanized sheets  used especially by  the  automotive

industry. The  steel  industry  will probably be  operating at  about  75%  of

capacity  through the  balance  of  this  year, which is  well  below the

near-capacity operations  reported by most producers  earlier  this  year.

Inventory  liquidation is  expected to  curtail  steel  output  over  the next  few

quarters.  Spot prices  for  selected steel  products  have dropped considerably  in

domestic  markets  and even more  in export  markets  in  the past  few months.

Financial  Developments.  Some  large banks  in  the District  report

continued softening in  commercial and  industrial  loans,  although mortgage loan

demand  is  strong apparently because  of  refinancing.  Bank economists  generally

expect that  short  term interest  rates  will ease  over  the balance  of  this  year,

aided by  the  thrift bailout, which will  require  long-term financing.  Lower

interest  rates  and narrowing of spreads between money market  rates  and deposit

components  of M1  and M2  will  revive  growth of  deposits  and will  support

somewhat  larger  growth  in M2  this  quarter and next than  in  the  first  half of

1989.

Thrift  institutions  report  that  since  the bailout  legislation, some

thrifts have  been selling their mortgage-backed securities  in order  to meet

new  capital standards.  Also,  easing  from premium rates  paid on  CDs by  some

thrifts  in  the  District should help  them  to absorb  the higher cost  of deposit

insurance.

FIFTH  DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview

District  economic  activity strengthened  somewhat  in August  from  its

sluggish  pace  in July,  although a few sectors  remained  flat.  Retail  sales

continued  lackluster but  tourism rose.  Manufacturing  activity grew  slightly

after  declining  the  previous  month.  Export  and  import  activity was  again

mixed  at  District ports.  Home  sales  increased  in some  areas  and  remained

steady  in others,  and  nonresidential  construction activity  strengthened.

Loan  demand was  generally steady.  The  District's  agricultural  sector  looks

strong this  year.

Consumer Spending  and  Tourism

Our  regular mail  survey  indicated  that  retail  activity  in the  District

was  flat  in August.  New  car  sales  apparently  increased  somewhat  after two

consecutive  months  of  decline, but  department  store  sales  were  unchanged

after two months  of  reported  increases.  Sales  of  big  ticket  items  at

department  stores  declined slightly  in August.  Some  stores,  however,

reported  strength  in sales  of fall  apparel.  Most  retailers  expect  sales  to

rise  in the  next  six  months.

A telephone  survey  of  hotels,  motels,  and  resorts  in the  District

indicated  an  increase  in tourism this  summer  compared to  last  summer.  Most

respondents  expect  tourist  activity to  continue  better  than  a year ago  in

coming months.

Manufacturing

District manufacturers  responding  to  our  regular mail  survey  reported

increased  activity in August  following  a decline  in July.  Reports  of

increases  outnumbered  decreases  in shipments,  new  orders,  and  new  export

orders.  Unfilled orders,  employment,  and  the  length  of  the  workweek were

largely  unchanged.  Inventories  of materials  and  finished  goods  declined

somewhat.  Prices  for  finished goods  continued  to  rise,  but  at a rate

slightly slower than  reported  in July.  Increases  in the  prices  of  raw

materials  slowed  sharply,  however, as  30  percent  of our  respondents  reported

increases  in August  compared with  41  percent  in July.

District  manufacturers were  less  optimistic  than  in July  about  prospects

for growth  in their  businesses  in the  next  six months.  Respondents  who

expect  declines  in sales,  new  orders,  unfilled orders,  employment,  and  the

length  of  the workweek  slightly outnumbered  those  who expect  increases.

Textile  producers,  for example,  expect  demand  to decline  soon  because  of a

recent  increase  in the  volume  of  imports.  In all  manufacturing,  the  number

of  respondents  who  expect  decreases  in overall  U.S.  economic activity  in the

next  six  months  remained  above  the  number  who expect  increases,  while the

number who  expect  no  change  remained about  the  same.

Ports

Reports  received  from the  three  major  District ports--Hampton Roads

(Norfolk),  Charleston,  and  Baltimore--indicated  that  import  and  export  levels

were  mixed  in August as  in July.  Imports  were  reported  to  be  higher  at

Baltimore,  slightly lower  at  Hampton  Roads,  and  about  the  same  at  Charleston.

Exports  were  slightly  higher  at  Hampton  Roads,  lower  at  Baltimore,  and

unchanged  at  Charleston.  Both  Charleston  and  Hampton Roads  indicated  that

export  activity  outpaced  import  activity,  a trend  they  expect  to  continue  in

coming  months.  Baltimore  reported  exports were  lower  than  last  year and

expected them  to  decline  further  in coming months.  Hampton  Roads  noted  that

coal  exports  were  down  about  35  percent  from a year ago,  evidently  because  of

the  Pittston  coal  strike.

Housing

A telephone  survey  of  District realtors  and  homebuilders'  associations

suggested  that  housing  activity in the  District remained  steady  or  increased

slightly  in recent  weeks.  Some  respondents  credited  lower  interest  rates  for

increases  in home  sales.  Most homebuilders  observed,  however,  that

construction  remained  well  below  the  levels  of  a year ago.  Looking  ahead,

respondents  expect  activity  in the  housing market  to  increase  soon.

Nonresidential  Construction

Nonresidential  construction  activity  apparently  gained  some  strength  in

recent weeks.  Industrial  building  was  reported  strong,  and  one  respondent

sensed  an  end  to  the  decline  in commercial  building  activity.  Another  noted

that  public  construction continued  steady  with  good  prospects  for  increases

in road  building,  but  that  power plant construction  had  slowed.

Architectural  engineering firms  were  reported  to  be  busy,  which  implies  a

favorable  outlook for  activity  in the  months  ahead.

Financial  Institutions

A telephone  survey  of District financial  institutions  indicated  that

demand  for commercial  and  industrial  loans  remained  steady  in August.  Nearly

all  respondents  reported  moderate  increases  in mortgage demand,  especially

for  fixed-rate  loans.  The  cost  of  funds  to  depository  institutions  was

apparently  largely  unchanged  in August.  Deposit  growth  was generally

sluggish  to  moderate.

Agriculture

With  the  harvest  approaching,  crop  prospects  are  excellent  for  the  Fifth

District.  Yields  of corn,  soybeans,  and  small  grains  should  be  at  or  near

record  levels,  and  tobacco yields  should  also  be  good.  Prices of  most  grain

and  bean  crops  are  likely  to  average well  below  last  year's  drought-boosted

levels  but  to  be  relatively  strong  nonetheless  when  compared  to most  other

recent years.  Tobacco  prices  also  have  been  firm this  year.  Prospects  for

livestock  producers  are  bright  as  fall  approaches.  Firm  prices  for  beef,

pork,  and  poultry are  helping  producers  offset higher  feed  costs,  and  with

feed  costs  expected  to  decline  faster  than  meat  prices,  margins may widen

somewhat  in the  fall.

Income  prospects  for District  farmers  are  good,  with  cash  receipts

possibly exceeding  the  relatively  strong  1988  showing.  Further  adding  to

farmers'  financial  security are  rising  farmland  values.  All  District states

are experiencing  rising  values,  but  particularly  Maryland  and  Virginia,  where

increases  in land  values  over the  last year  exceeded  10  percent.

VI-1

SIXTH  DISTRICT  - ATLANTA

Overview:  Contacts  throughout  the  Southeast  report  that  business  activity  in

general  is  no  longer  weakening  and  their  expectations  for  the  remainder  of  the  year  are

somewhat  brighter  than  before.  Several  contacts  in  manufacturing  have  recently  revised

upward  their  expectations  of  business  activity  for  the  near  term  and  report  their  capital

spending  plans  will  remain  unchanged  or  increased  as  a  result.  These  manufacturers  are

primarily  in  chemicals,  textiles,  and  primary  metals  industries.  The  few  manufacturers

reporting  a  downward  revision  in  their  expectations  tended  to  be  associated  with

residential  and  office  construction.  The  railway  and  trucking  industries  continue  to

report  a  decreasing  volume  of  shipments.  Contacts  indicate  that  consumer  spending  is

stronger  than  they  expected  last  month.  Oil  and  gas  exploration  is  still  showing  some

renewed  strength,  although  expectations  are  for  only  a  slow  improvement  in  activity.

Manufacturing:  Most  manufacturers  report  generally  good  business  activity  and

their  expectations  for  the  next  few  months  remain  unchanged  or  have  been  revised

upward  in  August.  A  producer  of  plastic  containers  noted  that  to  begin  a  new  product

line,  capital  spending  plans  had  been  recently  increased.  He  added  that  most  of  the

additional  investment  would  be  in  their  southeastern  plants,  where  wage  pressure  and

labor  shortages  were  lower  than  in the  rest  of  the  nation.  He  also  reported  that  the  price

of  plastic  resins  has  been  falling,  which  he  thought  would  eventually  lead  to  a  decline  in

the  prices  of  their  final  products.  Another  producer  of  thermoplastics  reported  that

prices  of  raw  materials  like  ethylene  have  been  coming  down  all  year,  and  he  expects

them  to  fall  further  by  year's  end.  He  anticipates  business  will  remain  good  for  the

remainder  of  the  year  with  the  only  weakness  occurring  in  construction  related  plastic

goods  such  as  plastic pipe.

Producers  of  aluminum  expect  continuing  good  business  after  record  business  last

year.  The  sources  of  strength  are  large  orders  from  aircraft  producers  and  strong  export

VI-2

demand.  From  a  year  ago,  exports  of  aluminum  have  been  up  by  50  percent.  Weaker

auto  and  appliance  sales  have  not  affected  aluminum  production  so  far,  but  producers

expect  some  inventory  buildup  by  the  end  of  the  year.  A  manufacturer  of  kitchen

appliances  reports  that  although  1989  started  out  strong,  production  over  the  past  few

months  has  been  below  last  year's  level  by  about  15  percent;  he  expects  production  to

remain  weak  for  the  rest  of  the  year.

Contacts  in 

the  textile  and  apparel  industry  have  reported  concern  about

competition  from  imports,  although  strong  domestic  demand  has  been  able  to  absorb  both

imported  goods  and  domestic  production.  One  producer  notes  that  there  has  been  a  slight

easing  in  the  costs  of  raw  materials  like  cotton  and  chemicals  recently.  Another,

describing  his  outlook  as  "guardedly  optimistic,"  reports  that  capital  spending  will

continue  at the  same  level  for  the  next  three  years,  a level  he  considers  substantial.

Construction:  Reports  on  residential  construction  vary  considerably.  Reporters

indicate  that  building  permits  in  Orlando  are  up  over  50  percent  compared  to  year-ago

levels,  while  contacts  in  Miami  describe  their  market  as  depressed.  Some  Miami  lenders

note  that  they  do  not  expect  to  encourage  new  borrowing  until  the  real  estate  picture

clears  up.  Uncertainty  related  to  the  potential  impact  of  the  new  S&L  legislation  on  the

real  estate  market  was  mentioned  a  number  of  times.  A  major  supplier  of  building

materials 

in  Florida  says  that  business  is  down  substantially  because  of  declining

residential  construction,  and  while  he  sees  signs  of  activity  leveling  off,  he  does  not

expect  any  recovery  this  year.  On  the  other  hand,  a  spokesman  from  the  lumber  and

wood  industry  reports  that  home  remodeling  has  been  steadily  increasing  in  importance

and  has  taken  up  the  slack  from  weak  residential  construction  demand.  His  expectations

of  future  business  activity  have  not  changed  recently.  Nonresidential  construction  is

reported  to  be  holding  up  well  in  most areas  of  the  Districts.

Consumer  Spending:  Contacts  continue  to  indicate  that  spending  for  home

appliances  and  furniture  is  soft.  A  furniture  retailer  pointed  out  that  sales  so  far  in

VI-3

September  have  been  about  the  same  as  last  year  and  that  they  are  expecting  only  slow

growth  for  the  rest of  the  year.  They  have  been  postponing  capital  expenditures  in  case

business  weakens  further. 

Purchases  of  nondurables  like  apparel  and  textiles  are

generally  described  as strong.

Auto  sales  in  August  are  reported  to  be  up  substantially  over  previous  months  as

a  result  of  manufacturer  rebates,  although  sales  in  the  Sixth  District  were  somewhat

weaker  than  the  rest  of  the  nation.  It  is  feared,  however,  that  the  recent  gains  may  be

at  the  expense  of  reduced  sales  in  1990.

Natural  Resources  and  Energy:  Reporters  indicate  that  interest  in  drilling  for  oil

and  natural  gas  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  has  picked  up  recently.  Contacts  thought  that

increased  interest  in  exploration  to  replenish  domestic  reserves  combined  with  some

consolidation  in  the  industry  might  result  in  improved  drilling  activity  later  this  year.  A

couple  of  our  contacts  indicated  that  the  increased  interest  in oil  and  gas  exploration  in

the  Gulf  is  a  consequence  of  the  Alaskan  oil  spill  and  uncertainties  concerning  future

regulation  of  production.

Services:  The  trucking industry  has  been  reporting  declining  volume  of  shipments

for  the  past  several  months.  Reduced  shipments  of  building  materials  and  lumber

products  have  been  sources  of  weakness.  Representatives  of  several  trucking  firms  said

that  they  have  recently  decided  not  to  increase  capacity,  any  capital  spending  would  be

to  maintain  existing  equipment.  Railway  representatives  report  that  carloadings  have

been  down  for  all  products,  including  autos  and  other  manufactured  goods.  One  contact

noted  that  the  Southeast  is  faring  about  the  same  as  the  rest  of  the  nation.  Most  have

attributed  the  reduced  volume  to  overall  economic  conditions  rather  than  seasonal

factors.

The  health  care  industry  has  reported  that  the  shortage  of  nurses  has  eased

recently.  Efforts  to  increase  enrollments  in  nursing  programs  seem  to be  paying  off.

VII-1

SEVENTH  DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.  Contacts  in the  District  report  slower growth  in activity  in

some  industries  and  declines  in others.  Total  payroll  employment  in the  five

states,  through  July,  showed  only  a sluggish  increase  from year-end  1988

levels  (seasonally  adjusted),  and  manufacturing employment was  lower

reflecting,  in part,  cutbacks  at  motor vehicle  plants.  Chicago  purchasing

managers  in July  and  August  reported  lower  production,  orders,  and  backlogs,

faster deliveries,  and  continued  easing  of  inflationary  pressures.  However,

the  July-August  softness  may  have  been  partly  seasonal,  in contrast  with  a

year earlier  when  usual  summer  shutdowns  in some  industries were  shortened.

Uncertainties  over  the  extent  of  possible further  cutbacks  in motor  vehicle

assemblies,  particularly  if stronger  sales  in July  and  August  prove  temporary

as  some  expect,  overhang that  industry and  its  suppliers.  The  pattern  in

machinery markets  is mixed,  with  demand  continuing  strong  in some  industries

and  slowing  in others.  Lower  mortgage  interest  rates,  partly  reversed  since

August  lows,  have  stimulated  an  upturn  in nonresidential  and  residential  sales

and  lending  activity.  Sales  of  consumer durables  are  expected  to  remain

slow.  Crop  conditions  have  improved  in much  of  the  District,  helped  by

rainfall  in August.

Manufacturing.  Recent  reports  from  contacts  with  industrial  firms  show

business  activity  growing more  slowly  than  earlier  this  year  in some  sectors

and  declining  in others.  This  slowdown  in the  third  quarter  appears  to

reflect  in part a return  to  a more  "normal"  pattern  of  July-August  shutdowns

in several  industries  in which  such  plant  closings--for  vacations,

maintenance, and  model  changeovers--had  been  shortened  or  largely  foregone  in

recent  years.  Uncertainties  regarding  the  extent  of  upcoming cutbacks  in car

and  truck  production  continue  to  overhang  suppliers  as  well  as  motor  vehicle

producers.  Industrial  materials  are more  readily  available  than  earlier,  and

VII-2

pricing  pressures  have  eased  with  price  increases  less  widespread  and

decreases more  common.

Machinery markets  have  turned  increasingly  mixed  over  the  course  of  this

year,  after widespread  improvement  last  year.  Sales  of  construction equipment

are  below  last  year,  except  highway  construction equipment  which  is higher.

Mining  equipment  sales  are  quite  strong,  partly  to meet  long-deferred

replacement demand,  but  a general  decline  in minerals  prices  is expected  to

lead  to  lower  sales  next year.  Diesel  engine  demand,  robust  virtually  across

the  board  earlier  this  year,  is less  vigorous  with  some markets  softer

including  heavy trucks,  marine equipment,  and  generating  equipment.  Machine

tool  orders  have  slowed  while  shipments  have  picked  up,  eroding  backlogs.

Farm  equipment  demand  has  strengthened  substantially  this  year.

Though motor  vehicle  sales  have  picked  up  in the  third  quarter,  this  rise

is attributed by  observers  to  enhanced  incentives  and  concerns  about  higher

prices  in the  1990 model  year.  A contact with a supplier to  the  industry

thinks  planned  fourth  quarter  production  cuts  may  be  inadequate to  bring

inventories  back  into  line.  However, the  sharp  cuts  in auto  assemblies

scheduled by  the  "Big  Three"  are  being  partly  offset by  large  increases  at

plants  partly or  wholly owned  by  foreign companies,  most  of  which  are  located

in or  near  this  District  and  are  supplied  by  components  makers  located  here.

Shipments  of  medium duty  trucks  have  slowed,  and  orders  for  heavy  trucks,

strong early  in the year,  have  softened.

Construction  and  Real  Estate.  Lower  interest  rates  on  commercial  and

residential  mortgage  loans,  since  the  peak  last  March,  stimulated an  upturn  in

inquiries  and  activity.  Interest  rates  on  mortgage  loans  have  since  reversed

part  of  the  earlier  decline.  A number  of  Chicago-area  lenders  have  raised

quotes  on  30-year  fixed-rate  loans,  to  around  10  percent  in early September.

Rates  ranging 9.5-9.75  percent were  typical  in early August.  A large

VII-3

Chicago-area  real  estate broker  reported  an  upturn  in unit  sales  of  homes,

after declines  in the  first  half.  Nevertheless,  homes  in some  formerly  "hot"

suburbs  remain  harder  to  sell  than  a few years  ago.  Year-over-year  increases

in prices  of  homes  sold,  on  average,  are  reported  in single digits  after

double-digit  rates  of  rise earlier.  Construction  activity  on  downtown  Chicago

office buildings  continues  at  a high  rate,  and  industrial  construction  in the

metropolitan  area  is strong,  as  is activity  on  public  works,  especially

highways.

Consumer  Spending.  A contact with  a general  merchandise  retailer  expects

further  weakness  in consumer  spending  on  durables.  Sales  of  women's apparel,

on  the  other  hand,  are  doing  better.  Softness  in durables  was  attributed  to

slower  employment  and  income  growth;  weaker  home  sales,  compared  with peaks  a

few years  ago;  reduced  consumer buying  intentions;  and  heavy  consumer debt

levels.

Agriculture.  Crop  conditions  continue to  show  strong  improvement

throughout most  of  the  District,  with  the  August  rains  being  particularly

beneficial  for  soybeans.  Corn  crops  in Indiana  and  Wisconsin are  excellent,

with  90  percent  of  the  crop  rated  good  or  better  in early  September.  Iowa,

although  showing  some  improvement  in early  September,  has  only  35  percent  of

its  corn  crop  rated  good  or  better.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT  - ST.  LOUIS

Summary

District 

economic  growth  remains  sluggish  with  most  contacts

anticipating no  major  changes  for  the  remainder  of  1989.  Several sectors,

however, report worsening  shortages  of  skilled workers.  Consumer  spending

increased 

in  August  and  early  September  following  generally  sluggish

summer  activity.  Real  residential  construction  activity  remains  below

year-ago  levels.  Bank  profits  were  reduced  by  rising  loan  losses.  Many

bankers  anticipate  additional  commercial  real  estate  loan  problems.

Consumer  Spending

District 

retail 

sales  of  general  merchandise  picked  up  slightly  in

August  and  early September after  being  flat  for  most  of the  summer.  Sales

of  women's  apparel  were  strong  throughout  the  region  while  back-to-school

sales  were  moderate.  Spending  on  durables, 

including  building  materials

and  furniture, 

were  lower  than  a  year  earlier. 

Most  contacts  report

inventories  at  satisfactory levels.  Car  sales  are  either  flat  or  lower

than  a  year  earlier 

in  most  areas, 

though  contacts 

in  Arkansas  and

Louisville  report  increases 

in  August  and  early  September  spurred  by

dealer  incentives.  Auto  inventories  remain  above  desired  levels. 

The

outlook  for  the  remainder  of  the  year  for  both  general  merchandise  and

autos  is  for  flat or  slightly higher  real  sales  compared with  last year.

Labor Markets

District employment has  leveled off  since  the  first  quarter, with  no

major  sector  showing  significant 

growth. 

Construction  employment  has

VIII-2

rebounded 

in 

some  parts  of  the  region  in  recent  months  but  remains  below

the  levels  of  a  year  ago. 

Regional  manufacturing  employment  declined

slightly  in 

recent  months,  except  in  Arkansas,  where 

it  has 

expanded

moderately over  the  last  year because  of  growth  in  nondurables production.

Producers  of  poultry  products, 

apparel,  paper  and  boxes  have  either

expanded or announced major  expansions.

The  St.  Louis  unemployment rate  declined  0.1  percentage  points  to

5.2  percent in July  despite temporary  layoffs  of 4,000  auto  workers.  One

labor  analyst  expects  the  jobless  rate  to  drop  even  lower  in  August, 

then

remain near 5 percent for  the rest  of  the year.

Although  District  job  growth  has  generally  been  sluggish, 

labor

shortages  have become  more  severe  over  the  last year.  Little  change  in

the  availability  of  unskilled workers  was  reported,  but  finding  qualified

skilled  workers  is  increasingly  difficult  for  manufacturing,

wholesale/retail  trades, 

finance  and  services  firms. 

For  the  rest  of

1989,  businesses  surveyed  in  the  District  expect  little  change  in  overall

economic  conditions  and  most  plan  no  substantial  changes 

in 

the  size  of

their  workforce  or 

inventories 

in 

the  next  few  months. 

Among 

the

District's 

major  metropolitan  areas, 

employment  opportunities  were

expected 

to  be  most 

limited 

in  Louisville,  where  construction 

job

reductions  are  expected.

Construction and Real  Estate

The  value  of  contracts 

for  nonresidential  building 

increased

moderately 

in 

recent  months 

in  Arkansas,  Kentucky  and  Missouri  and 

is

slightly  above  the  level  of  a year earlier.  Following  several  years  of

strong  construction  growth, 

the  recent  completion  of  a  one  million

square-foot  office  building  precipitated  a  rise  in  St.  Louis  downtown

VIII-3

vacancy  rates  to  24  percent, 

the  highest  rate  of  the  decade. 

No  new

office  construction  of  any  magnitude  is  expected  in 

the  downtown  area  for

several  years.

Although 

slight 

gains  were  reported 

this  summer,  District

residential  construction  growth  remains  sluggish. 

The  value  of  District

residential  contracts 

issued 

in 

the 

first 

seven  months  of  1989 

is

virtually  identical 

to  that  of  a  year  earlier,  with  building  of

multi-family dwellings  particularly weak.

Agriculture

Most  District  crops  are  in  fair-to-good condition.  Drier conditions

in  southern  states  have  helped  improve  cotton  and  soybean  crops  that  were

damaged by  excess  rain earlier  in  the  season.  Continued rains  in northern

Missouri  have  helped  drought-stressed  late  soybeans  and  pastures,  but

arrived  too  late  to  help  the  corn  and  sorghum  crops. 

Agricultural  banks

servicing  weather-stressed  areas  are  not anticipating  a substantial change

in the  quality of their  agricultural loan portfolios  this year.

Banking

District  bank  earnings  declined  4.6  percent 

in 

the  second  quarter.

Loan  losses  in 

the  commercial  area  and  additions  to  loan  loss  reserves

hampered  earnings.  Asset  quality  declined  during  the  second  quarter,

particularly at  the  largest banks  where nonperforming loans  represent  2.16

percent of  total  loans.  Problems  with  real  estate  loans  are  of  particular

note.  District  commercial  banks  continued 

to 

improve 

their  capital

adequacy  position  with  only  four  banks  failing  to  meet 

the  minimum

regulatory primary  capital  guideline.

IX-1

NINTH  DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

Ninth  District  economic  conditions  have  been  mixed.  The  Minnesota  labor

market  has continued  to  display signs  of  weakness,  while  the  employment  situation  in  the

rest  of  the  district  has  improved.  Consumer  spending  on  general  merchandise  has  been

strong,  automobile  sales  have  risen  sharply  from  levels  earlier  in  the  year,  and  housing

activity  has  shown  signs  of  improvement.  Conditions  in  resource-related  industries  have

been  mixed.

Employment

The  district  employment  situation  has  continued  to  be  mixed,  with  signs  of

increasing  unemployment  in  Minnesota.  The  unemployment  rate  in  Minnesota  in  June

was  4.9  percent,  0.6  percentage  points  higher  than  in  May  and  0.8  percentage  points

higher  than  in  June  1988.  The  unemployment  rate  in  the  Minneapolis-St.  Paul  metropol-

itan  area  was  4.4  percent  in  June,  up  from  3.9  percent  in  May  and  3.0  percent  in  June

1988.  Manufacturing  employment, 

in  particular,  has  been  stagnant  since  June  1988.

Analysts  attribute  the  lack  of  growth  in  manufacturing  employment  to  the  problems

experienced  by  area  firms  in  the  computer  and  electronics  industries.  The  one  bright

spot  is  the growth  in  employment  by  firms  specializing  in  advanced  medical  technologies.

The  unemployment  rate  in  North  Dakota  declined  to  3.8  percent  in  July  from

4.6  percent  in  June  and  4.4  percent  in  July  1988.  The  unemployment  rate  in  South

Dakota  was  4.0  percent  in  July,  0.2  percentage  points  lower  than  in  June  and  0.5 percent-

age  points  higher  than  in  July  1988. 

In  Montana,  the  unemployment  rate  fell  to  5.2

percent  in  July,  from  6.0  percent  in  June  and  6.5  percent  in  July  1988.  The  unemploy-

ment  rate  in  the  Upper  Peninsula  of  Michigan  dropped  to  6.0  percent  in  July  from  7.5

percent  in  June.

IX-2

Consumer  Spending

Consumer  spending  on  general  merchandise  has  continued  to be  strong.  One

retailer  reports  that  August  sales  were  19  percent  higher  than  a  year  ago  and  8  percent

higher  on  a  year-to-date  basis.  This  retailer  said  that  sales  were  the  best  they  had  been

in  a  long  time.  Another  retailer  reports  that  sales  in  August  were  5.1  percent  higher

than  a  year  ago,  and  year-to-date  sales  were  5.7  percent  higher  than  last  year.  Invento-

ries  were  reported  to  be  at  acceptable  levels.  All  of  our  contacts  were optimistic  about

fall and  Christmas  sales.

Automobile  sales  have  continued 

to  recover  rapidly  from  a  poor  first

quarter.  One  domestic  manufacturer  reports  that  sales  in  the  Minneapolis-St.  Paul

metropolitan  area  in  August  were  25  percent  higher  than  in  August  1988  and  were  about

even  on  a  year-to-date  basis  compared  to  last  year.  Another  domestic  manufacturer

reports  that  sales  in  the  Minneapolis-St.  Paul  metropolitan  area  were  22  percent  higher

in  August  than  in  August  1988  and  5  percent  higher  on  a  year-to-date  basis.  Automobile

dealers  were  generally  optimistic  about  sales  prospects  for  the  new  model  year.

Housing  activity  has  also  rebounded  from  its  depressed  levels  earlier  in  the

year. 

In  Minnesota,  the  number  of  new  housing  permits  issued  in  June  was  roughly  the

same  as  in  June  1988.  Earlier  this  year,  the  number  of new  housing  permits  issued  was  as

much  as  30  percent  below  the  levels  of  last  year.  Housing  sales  in  the  Minneapolis-St.

Paul  area  were  6.3  percent  higher  in  August  than in  August  1988  but  3.4 percent  lower  on

a  year-to-date  basis.  Nonresidential  construction  has  not  fared  as  well.  The  dollar  value

of  contracts  for  future construction  in  the  Minneapolis-St.  Paul  metropolitan  area  was  25

percent  lower  in  July  than  in  July  1988  and  about  15  percent  lower  on  a  year-to-date

basis.

Tourist  spending  has  been  fairly  strong.  North  Dakota,  South  Dakota,  and

Montana  have  been  celebrating  their  centennial  year  as  states  in  the  Union,  and  all  three

states  report  very  good  tourist  seasons.  One  observer  reports  that  in  some  areas  of

IX-3

Montana  it  was  nearly  impossible  to  find  lodging.  The  city  of  Northfield,  Minnesota,

anticipates  that  over  100,000  people  will  turnout  for  its  annual  "Defeat  of  Jesse  James

Days," the  reenactment  of  the  shootout  between  the  citizens  of  Northfield  and  the  James

Gang  in  1876.

Resource-Related  Industries

Conditions 

in  resource-related 

industries  have  been  mixed.  Agricultural

conditions  in  Minnesota  improved  since  our  last  report. 

It  was  reported  that  in  early

September  62  percent  of  Minnesota  farmland  had  adequate  or  surplus  moisture.  This

report  was  an  improvement  over  earlier  reports  that  over  half  the  farmland  was  dry  or

very  dry.  The  spring  wheat  harvest  in  Minnesota  was  projected  to  be  91  percent  higher

than  the  drought-affected  levels  of  a  year ago.  An  index  of  prices  received  by  Minnesota

farmers  was  6  percent  lower  in  August  than  in  August  1988. 

In  North  Dakota,  it  was

estimated  that  60  to  65  percent  of  the  spring  wheat  harvest  was  lost  this  year  due  to

unseasonably  hot  weather  and  grasshopper  infestation.  The  mining  industry  throughout

the  district  reports  to  be  doing  well.  Gold  mines  in  Montana  are  having  a  good  year.

Manufacturers  of  heavy  equipment  used  in  mining  also  report  an  excellent  year.  A

platinum  mine  in  Montana  plans  to expand  operations.  The  lumber  industry  in  the  district

continued  to  report  difficulties  in  securing  enough  timber.

TENTH DISTRICT  - KANSAS CITY

Overview.  The Tenth District economy  is  still  growing moderately.

Retail  sales  are up  over  last year  and over  the  last  three months.  Automobile

sales  are  down from last year, but up  slightly  from last  month.  Manufacturers

report  moderate price  increases  for both  inputs  and products.  Inventories  at

retailers  are  low and expected  to  stay low.  Manufacturers, however,  are

trimming  inventories  from relatively high levels.  Drilling activity has

increased  slightly  in  recent months.  Housing  activity remains  weak.  Loan

demand at  commercial  banks  remains  flat, while  deposits have  increased.

Recent rains  have alleviated  the drought  situation, and agricultural credit

conditions  continue  to  improve.

Retail  Sales.  District retailers  report  sales  increases  over  last year

and over  the  last  three  months,  with additional  improvement  expected as  the

holiday season approaches.  Most  respondents  plan  to  keep  inventory  levels  low

in  the  upcoming months.  Recent higher costs  have  led  some  retailers  to

increase prices  slightly, but most  expect  stable prices  in  the  future.

Automobile  dealers  report  slightly higher sales  over  the  last month, but  sales

this  year  to  date  remain down from  a year  ago.  Most  dealers  continue  to  trim

inventory  levels  and expect  sales  to  continue  at  about  their current  pace.

Manufacturing.  Most  respondents  report moderate  input  price  increases

from a year earlier.  Prices have  increased  in  the past  three  months but  are

expected  to  stabilize  soon.  Firms  report no  problems  in  acquiring materials,

although lead  times  have  lengthened.  Most respondents  continue  trimming

inventories  from  relatively high  levels.  Many plants  are  operating at  full

capacity, with some extending work days  or  shifts.  Labor  supply  is  not  a

problem,  although  one  aircraft manufacturer reported a shortage  of  experienced

labor.

Energy.  Although  district  drilling activity remains  below year-ago

levels,  more  stable oil  prices  and  increased exploration for natural  gas have

brought  some  recent  improvement  to  the  district's  energy  industry.  After

increasing  sharply in July  to  249,  the  average number  of  active  drilling rigs

in  the district  increased again  to  259  in August.  Exploration and development

activity nonetheless  stands  about 5 percent below the  level  of  one  year ago.

Housing Activity  and Finance.  Most district homebuilders report housing

starts  down  from a year ago.  Compared with a month  ago, housing starts  vary

across  the district.  Most respondents  report  that  construction materials  are

available and  that prices  are  generally  stable.  New home  sales  are  slow, and

most respondents  expect  only  slight  improvement  for  the  rest  of  the year.

Deposit flows  at  district  savings  and  loan institutions have  mostly held

steady over  the past month, although a few respondents have  noticed a slight

outflow of  funds.  Respondents  expect  steady deposit  flows  in  coming months,

with  slightly  increased  inflows  expected only after press  coverage of  the  new

savings  and  loan legislation dies  down.  Mortgage demand has been down

modestly over  the summer  months,  and  respondents  expect  a further seasonal

decline  during  the  winter.  Respondents  report  stable  mortgage  rates  and

believe rates  will remain steady or  drop  slightly  in  the  coming months.

Banking.  District bankers report  that  total  loan demand was  stable

during the  last month, with both  consumer  loans  and commercial  and industrial

loans  reported as  unchanged.  Home mortgages  and home  equity  loans  increased,

however,  offsetting a decline  in  commercial  real  estate  lending.  Increased

deposits  brought declines  in  loan  to  deposit  ratios.  Demand deposits  declined

during  this  period, but  NOW accounts, MMDAs,  and small  time  and savings

deposits  were  all  steady  to  slightly higher.  IRA accounts  and large

certificates  of deposit were  largely unchanged.  About half of  the  respondents

report  a reduction in prime  rate  during the  last  month, with the  other half

reporting no  change.  Most respondents  expect no further change  in bank

lending rates  in  the  near  future.

Agriculture.  Plentiful  late summer  rain  is  alleviating  the  severe

drought that  affected much of  the  district  during  the  past year.  In Nebraska

and northern Missouri, where  the  corn and soybean harvest will begin soon,  the

recent rains  will boost crop  yields.  Still,  yields may be  a fourth  to  a third

below average.  In  Kansas,  the rainfall  did not arrive  in  time  to  improve

drought-diminished  milo yields,  and  the wet  weather may delay  the  milo

harvest.  Cool,  wet weather  in southwest  Oklahoma has  delayed  the  development

of  the  cotton crop  and  left  the  crop vulnerable  to  an early frost.  Although

recent  rainfall has  temporarily halted winter wheat  planting  in Oklahoma  and

could  delay planting in  Kansas,  greater  soil moisture will benefit  the early

development  of the  new crop.

The  rains have  improved range  and pasture  conditions  across most  of  the

district.  Adequate  forage  and strong  cattle prices  are  encouraging district

cattle  ranchers  to  expand herds.  The  limited supply  of  young cattle  available

is  likely  to  maintain high  feeder  cattle prices  that,  in  turn,  will  limit

profits  for district  cattle  feeders.

In  the  parts of  the  district where the  drought was most  severe,  bankers

expect  a slight  decline  in  farm  loan repayment  rates.  Well-targeted  federal

drought  relief, however, will  be  of greatest benefit  to  those  farmers

suffering  the  greatest  losses.  On balance,  agricultural  credit  conditions  in

the  district  continue  to  improve.

XI-1

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

The  District economy  is  growing  slowly.  Manufacturing  expansion

appears  to have  ebbed.  Retail  sales  are  increasing moderately, but more

slowly than  earlier  in  the  year.  Auto  sales  have  dipped.  Construction

activity  continues  to  show  signs  of  a modest  recovery.  The  oil  and  gas

drilling upturn  is  still  in place.  Prices  paid  to  District agriculturalists

reached  their highest August  levels  since  1980,  but  crop  yields  are  down.

Orders  to  District manufacturers  are  showing  slight  growth, but

there  is  great variation  across  industries.  Although weakness  in  construction

and  automobile manufacturing  have made  stone,  clay  and glass  sales  sluggish,

expansions  in  chemical  plants  are  stimulating  some  demand  increases  along  the

Gulf Coast.  Firms  in  the  stone,  clay and  glass  industry that  supply

construction are  optimistic  about  rising demand  in  the  coming months.  Lumber

and wood products  firms  say  that  sagging  homebuilding  activity has  lately

pushed down orders  and they  do  not expect a  recovery  in  the  near  future.

Producers  of  primary metals  generally cite  slowing  sales,  slipping prices  and

increased foreign competition  as  recent problems.  Nevertheless,  orders  for  a

variety  of  cast-metal  products  are picking  up.  Sales by  fabricated metals

producers have been  expanding moderately.  Demand  for  oilfield equipment has

risen somewhat  during  1989.  Further  increases  are  anticipated  and  some  firms

expect  to  increase  their product prices  later  this  year.  The very recent

patterns  of  demand for  electronics  varies widely  among products but,

generally, orders have  softened.  Past  shortages  of  D-Ram chips  have  ended,

XI-2

and demand  and prices  have  dipped.  In  the  computer  industry, some  upper-end

products  remain in  strong demand, but  lower-end personal  computers  are  said  to

be  selling poorly.  Chemical  firms  report  some  slippage  in  sales  and product

prices,  and they  say  that  inventories  are  somewhat  higher than  desired.  Sales

at paper  and  allied products  companies  are  stable but remain a  little below  a

year earlier.  For  apparel  firms,  demand has remained  fairly consistent  in

1989,  and  sales  remain above  a  year  earlier.

Retail  sales  growth has  slowed somewhat  from earlier  this  year.

Stores  specializing in  apparel  cite  strong year-over-year  increases  in  sales,

while  some  stores  selling  other merchandise had less  positive  reports.

Recent  expansion in  retail  sales  appears  to be  strong  in  south Texas  and  the

Houston  area.  West Texas  sales  are  soft.  Retailers are  generally optimistic

about  the  future, but  they are  cautious.

Auto  sales  are  generally weak  in the  District, but moderate

year-over-year  expansion  is  reported for  the  Houston  area.  Dealers  are  not

optimistic  about  sales  growth for  the  next few  months  and some  mentioned  the

likelihood of substantial  rebates  for  the  1990  models.

The  construction  industry  is  maintaining  a  mild, but persistent

recovery.  Nonresidential  construction has  generated nearly  all  of  the  gains,

and  most nonresidential  growth is  in  plant construction.  The  value  of

nonbuilding construction, which  includes  highways  and water  and sewer  systems,

has  been declining.  Residential building shows  little  change  overall,  but

some  expansion has  recently occurred  in New Mexico.  At  the  same  time,

declines  have  taken place  in Louisiana.  Multifamily  residential  construction

activity  continues  to  be  very weak  in much of  the  District.  Multifamily

XI-3

permits  in New Mexico  have been greater  than those  in  Texas  and Louisiana

combined.  The  rate  at which residential building permits  are  issued is

essentially unchanged across  the  District.

The oil  and gas  industry continues  to  recover at  a modest  rate.

After  dipping  in July,  the  District  rig count increased again  in August.

Drilling  in  Texas  posted year-over-year growth for  the  first  time  since June

1988,  but  drilling in  Louisiana and New Mexico  is  still below year-earlier

levels.  The  seismic  crew count, considered to be  a leading  indicator  of

drilling activity, edged up  slightly  in July after  four  consecutive months  of

decline.  Also  in July, District oil  and  gas extraction employment  grew

strongly.  The  spot  price of West Texas  Intermediate  crude  oil  increased  in

the  first half of August  and has  since  remained at  nearly  $19  per barrel.

Employment  in  oil  and gas  extraction  in  the  District  grew strongly  in July.

In August,  District agricultural  product prices  rose  to  their

highest  level  for  an August since  1980  -- largely as  the  result of  rising

livestock prices.  Overall,  farm product prices were up  5 percent  from a year

earlier  and 2 percent  from July.  Rising  livestock prices were  dominated by

sharp  increases  in beef cattle  prices.  Hog,  sheep,  and broiler prices  fell.

Crop  prices  were  3 percent  above  a year earlier and were unchanged from July.

Harvesting is  well underway throughout  the  District, but production estimates

for  many crops  are  below last year's.  Estimates  for  cotton and winter wheat

are  down particularly hard, but production of  corn, hay, sorghum  and soybeans

is  expected to  increase.  Moisture  conditions have  generally  improved in  the

District, but  central and  south Texas  remain dry.

XII-  1

TWELFTH  DISTRICT  -- SAN  FRANCISCO

Summary

The  economy  in  the  West  is  expanding  at  a  healthy  pace.  Twelfth  District  business

leaders'  expectations  of  further  growth  have  improved  during  the  past  month.  Annual  increases

in  wages  and  in  the  prices  of  most  products  are  running  at  or  below  5  percent.  Consumer

spending  growth  continues  healthy.  Apparel  sales  continue  strong,  and  a  pickup  in  car  sales

during  August  buoyed  the  generally  lackluster  sales  of  durable  goods.  Manufacturing  industries

report  generally  satisfactory  conditions,  with  little  change  in  exports  in  recent  months.  Crop

yields  are  good  in  most  parts  of  the  District,  and  exports  of many  products  continue  strong.

Lumber  mills  in  the  Pacific  Northwest  still  face  limited  log  supplies.  Construction  and  real

estate  activity  are  strong  in  most  of  the  West,  although  Arizona  remains  weak.  Western

bankers  report  increases  in  loan  volume  and  earnings,  and  stiff competition  for  deposits.

Business  Sentiment

The  most  recent  information  on  the  economic  mood  of  Twelfth  District  business  leaders

indicates  improvement  in  all  categories.  Although  almost  three-quarters  of  respondents  still

expect  weak  growth  in  GNP  during  the  next  four  quarters,  expectations  for  housing  starts,

consumer  spending,  and  the  trade  balance  improved  markedly  during  the  past  month.

Wages  and  Prices

Annual  price  increases  at  or  below  the  5  percent  range  are  reported  for  automobiles

(both  foreign  and  domestic),  building  materials,  and  natural  gas.  Respondents  note  larger  price

increases  for  processed  vegetables  (up  20  percent),  raw  stumpage  (up  64  percent),  and  Idaho

potatoes  (up  30  percent).  Grape  and  silver  prices  have  fallen  in  recent  months,  and  easing

capacity  constraints  for  paper  manufacturers  are  putting  downward  pressure  on  paper  prices.

XII  - 2

Recently  negotiated  union  settlements  generally  call  for  annual  wage  increases  of  4

percent  or  less.  Exceptions  to  this  trend  are  nurses  and  teachers  in  several  western  cities  who

recently  negotiated  annual  salary  increases  in  the  ten  percent  range.  Businesses  report  difficulty

hiring  sufficient  qualified  labor  in  many  parts  of  the  District,  including  Oregon,  southern  Idaho,

and  agricultural  regions  of  California.

Trade  and  Services

Retail  sales  continue  to  exhibit  healthy  growth,  with  particular  strength  in  apparel  sales.

One  retailer  notes  that  the  primary  constraint  to expanding  his  operations  is  the  difficulty  of

finding  adequate  labor  in  many  locations.  Sales  of  durable  goods  have  been  less  robust,

although  a car  dealer  notes  that  1989  models  moved  well  in  August  as  buyers  tried  to beat  the

price  increases  scheduled  for  1990  models.  Summer  tourist  activity  is reported  to  have

increased  over  last  year's  level  in  Idaho,  Utah,  and  southern  California.

Manufacturing

Conditions  in  manufacturing  industries  generally  are  satisfactory,  with  significant

variations  by  product  line  and  company.  One  electronic  component  manufacturer  reports  that

the  order  rate  is  flat,  while  other  high  tech  firms  report  strong  growth  and  still  others  announce

cutbacks  and  layoffs.  A  heavy  equipment  dealer  reports  that  construction  machinery  sales

throughout  the  West  continue  to  do  "very  well."  Defense  contracting  activity  continues  to  slide.

A  cable  television  company  faces  delays  in  receiving  wiring  and  materials  from  manufacturers

because  strong  demand  is creating  bottlenecks  in  existing  facilities.

Most  Twelfth  District  manufacturers  report  little  change  in  exports  following  the  recent

appreciation  of  the  dollar.  For  example,  international  demand  for  aircraft  is  so  strong  that

fluctuations  in  the  exchange  value  of  the  dollar  have  little  effect  on  aircraft  exports.  One

XII  - 3

banker  notes  that  current  exports  were  contracted  in  early  August  when  foreign  prices  of  U.S.

products  were  more  favorable.  Nevertheless,  an  electronic  component  manufacturer  reports

that  the  dollar  value  of  his  export  sales  has  fallen.

Agriculture  and  Resource-Related  Industries

Crop  yields  and  product  quality  are  reported  to  be  good  in  most  parts  of the  District,

although  weather  conditions  have  hurt  crops  in  eastern  Oregon,  Utah,  and  pockets  of

southeastern  Idaho.  Exports,  buoyed  by  strong  demand  from  Pacific  Rim  countries,  are

reported  to  be  strong  for  a  wide  range  of agricultural  products,  including  almonds  and  corn.

However,  grain  exporters  report  slow  sales  following  the  recent  dollar  appreciation.  Exports  of

beef  continue  to  increase,  with  one  Asian  country  currently  negotiating  a  large  order.

The  environmental  controversy  regarding  logging  of old-growth  forests,  combined  with

continued  strong  demand  for  exported  logs,  has  reduced  log  supplies  available  to  mill  owners.

One  large  mill  reports  having  a  10-month  supply  in  the  pipeline,  compared  with  a  24-month

supply  a  year  ago.

Construction  and  Real  Estate

Construction  and  real  estate  activity  are  reported  to  be  strong  in  most  parts  of the

West.  The  pace  of  activity  in  Utah,  where  activity  had  been  weak  for  several  years,  appears  to

be  picking  up.  Sales  and  construction  activity  continue  strong  in  California,  Nevada,

Washington,  Oregon,  Hawaii,  and  in  much  of Idaho.  Finding  trained  construction  workers  is

reported  to  be  troublesome  in  most  of  the  region.  Bidding  wars  to  purchase  single-family

homes  seen  in  California  a  few  months  ago  seem  to  have  moved  north  to  the  Puget  Sound  area

in  Washington.  However,  a  southern  California  developer  notes  that  leasing  activity  is  not

keeping  up  with  the  pace  of  new  office  building  construction.  Arizona  remains  weak,  although

the  virtual  absence  of  building  activity  during  the  past  two  years  has  begun  to  yield  net

XII  - 4

absorption  of  commercial  and  industrial  space.

Financial  Sector

Twelfth  District  bankers  report  generally  good  conditions  and  significant  earnings

growth.  Loan  volume  is  up,  with  particular  strength  reported  in  real  estate  and  mortgage

lending.  Deposits  continue  to  shift  away  from  savings  and  demand  deposit  accounts  and  toward

certificates  of  deposit  and  money  market  demand  accounts,  increasing  the  cost  of funds  to

banks.  Several  bankers  note  that  competition  for  deposits  is  stiff,  since  customers  are  very

conscious  of  yields  and  account  fees.

