FEDERAL  RESERVE  press  release

For Use  at  4:30  p.m. 

October 6, 1989

The Federal  Reserve Board and the  Federal Open Market

Committee today  released the  attached record of policy actions

taken by the Federal Open Market Committee  at  its meeting on

August 22,  1989.  This record also includes policy actions taken

during the period between the meeting on August  22,  1989, and the

next regularly scheduled meeting held on October 3, 1989.

Such records for each meeting of the Committee are made

available a few days after the next  regularly  scheduled meeting

and are published in the Federal Reserve Bulletin and the Board's

Annual  Report.  The summary descriptions of  economic and financial

conditions they contain  are based solely on the information that

was available to the Committee at  the time of the meeting.

Attachment

f'lt 
FoDE4AL  RL 

trc 

t

RECORD OF POLICY ACTIONS OF THE
FEDERAL OPEN MARKET  COMMITTEE

Meeting Held on August  22,  1989

1.  Domestic policy directive

The  information reviewed at  this meeting suggested that

economic  activity had continued to expand at  a moderate pace in recent

months.  Job growth had remained sizable;  and final demands, most

notably  in the  consumer sector, appeared to be  better maintained than

had been indicated earlier.  At  the  same  time, price inflation had

slowed,  in  large part  reflecting a retracing of price  increases  in the

food  and energy sectors that  had boosted inflation  rates earlier this

year;  wage trends  gave no  signs  of  upward pressures.

Total  nonfarm payroll employment  rose appreciably further  in

July after  a large advance in June.  Most  of the July increase  took

place  at  service establishments and  in the  construction industry where

hiring had  slowed during the  first half  of the year.  Employment  was

little changed in manufacturing after three months  of declines;  much of

the  recent weakness had reflected layoffs in the automobile and

electrical equipment  industries.  The civilian unemployment  rate, at  5.2

percent,  remained close to its  average level  in earlier months of the

year.

Industrial production edged higher  in  July, offsetting the

decline of the  two previous months and  continuing the  general pattern of

slow growth since  the beginning of the year.  Output  of capital

equipment  posted another strong gain  in July.  Production of motor

vehicles  and parts declined substantially, but  output of other consumer

goods  continued to  rise at  a moderate pace.  Production of materials

-2-

rebounded after  declining on balance over the first half  of  the  year.

Total  industrial capacity utilization held steady in  July at  a

relatively high  level.  In manufacturing,  despite  a pickup  in primary

processing  industries,  operating rates  edged  lower and were down

appreciably  since  January.

Retail  sales  rose  considerably  in July,  and revisions  for

earlier months suggested that  consumer  spending in the  second quarter

had not  been as  weak as previously  estimated.  Purchases  of nondurable

goods  advanced appreciably  further  in  July from the upward revised

levels  of  recent  months.  With a new  round of manufacturers'  incentives

boosting  sales  of motor vehicles,  spending on durable  goods also

increased.  Housing starts  rose  slightly  further in  July following a

large  gain in  June.  The  upturn  in  starts  occurred in the wake  of a

bounceback in  sales  of both new and  existing homes that  was  associated

with the  sizable  decline  in mortgage  rates  since  April.

Recent  indicators  of business  capital  spending suggested

some  slowing of  growth from the  substantial  pace of earlier months  in

the year.  In June,  shipments  of nondefense  capital  goods  increased

modestly as  a brisk rise in outlays  for aircraft and computers

outweighed a sharp  decline in  spending for  other  categories of

producers' durable  equipment.  Nonresidential  construction activity,

led by  stepped-up outlays  for  industrial  structures,  advanced strongly

for  a second consecutive month.  Inventory investment  in manufacturing

and  trade  slowed in June to  a pace well  below the average  rate  of

increase  observed earlier  in  the  year.  In  the manufacturing  sector,

inventories  of most  types  of  finished  oods  rose  only moderately, while

-3-

stocks of materials  declined further.  Inventories of work-in-process in

the aircraft  industry continued to  grow, as the  industry expanded

production to keep pace  with mounting orders.  At  the  retail level,

dealer  stocks of  automobiles  rose a bit  further.  Inventories at  other

retail  establishments also increased, but  imbalances with  sales appeared

to be  limited.

In June,  the nominal U.S. merchandise trade  deficit  narrowed

considerably, and for the  second quarter as  a whole it was about

unchanged from a substantially reduced average value  in the first

quarter.  Exports  rebounded in June  as  increases  in both capital and

consumer goods  outweighed a further decline  in sales  of  agricultural

goods.  Imports declined appreciably, largely because of  a drop in the

value of  oil  imports.  In the major  foreign industrial  countries,

economic growth slowed  significantly in the second quarter, following

exceptionally rapid expansion in the  first  quarter.

Partly  reflecting further  sharp declines  in consumer  energy

prices, producer prices of finished goods  fell  in  July for a second

consecutive month.  Prices of finished consumer goods other than food

and energy also declined, while prices of capital goods held steady.

Apart  from food and energy, prices of materials  had fallen somewhat on

balance at  the  intermediate  level in  recent months and had come down

markedly at the crude  stage.  Consumer prices  rose modestly  in June

after increasing  sharply in earlier months of the year.  Lower prices

were  registered for gasoline,  fuel  oil, and electricity;  and consumer

food prices rose more  slowly.  Prices of  consumer  services continued to

advance  in  June at  about the  rate  observed over the  past year and a

half.  Average  hourly earnings  jumped  in July after  showing  little

change  in  the previous two months, and on balance  the data for  recent

months  suggested no  change in prevailing wage  trends.

At  its meeting on July 5-6,  the  Committee adopted a directive

that  called  for  a slight  reduction  in the  existing degree of pressure  on

reserve  positions.  The  Committee agreed that  somewhat greater  or

somewhat  lesser  reserve  restraint would be acceptable  in the  inter-

meeting period depending on  indications of  inflationary pressures,  the

strength of  the business  expansion,  the behavior  of the monetary

aggregates,  and developments  in  foreign exchange and domestic  financial

markets.  This policy  stance  was  expected to be  consistent  with growth

of M2  and M3  over the  period  from June  through September  at  annual rates

of  about  7 percent.

Immediately after the  Committee meeting, the Manager  for

Domestic Operations conducted operations to achieve the  slight easing  in

reserve  conditions that  the Committee  had directed.  At  the same  time,

to  reflect  strength in  seasonal borrowing, a small technical  upward

revision was made to the  assumed level of  adjustment plus  seasonal

borrowing.  Late in July, as  incoming data continued to portray a softer

economy and  some  lessening in inflationary pressures, the Manager sought

a further slight  reduction in the degree  of  pressure on  reserve

positions.  Adjustment plus  seasonal  borrowing averaged nearly  $600

million over the  three  reserve maintenance periods completed since  the

July  5-6 meeting, while  the federal  funds  rate  moved down a little more

than  1/2 percentage  point  to around  9 percent.

-5-

Other market interest  rates  fluctuated over  a wide range  during

the intermeeting interval.  Early  in the period, rates tended to decline

in response  to weaker-than-anticipated economic  data  and related market

expectations  of  further monetary easing.  Subsequently,  rates  rebounded

after the  release of  other economic  indicators  that were viewed as

suggesting less  weakness in the expansion and therefore a reduced

likelihood of  further easing.  As a result,  most  rates  ended the  period

with  only modest  net  changes.  Treasury bill rates were  up about  1/4

percentage point  on balance,  while private short-term interest  rates

declined by roughly 30  basis  points,  and major banks  lowered their prime

rate  1/2 percentage point to  10-1/2 percent.  In  long-term debt  markets,

yields were  about unchanged to  slightly higher over the period.  Most

major stock price  indexes reached record highs during the intermeeting

period before giving up part  of  their gains.

In  foreign exchange markets,  the trade-weighted value of the

dollar in  terms  of  the other G-10  currencies moved lower on balance

through July as  interest  rate differentials  favorable to the dollar were

narrowing.  In August,  the dollar  resumed its upward climb, spurred by

continued political uncertainties abroad and a reassessment by market

participants of the outlook for U.S.  interest  rates  in light  of a spate

of  new economic data.  Over the  intermeeting period as a whole, the

dollar  rose but  at  the end of the period remained below the highs of

last June.

Growth of M2 and M3  accelerated in  July and appeared to have

continued at  a fairly  strong pace into August,  evidently reflecting both

the  rebuilding of balances drawn down to meet April tax liabilities and

the  substantial  narrowing of  opportunity  costs associated with holding

liquid deposits.  Through July, expansion of M2  had been around the

lower  end of the  Committee's  annual  range,  and M3  remained somewhat

above the  lower bound  of  its range.

The  staff projection prepared  for this meeting  suggested that

the  nonfarm economy was  likely to grow over the  remainder of  1989  at

about  the pace estimated  for the  first half of  the  year but  that some

slowing of  the expansion would occur  in 1990.  The  projection assumed

that  fiscal policy would move noticeably toward restraint  over  the

projection period and that  the  contribution of  foreign trade  to growth

would be very limited, owing  in part  to the  earlier appreciation of the

dollar.  Consumer demand was  likely to be  somewhat  stronger over the

next  several quarters,  bolstered by continued  job growth and  reflecting

the ongoing effects on consumer  sentiment  of the advance  in stock

prices this  year and the declines  in  interest  rates  since  spring;  in

subsequent  quarters,  gradually mounting slack in  labor markets would

exert a restraining effect  on consumer  spending.  The  lower  levels  of

interest  rates  also were expected to produce  some pickup in residential

construction activity.  Growth in business  capital spending, although

moderating somewhat  from the pace in  the  first  half  of  the year, was

projected to  remain a source  of  strength.  The  recent weakening  in  food

and energy prices pointed to a slower  rise  in consumer prices for  the

next  few quarters;  however,  with margins of  unutilized labor  and other

production resources  still  low,  the  underlying  trend in  inflation was

not  expected to  improve  through  1990.

In the Committee's  discussion  of the  economic situation and

outlook, members  observed that  indicators of business  activity looked

somewhat  stronger  on balance than at  the time of  the July meeting and

that,  despite  some earlier concerns  about a progressive slowdown, the

economy appeared to be  continuing to  grow at a moderate pace.  Several

commented that  further expansion at  a rate  close  to that  experienced

recently was  a reasonable expectation for the next  several  quarters  and

would constitute a desirable  economic performance under prevailing

circumstances.  A number of members noted that there  were no major

imbalances  in the economy of the  sort that  often  lead to a recession or

to a surge  in business activity.  However,  because of the uncertainties

that  were  involved, the members  differed to some  extent in their views

regarding the  risks of  some  deviation in  the expansion from its present

course;  some  felt  those  risks were  about evenly balanced or were tilted

toward some  strengthening in  the months ahead;  several  others  saw some

weakening as the most likely prospect,  or at  least the one that  had to

be guarded against  because of the broad economic  and social  consequences

of  a downturn in economic activity.  No member anticipated a sharp turn

in the  economy in  either direction.  The members also differed to some

degree  in  their views on the outlook  for  inflation.  Recent developments

provided a basis for  some optimism, but  progress in reducing the

underlying rate of inflation would depend  importantly on the strength  of

the business expansion and also  on the  behavior of the dollar  in foreign

exchange markets.

In  their discussion of  specific  developments bearing on the

economic outlook, members noted that  consumer  spending appeared to have

-8-

strengthened somewhat  in  recent months  and most members  expected such

spending to hold up,  or possibly to  increase  somewhat  further,  in the

months  ahead.  Others placed more weight  on the possibility that  further

gains,  if  any, might  be  relatively limited, in part  because they

expected automotive  sales to be  curtailed by higher prices  and lower

rebates  when the  new model year began.  In the  housing sector,  current

conditions were quite uneven across the  country, with an increasing

number of  areas  showing weakness, and the  outlook was  clouded to  an

extent  by the  possible effects of the  disposition of properties  in

conjunction with the  resolution of  insolvent  savings and loan

associations.  However,  recent declines  in mortgage  rates would help to

sustain the overall demand  for  houses.  Should housing markets  weaken,

for whatever  reason, the  effect  could be  to depress not  only

construction activity but  consumption spending as  well.  In the business

investment sector,  current demand  conditions  appeared consistent with

further growth in  overall  investment  spending, though probably at  a much

reduced pace  from that experienced  in the first  half  of the year,

especially given the  likely weakness  in  construction activity in many

areas because  of earlier overbuilding.  With regard to the  outlook for

foreign trade, members emphasized that  the strength of  the dollar could

have negative implications  for  the nation's trade prospects, and  several

expressed the  view that  further  improvement  in the trade balance,  if

any, was  likely to be  limited over the  next  several quarters;  on the

positive  side,  reports suggested that  export  markets remained relatively

robust  for many products.

In their comments  on  regional business  conditions  and business

attitudes, members reported a somewhat mixed picture, depending on the

industries that  were  involved.  On balance, most  parts of the  country

continued to  experience a high  level  of business activity or at  least

modest  further improvement  from relatively depressed conditions.

However,  signs  of  somewhat  slower growth had become more  widespread and

there  were indications  that business  activity might  have  leveled out  or

turned down in  some  areas.  Many business contacts  appeared to be more

bearish on the  outlook than they had been earlier.  In general, these

contacts  expected the overall  economy to settle  into a pattern of

relatively  slow growth.  Few expressed concern about a possible decline

in  business activity.

In their comments  on the outlook for  inflation, members noted

that  the behavior of key price and wage measures in  recent months  was an

encouraging development.  From the perspective of cost  pressures, the

prices of many materials had  increased less  rapidly or had actually

declined in recent months, and increases in  labor  compensation had been

relatively moderate despite  still tight  labor markets in many parts of

the  country.  While a number of members observed that  little or no

progress had been made thus  far  in reducing the underlying rate of

inflation, most  remained confident  that the  currently  restrained growth

in overall economic activity had established the necessary conditions

for  lowering inflation and achieving the Committee's price  stability

objective over time.  Some anticipated  that  favorable  inflation results

might well  emerge sooner rather than  later.  For  some others  a troubling

question remained as to  whether significant  progress  in reducing

-10-

inflation was possible with the  current  degree of pressure on production

resources.  In this connection, a few expressed concern that  some

intensification of  labor-cost  pressures  could not be  ruled out  under

current  economic  conditions,  and they noted  in particular that there

were  indications  of growing labor militancy in  some  industries and parts

of  the  country.  The  strength of the  dollar  appeared to have  damped

inflation, but  that effect  would be  reversed if  the  dollar were  to

depreciate  substantially in  foreign exchange markets.

Turning to the conduct  of monetary policy,  all of the members

supported  a proposal to maintain unchanged conditions of  reserve

availability at  least  initially during the  intermeeting period ahead.

The easing  steps  implemented since early  June  had been appropriate  in

the  context  of earlier indications of  some  slowing in the business

expansion and  a prospective  lessening of inflation pressures.  Partly as

a consequence of the  easing  in policy,  growth of the monetary aggregates

had picked up,  and both M2 and M3 were  within the Committee's  ranges  for

the  year.  For the  period ahead, a steady  policy course was desirable  in

light  of the  latest  evidence suggesting  that price pressures were not

intensifying;  in addition, the  expansion appeared to  have stabilized at

a moderate and provisionally acceptable  pace and considerable

uncertainty existed with regard to  the  timing and direction of  future

deviations from the expansion's  current momentum.  Some members

commented on  indications that  financial  markets anticipated  some  further

easing  of monetary  policy in the  months  ahead, if  not  immediately.  If

such easing failed  to materialize,  the  result  could be some  upward

adjustments  in  interest  rates  that  could  have an adverse  impact on

-11-

interest-sensitive sectors  of the  economy such as  housing and that  could

place undesirable  upward pressure  on the value of the dollar in foreign

exchange markets.  Despite such  concerns,  the members agreed that  for

now an  unchanged policy offered the best  prospects of  fostering the

financial market conditions and the monetary growth that  would

accommodate satisfactory  economic performance.  They recognized that

economic developments  would have to be monitored  closely to  assess

whether any change in policy might be  needed.

In their  consideration of  an appropriate policy course,  the

members took  account  of a staff analysis  indicating that the  expansion

of M2  and M3 was  likely to slow  substantially  from the recent pace  but

to remain well  within the Committee's ranges  for the year.  The analysis

took note of the decline  in market  interest  rates over the past  several

months and  assumed that the  latter would  stabilize at  current  levels  and

that  the expansion of nominal income would remain near  its  recent pace.

The  outlook for money growth was subject  to unusual uncertainty,

however,  stemming  from the range  of possible responses by thrift

depository institutions to the  recently enacted legislation and

associated government  strategy for  resolving insolvent institutions.

The  expansion of M3  would be slowed as  savings and loan associations

reduced their funding needs by  selling assets or curbing the growth of

assets;  the expansion of M2 might  also be  affected depending on the

impact of these developments on deposit  offering rates  and related

opportunity  costs of holding deposits.  Any weakness  in money growth for

these reasons,  however, would not  be  an indication of a slowing economy,

given the presumption that  highly developed secondary markets would

-12-

maintain the  availability of mortgage  credit.  Members commented that

despite  its  recent  acceleration, monetary growth  remained damped when

measured over a longer period, suggesting  a basically restrained

monetary policy. 

While  continued monetary expansion at  the recent

rapid pace clearly would be undesirable in a period when underlying

inflation was  unacceptably high, a renewed shortfall  in relation to the

Committee's  ranges  also should be  averted.

With regard to possible adjustments  in the degree of  reserve

pressure  in the  intermeeting period, a majority of the members  believed

that operations should be adjusted more readily toward  further easing

than toward any  firming and a few  indicated that  they viewed the

incorporation of  such an understanding  as  a key element of an acceptable

directive.  While most members anticipated that a steady policy course

might well prove to be appropriate  for the entire intermeeting period,

any adjustment  called for by prospective  developments was more likely

to be,  in  the majority view, in  the  direction of  some  reduction in the

degree of  reserve  restraint and  such an expectation should be  reflected

in the directive.  Most of the other members indicated that  they could

accept  such a directive, but  because they believed that  the  risks  to the

economy were more evenly balanced, they favored a directive that  did not

include a presumption as to the likely direction of any intermeeting

adjustments.  These members also noted  that the current  directive  was

symmetric in  form and a bias in  the  new directive toward ease might lead

to  a misreading of System policy in the context of  an unacceptably high

rate of inflation.

-13-

At the  conclusion of the  Committee's  discussion, all  but one  of

the members  indicated that  they preferred or  could accept  a directive

that  called for maintaining the current  degree  of pressure on reserve

positions and that  provided  for giving special  weight to potential

developments  that might  require  some slight  easing during the

intermeeting period.  With regard to  the factors that  were  important  in

considering any intermeeting changes  in reserve  conditions,  the

Committee continued to give primary weight  to the inflation outlook.  In

that  regard, they emphasized that policy actions ought  to  be  consistent

with furthering  achievement  of the ultimate objective of price

stability.  Accordingly, slightly greater reserve restraint might  be

acceptable during the intermeeting period, while  some  slight  lessening

of  reserve pressure would be acceptable, depending on progress  toward

price  stability, the  strength of the business  expansion, the behavior  of

the monetary  aggregates, and developments in  foreign exchange and

domestic  financial markets.  The  reserve conditions contemplated by the

Committee were expected to be  consistent with growth of M2  and M3  at

annual rates  of around 9 percent and  around 7 percent  respectively over

the  three-month period from June to September;  in the  case of M2,  such

growth was  somewhat  faster than that  anticipated at the time of the July

meeting.  The  intermeeting range  for  the  federal funds  rate, which

provides one mechanism for initiating consultation of the Committee when

its  boundaries are persistently exceeded, was  left unchanged at  7 to  11

percent.

At the  conclusion of the meeting, the  following domestic policy

directive was  issued to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York:

-14-

The  information reviewed at  this meeting suggests

that economic  activity has  continued to expand at  a
moderate pace  in recent months.  In July, total
nonfarm payroll  employment  rose appreciably further
after a large  advance  in June, and the  civilian
unemployment  rate, at  5.2  percent,  remained close to
its  average  level in earlier months  of the year.
Industrial production  edged higher in July,  continuing
the  slower growth observed  since the  beginning of the
year.  Retail  sales have  grown at  a moderate  pace  in
recent months.  Housing starts  rose  slightly  further
in July following a large gain in June.  Recent
indicators of  business capital  spending  suggest  slower
growth after the  substantial increase  in the  first
half of  the year.  The  nominal  U.S. merchandise  trade
deficit  narrowed considerably  in June  and for the
second quarter  as a whole  was  about  unchanged from a
substantially reduced average value in the  first
quarter.  Partly  reflecting reductions  in energy
prices,  increases  in consumer prices moderated in June
and July.  The  latest  wage  data suggest  no change in
prevailing trends.

Interest  rates  show mixed changes  on balance
since  the Committee meeting on July 5-6.  In foreign
exchange markets,  the trade-weighted value of the
dollar in  terms  of the  other G-10  currencies has risen
on balance over the  intermeeting period.

M2  and M3 grew markedly in July,  lifting

expansion of M2  thus  far  this year to around the lower
end  of the Committee's annual  range, and keeping M3
somewhat  above the lower  bound of  the  Committee's
range.

The  Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary

and  financial conditions that will  foster price
stability, promote growth  in output  on a sustainable
basis, and contribute  to an improved pattern of  inter-
national transactions.  In  furtherance of these
objectives, the Committee at  its meeting in July
reaffirmed the ranges  it had established in February
for growth of M2  and M3  of  3 to 7 percent  and 3-1/2 to
7-1/2 percent,  respectively, measured  from the  fourth
quarter of  1988  to the  fourth quarter of  1989.  The
monitoring range  for  growth of total  domestic  non-
financial  debt also was  maintained  at  6-1/2  to 10-1/2
percent  for the year.  For 1990,  on a tentative basis,
the  Committee agreed in  July to use  the same  ranges as
in  1989  for growth  in each of the monetary aggregates
and debt,  measured from the  fourth quarter of  1989 to
the  fourth quarter of  1990.  The  behavior  of the
monetary  aggregates will  continue  to  be  evaluated in

-15-

the light  of movements in their velocities,  develop-
ments  in the economy and financial markets,  and
progress toward price  level  stability.

In the implementation of policy  for the  immediate

future, the Committee  seeks to maintain the  existing
degree  of pressure on reserve positions.  Taking
account of  progress toward price  stability, the
strength of  the business  expansion, the behavior of
the monetary aggregates, and developments  in  foreign
exchange  and domestic  financial markets,  slightly
greater reserve  restraint might  or slightly  lesser
reserve  restraint would be  acceptable  in the inter-
meeting period.  The contemplated reserve conditions
are expected to be  consistent with growth of M2  and M3
over the period from June through September at annual
rates  of  about  9 and 7 percent,  respectively.  The
Chairman may call for  Committee  consultation if it
appears to the Manager  for Domestic Operations  that
reserve conditions during the period before the next
meeting are  likely to be  associated with  a federal
funds  rate  persistently outside a range of  7 to 11
percent.

Votes  for this  action:  Messrs. Greenspan,
Corrigan, Angell, Johnson, Keehn, Kelley, LaWare,
Melzer, Ms. Seger, and Mr. Syron.  Vote against
this action:  Mr. Guffey.

Mr. Guffey supported an unchanged policy for  the period ahead,

but  he could not  accept a directive that would allow possible

intermeeting adjustments to be made more  readily in an easing than in a

firming direction as new information became available.  In his view, the

risks to the expansion were fairly evenly balanced and did not  warrant

an asymmetric directive biased toward ease, especially in light  of

undesirably high rates of  inflation both current  and prospective.  He

also noted his concern that a directive tilted toward ease  could give  a

misleading indication of the  weight that the  Committee continued to

place on achieving its  long-run price  stability objective.

-16-

2.  Authorization  for  Foreign Currency Operations.

As  part  of a proposed multilateral  bridge financing facility

for Mexico, the Committee approved a special reciprocal  currency

arrangement  of  $125  million with the  Bank of Mexico.  The  new  facility

supplements  the  regular  $700  million arrangement with the Bank of Mexico

set  out  in paragraph 2 of the  Authorization for  Foreign Currency

Operations.  The  Committee  delegated to Chairman Greenspan the authority

to approve  a drawing on both of these arrangements  by the Bank of

Mexico,  subject  to his  determination that  the  appropriate terms  and

conditions  had been met.

Under the terms  of the multilateral  facility, the  Bank of

Mexico may draw up to  $2 billion in  short-term financing  in support of

the program of the Government  of Mexico  for  economic reform and economic

growth.  Participating with the  Federal  Reserve  in making funds

available are the U.S. Treasury through  its  Exchange Stabilization Fund,

central banks  from the other  Group of  Ten countries acting under the

aegis  of the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  and the Bank of  Spain.

The  final maturity date  of the  facility is February 15,  1990.

Votes  for this  action:  Messrs. Greenspan,

Corrigan, Angell, Guffey, Johnson, Keehn, Kelley,
LaWare, Melzer, Ms. Seger, and Mr.  Syron.  Votes
against this action:  None.

On September 14,  1989,  the multilateral bridge  financing

facility became effective and on  September 22,  1989, Chairman Greenspan,

acting  under the  delegation of  authority  from the Committee,  gave  final

clearance  for drawings  by the  Bank of  Mexico on the  reciprocal currency

arrangements.

-17-

3.  Agreement to  "Warehouse" Foreign  Currencies

On September  19,  1989, the  Committee agreed to  a request  by

the  Treasury for  an increase  from $5.0  billion to  $10.0  billion in the

amount  of eligible  foreign currencies that  the System would be  prepared

to  "warehouse" for  the Treasury and the Exchange  Stabilization Fund

(ESF).  The  warehousing  facility involves  spot  purchases  of  foreign

currencies  from the  Treasury or the  ESF  and simultaneous  forward sales

of  the  same currencies  at  the  same exchange  rate to the Treasury or the

ESF.  Such transactions are  authorized under Paragraphs  1.A and  1.B of

the  Committee's  "Authorization For Foreign  Currency Operations,"  and the

maximum size  of the  facility is  determined periodically by the

Committee;  the most  recent  change  involved  an  increase from $1-3/4

billion to  $5.0  billion in  December 1978.  The  proposed increase was

intended to enable  the ESF  to  finance its  continued participation in

foreign currency operations.

Votes for  this action:  Messrs. Greenspan,

Corrigan, Angell,  Guffey, Keehn, Kelley, LaWare,
Melzer, Ms. Seger,  and Mr.  Syron.  Votes  against
this  action:  None.  Abstention:  Mr. Johnson.

Effective  September 25,  1989, the  Committee approved an

increase  from $18  billion to  $20  billion  in the limit  on holdings  of

foreign currencies  specified in paragraph  ID  of the Committee's

Authorization for  Foreign Currency Operations.  That  limit  applies to

the overall  open position in all  foreign  currencies held  in the System

Open Market  Account;  at  the time of  this  action, System holdings  had

reached nearly  $18  billion.  The  higher  limit was  approved in  light of

the potential  for  further System  acquisitions  of  foreign currencies  in

coordination with similar transactions  by  the  U.S.  Treasury.  In

-18-

approving the  increase, the  Committee took account  of  the views

expressed by the Finance Ministers and Central Bank  Governors of the

Group of Seven  countries  at their meeting on September  23,  1989.  These

officials  considered the rise  of the  dollar  in  recent months to be

inconsistent  with  longer-run economic  fundamentals  and they agreed that

a rise  of the dollar  above  current  levels  or  an excessive decline could

adversely affect  prospects  for the world economy.  In this  context,  they

agreed to  cooperate  closely in exchange markets.

Votes  for this action:  Messrs.  Greenspan,

Corrigan, Guffey, Keehn, Kelley, LaWare, Melzer,
Ms.  Seger,  and Mr. Syron.  Votes  against  this
action:  Messrs. Angell and Johnson.

In  dissenting from this action, Messrs. Angell and  Johnson

indicated that  they could not  consent to  an increase in the authorized

limits  for  holding foreign currencies  when such authorization

facilitates exchange  rate  intervention to drive  the dollar  lower as

compared with intervention to avoid disorderly conditions by stabilizing

or  limiting increases in the  dollar exchange rate.  Intervention of the

former type  confuses market participants  concerning the policy comit-

ment  toward price level stability and can contribute to disorderly

markets.  It can increase inflation  fears as  can be  seen in decreases  in

long-term bond prices and in increases  in the price of inflation-

sensitive commodities.  Interest  rate  risk premiums also may increase.

Finally, such intervention can work  to limit  flexibility  in the  exercise

of  fundamental monetary policy options  that  depend on evidence  of

improvement  in the  future  inflation environment.

