AGENDA

FEDERAL  OPEN  MARKET  COMMITTEE

Tuesday,  March  28,  1989  at  9:00  a.m.

Advices  of  the  election  of  the  following  members  and  alternate  members  of
the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  for  the  year  commencing  March  1,  1989,
have  been  received  by  the  Secretariat  and  these  individuals  have  executed
their 

oaths  of  office.

Member 

Alternate Member

E.  Gerald  Corrigan 
Richard  F.  Syron 
Silas Keehn 
Thomas  C. Melzer 
Roger Guffey 

James  H.  Oltman
Edward G.  Boehne
W.  Lee Hoskins
Robert  H.  Boykin
Gary  H.  Stern

1.  Election  of  officers  to  serve until  the  election of  their  successors

at  the  first  meeting of  the  Committee after  December  31,  1989.

A.  Chairman
B.  Vice Chairman
C.  Staff  officers

2.  Selection of  a  Federal  Reserve  Bank  to  execute  transactions  for  the

System Open Market Account.

3.  Selection of  (a)  Manager for  Domestic Operations  and  (b) Manager  for

Foreign  Operations,  System Open Market Account.

4.  Review of  authorization for  domestic  open market  operations.

(See  attachment.)

5.  Review of  (a)  foreign  currency  authorization,  (b)  foreign  currency

directive and  (c)  procedural  instructions with respect  to  foreign
currency operations.  (See  attachments.)

6.  Approval of  minutes  of  actions  taken  at  the  meeting of  the Federal

Open Market Committee  on February 7-8,  1989.

7.  Foreign currency  operations.

A.  Report  on  operations  since February  meeting.

B.  Action  to  ratify transactions  since  February meeting.

8.  Domestic  open market  operations.

-2-

A.  Report on  operations  since February meeting.

B.  Action  to  ratify  transactions  since February meeting.

9.  Economic  situation.

A.  Staff  report  on economic  situation.

B.  Committee discussion.

10.  Current monetary  policy  and  domestic policy  directive.

A.  Staff  comments.

B.  Committee discussion.

C.  Action  to  adopt  directive.

11.  Confirmation of date  for  next meeting  (Tuesday, May 16,  1989).

