SUMMARY  OF  COMMENTARY  ON  CURRENT  ECONOMIC  CONDITIONS

BY  FEDERAL  RESERVE  DISTRICT

May  1989

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS

SUMMARY 

...................................................... 

First  District--Boston............ 

.......................... 

Second  District--New  York  ......................................

Third  District-Philadelphia  .................................. 

Fourth  District-Cleveland  ...................................... 

Fifth  District-Richmond .........................................

Sixth  District--Atlanta  ...................................... 

Seventh  District--Chicago 

...................................... 

Eighth  District--St.  Louis  ..................................... 

Ninth  District--Minneapolis................................... 

Tenth  District--Kansas  City  .................................. 

Eleventh  District--Dallas.....................................XI-

Twelfth  District--San  Francisco.............................. 

i

I-

11-1

III-I

IV-1

V-

VI-1

VII-

VIII-1

IX-

X-I

XII-

SUMMARY*

The  nation's  economy  grew at  a moderate,  sustainable  pace  in  Febru-

ary,  March, and  early  April.  Business  activity  was  relatively  strong  in  the

Midwest  and  South.  Consumer  spending  in  most  of  the  country  was  moderately

strong,  but  signs  of  slowing  were  apparent  in  the  Northeast and  West.  Manu-

facturing  activity  expanded  at  a  fairly  strong  pace  throughout  the  country,

and manufacturers are  generally optimistic  about  sales  prospects  for  the  rest

of  the  year.  The  backlog  of  new  orders  has  been  mixed,  but  no  significant

changes  were  found.  No  serious  bottlenecks  were  reported.  Despite  the  con-

tinued  strength  in manufacturing output,  none of  the districts  report signifi-

cant  increases  in  input  prices  or  labor  costs.  Residential  construction  was

mixed,  but  nonresidential  construction  levels  were  described  as  moderately

strong.  Much  of  the  winter  wheat crop  was lost  due to  dry weather  early this

spring.  Recent  rains,  however,  have  improved  the  outlook for  the  spring wheat

crop,  as  well  as  for  agriculture  in  general.  Favorable  conditions  were  ap-

parent  in  the  mining and  lumber  industries.

Consumer  Spending

Consumer  spending slowed  significantly  in  several  districts but grew

fairly  strongly  in  others.  Boston,  New York,  Philadelphia,  Richmond,  and San

Francisco  report  sluggish  retail  sales.  The  sales  slowdown  was  particularly

marked  in  consumer  durables.  Lower-than-expected  automobile  sales  were  re-

ported  by  Richmond,  Minneapolis,  Kansas  City,  and  San  Francisco. 

A  large

dealer  in  the Minneapolis-St. Paul area describes  the slowdown  in  car sales  as

the  worst  in  over  twenty  years.  Boston  reports  that  retailers are  curtailing

*Prepared  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Minneapolis  and  based  on  information

gathered  before  April  25,  1989.

their  capital  spending  programs  due  to  disappointing  sales  growth,  focusing

spending  instead  on  upgrading  distribution  systems  rather  than  on  new  con-

struction.  Several  districts  point  out  that  the  early  Easter  this  year  made

sales comparisons  with  last year difficult.

Consumer  spending  on  general  merchandise  is  described  as  fairly

strong  by  Cleveland,  Chicago,  St.  Louis,  Minneapolis,  Kansas  City,  and

Dallas.  These  reports  suggest  that  the  economic  expansion  has  been  stronger

lately  in  the  South  and  Midwest  than  elsewhere  in  the  country.  Several  of

these  districts  also  report  an  early-April  recovery  in  auto  sales,  partly

attributable  to  enhanced  incentives  for  buyers.

Inventories  were at acceptable  levels  in  all districts.  The rate of

retail  price  increases  is  largely  reported  as  being  fairly  moderate.  Boston

and Minneapolis point to an  increase  in wholesale prices of  goods purchased  by

retailers.  Retail  prices,  however,  have  not  risen  much, and  Boston  reports

concern  about eroding retail margins.

Manufacturing

Manufacturing  activity  continued  to  expand  at  a  fairly  strong

pace.  None  of  the  districts  report  declines  in  shipments;  most  report  sig-

nificant  increases.  St.  Louis  reports  that  manufacturing  employment  rose  by

an  impressive  10.8  percent  from  December  to  February.  Cleveland  reports  that

cold-rolled  and  galvanized  steel  operations  were  at  full  capacity.  Chicago

reports  that shipments  of major  home appliances  reached record  levels.

Manufacturers are generally optimistic about sales  prospects for  the

year.  San  Francisco  reports  strong  demand  for  commercial  aircraft;  Atlanta

reports significant  increases  in  capacity  in  the broiler-chicken  producing and

processing  industry;  and Chicago cites  brisk demand  for  equipment installed  in

construction  projects. 

Reports  are  mixed  on  the  backlog  of  new  orders.

Boston  and  Atlanta  report  some  weakness  in new  orders,  but  Philadelphia,

Cleveland, Richmond, and  Chicago note  that new orders  increased  in many  indus-

tries.

Capacity  utilization  was  generally  at  satisfactory  levels: 

no

serious  bottlenecks were mentioned.  Atlanta reports that  capacity constraints

are easing  in several  sectors.  In contrast,  reports on  capital  spending plans

are somewhat  mixed.  Boston  reports  that half  the manufacturers  they  surveyed

plan  to  increase  capital  spending,  but  a  third  plan  to  invest  practically

nothing. 

New  York  reports  plans  for  a  $70  million  business  park  in  the

Rochester  area. 

Dallas  reports  that  electronics  manufacturers  are  planning

significant  increases  in  investment spending.  Atlanta,  however,  reports  that

capital  investment appeared  to  be  slowing.

None  of  the  districts mention  significant  increases  in  input  prices

or  labor  costs.  Boston  reports  that most of their  survey respondents were not

alarmed by  steady  to  slightly higher  input  prices.  Philadelphia  reports that

higher  prices  were  not  quite  as  widespread  as  they  were  over  the  winter.

Chicago  also  reports  that  prices  paid  by  manufacturers  showed  increases,  but

less  so  than  earlier.  Respondents  to  a survey  by  Kansas  City  indicate  that

input  prices are  expected to  stabilize or decrease  in the near  future.

Construction

Housing  construction  reports  are  mixed.  New  York  reports  that  a

glut  of  houses  in  the  metropolitan  areas  of  New  York  City and  New  Jersey  is

deterring  homebuilding  in the  area,  but  homebuilders  in upstate  New  York  are

quite  active.  Residential  construction was  vigorous  in the  Chicago  area,  but

first-quarter  housing  permits  in St.  Louis  were  down  31.8  percent  from a year

earlier.  Minneapolis and  Kansas City  report declines  in  residential construc-

tion,  but  Dallas  reports  that  single-family  housing  permits  were  above  last

year's  levels.  San  Francisco  reports  that  construction activity  was  strong,

though limited  by  a lack of available  land.

Nonresidential  construction  is  generally  described  as  moderately

strong. 

New  York  reports  that  office-leasing  activity  has  been  brisk.

Chicago  reports  that  district  contracts  for  nonresidential  buildings  were  at

their peak last year,  and Dallas  reports  that nonresidential building activity

showed year-over-year gains  in  contract  values.

Employment

Conditions  in  the  labor  market  are  described  as  largely  satis-

factory. 

Unemployment  rates  are  generally  low. 

Boston  reports  that  the

region's  labor markets  seemed less  tight.  New York  reports  that  the unemploy-

ment  rate  there  dropped  sharply,  primarily  because of  a decline  in  the  number

of job  seekers.  Atlanta  reports  that  wage  increases  remained  mostly in  the  3

to  5 percent range,  which  is  not  regarded  as  too  high.  However,  Atlanta also

notes  shortages  of  skilled  workers  in  many  sectors.  St.  Louis  reports  that

payroll  employment  from  December  through  February  grew  at  a  relatively  high

6.3 percent annual  rate.

Agriculture and  Resource-Related  Industries

Soil  moisture  conditions  have  improved  somewhat  in  several  regions

after  last year's drought.  Rains  in  March and  April  eased the  stresses  of  the

drought  in  California,  parts  of  Missouri,  and  North  Dakota.  Chicago  reports

that  soil  moisture  conditions  were  adequate  for  the  start  of  the  growing

season  in  most  of  the  district  except  western  Illinois  and  much  of  Iowa.

However,  the  recent  rains  came  too  late  for  much  of  the  winter  wheat  crop.

Wheat  yields  are  expected  to  be  below  normal  in  Kansas  and parts  of  Oklahoma

due  to  dry  conditions  throughout  the  early  spring.  According  to  Dallas,  the

winter  wheat  crop  was  damaged  by  insufficient moisture  and  by  insects.  Pro-

duction  of fresh  vegetables  is  reported  to  be  recovering  from the  effects of a

February  freeze  in  parts  of the  South and  Southeast.

Oil  prices  have  risen  sharply  in  the  aftermath  of  the  Alaskan  oil

spill.  The  spill  is  temporarily  helping  the  Alaskan economy,  though not  the

ecology:  fisherman  are  being  paid  $2,500  per  day  for  use of  their  boats  for

cleanup activities.  Oil  and  gas drilling  activity  reports are  mixed but  show

some  recent  signs  of  strength.  Dallas  reports  that  the  rotary  rig  count  in

the  district was up  sharply  in  March.  Kansas City  reports a decline  in  dril-

ling rigs  from February  to  March but a rebound  in  April.

The  lumber  industry  appears  to  be  doing  very  well.  Minneapolis and

San  Francisco  report  that  the  main  problem  is  a  shortage  of  available  logs.

Minneapolis  also  reports  that  environmental  concerns  have  delayed  logging

activity.  Reports on  capital expenditure plans  in  this  sector are mixed, with

Minneapolis  reporting  substantial  expansion  in  capacity  but  San  Francisco

reporting  that  lumber  shortages have  caused mills  to  reduce  expenditure plans.

I-1

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

Business  took on a softer  tone during March  and the  first half  of

April, according to  First District  reports.  Retail  sales were generally

below plan, and most manufacturers report moderate growth  in sales but

weak new orders.  Price pressures  are receding,  and many contacts noted

that  the  region's labor markets seem less  tight.

Retail

New England retailers report  goods moving slowly and below plan in

March and early April.  The slowdown is  broad-based, covering both

up-scale and discount  chains, hard goods and  soft.  Sales of building

materials have  come down considerably  from a strong  1988.  Auto dealers

report similar  experiences.  However, several  respondents detect  a very

recent upturn and  spending has held up in northern New England.

Inventories have not become  a problem, although some retailers  are

relying on a rise in spending  later this  spring  to  reduce stocks.

Wholesale prices  are generally rising  at  the  same  rate as  last

year, while the  rise  in  retail  prices has  slowed;  thus,  gross margins

have eroded somewhat.  Several  respondents also  report recent  softening

in the  labor  market.  Although  increases  in medical  insurance premiums

trouble some merchants, wage pressures  are  generally receding.

Several  contacts  are  involved  in corporate restructuring that has

led to  reorganization, automation of office  and distribution  facilities,

I-2

and cuts  in managerial staff.  The  resulting  increases  in operating

efficiency are helping  these firms  adjust  to  the pressure  on gross

margins.

Most retailers'  capital spending plans  for  1989  were already below

last year's levels.  In response  to disappointing sales  growth and  rising

interest  rates,  several are now further curtailing their  capital

programs.  Spending  is  focused on remodeling  and upgrading  office and

distribution systems, not new construction.

Retailers generally expect  growth in 1989  to  be  less  than  last

year.  Some remain hopeful that  sales growth will  return to  its  former

pace  in the  traditionally strong  fourth quarter.  Merchants  in the

still-vigorous northern states  are more optimistic, but building

suppliers  expect a cyclically down year.

Manufacturing

Reports  from First District manufacturers  suggest that  shipments

remain moderately strong while new orders  are  less  robust.  For most

contacts,  sales are up 5 to  8 percent  from year ago  levels, but  one-third

report  that  shipments are  flat  or down.  Looking to  the  future, most

respondents  report new orders are  flat  to  down while  the  rest have

year-to-year gains  of as much as  5 percent.  Several  firms mentioned  that

customers  are delaying  orders  or, more often, payments.  Firms  serving

auto,  appliance and computer makers,  contractors  and restaurants  report

relatively weak demand.  Despite  current  signs of softness,  all

manufacturing  contacts are  keeping inventories  in line with targets.

Manufacturers  also  express less concern about materials prices

than in recent  months.  Most  find  input  prices  steady to  up slightly -

I-3

"nothing alarming."  Only  two  firms mentioned  that metals prices  are

still  climbing.  One-third of the  respondents have raised  their own

prices  by 4 to  15  percent during  1989.  While most of  the others have not

changed  their sales prices  in the  last  six months,  computer-related

prices  continue to  fall.

Some respondents  sense that New England's tight labor markets are

loosening up, but  others disagree.  Employment levels  are  generally

unchanged.  However, some contacts  are hiring sales  staff  (available) and

software  engineers  (harder to  find).  Two  others  are reducing  employment

through layoffs or attrition.  A "low tech"  firm reports  attracting more

applicants  per job  opening and getting good programmers  and analysts

laid-off by high-tech firms.  Almost no one sees wage pressures building,

but  several complained of rising medical and  insurance costs.

Capital  spending plans  are mixed - with roughly half of  the

manufacturers planning  to  increase expenditures  from last  year's levels,

but  one-third investing practically nothing.  The rest  expect

expenditures  to  remain even or decline.  The  focus  of this  spending  is

maintenance,  cost  reduction and the  introduction of new products, not

buildings.  Indeed, several  firms mentioned  leasing as  the preferred way

to  acquire  additional  space.

Among First District manufacturers,  respondents are  divided about

the prospects  for a recession in 1989.  Half expect  a modest recession;

the  others do not  foresee a downturn but  anticipate slow growth in the

second half.

II-1

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

The pattern of developments  in the Second District economy was mixed since

the  last report.  Unemployment rates fell  sharply in New Jersey and New York during

March, though primarily as a result of fewer  job seekers, and office leasing

activity continued at a moderately rapid pace.  In contrast, however, demand for  new

housing varied  considerably over  the  District  and consumer spending was generally

slow in March.  Most small and mid-sized banks reported that  demand for home

mortgages is approximately unchanged from what  it was last  spring.

Consumer Spending

District  retail  sales were  sluggish  during March.  Several respondents

reported over-the-year declines  despite the fact  that Easter occurred  in March this

year  instead of April  as in 1988.  As a result,  sales fell well  below targeted

levels at  most  stores contacted.  Only one chain of  department  stores reported that

sales were  "right  on plan."  While  some  retailers attributed the disappointing March

results  to  "un-spring" like weather, others were at  a loss for explanations.

Year-to-year changes  in March  ranged  from -6.0 percent  to +3.2  percent  with

sluggishness noted  in many categories.  One category in which sales generally

remained good was women's apparel, a slow seller  throughout  1988.

In spite of the lackluster  sales results, most  respondents reported that

inventories were at  satisfactory  levels, due  in part  to  large markdowns on  some

items.  Based on one week's results, April is showing  a better tone than March and

respondents were hopeful  that  this would continue.

II-2

Business Activity

Unemployment  rates  in New York  and New Jersey fell by almost one percentage

point  in March as New Jersey's rate hit a record low.  The improvement  was primarily

the result  of  fewer  persons seeking work  rather  than a marked increase in  employment

and may not  be  sustainable in  the months ahead.  On Long Island, for example,  the

local  economy is  braced for  the  continuing impact of the Navy's cancellation last

December  of  an attack  bomber contract.  A loss of several thousand more jobs  is

expected  at  the aircraft  company and its  suppliers by year-end.  In addition,  the

recent  announcement  by a major New York City securities firm that  it  plans a

substantial  restructuring which could result  in  the layoff  of a couple of  thousand

employees is  also a source of  concern.  The brokerage industry is still feeling the

effects of  the October  1987  stock  market  crash and  a slowdown in  retail activity

since  that  time.

Eighty-four  percent  of purchasing managers in Rochester and 75  percent  in

Buffalo reported  stable to improved general business conditions in March, virtually

unchanged from the February numbers.  In  both cities more  than half  the surveyed

firms  reported  higher  prices on  the commodities  they purchased.

Few new investment  projects were announced in  recent weeks.  Among the

largest of  these  was a $70  million business  park in the Rochester area which Eastman

Kodak and  Pioneer Development Corporation hope  to begin constructing this year.  The

park would include office buildings,  shops, restaurants and hotels  to be built  on

vacant land  owned by Kodak.

Residential Construction and Real Estate

Demand  for  new housing in  the District  has been mixed  in recent  weeks.  A

glut  of  homes  in  the  resale market was cited as a major deterrent  to homebuilding

activity  in  the  New York metropolitan area and northern New Jersey.  Existing homes

prices have begun to  come down  somewhat,  but many observers believe still  lower

II-3

prices are needed before current owners can sell and "move up" to  new homes.  In

sharp contrast,  homebuilders in  several  upstate New York communities are quite

active and home prices  are rising in  response  to  strong demand.

Office leasing activity has been  at  a moderately strong pace since the last

report, with  vacancy rates showing little or  no change.  Upward pressure on vacancy

rates  in Manhattan is  expected to  build,  however,  with the completion of many new

commercial  buildings now under  construction and an increased supply of existing

office space  as  these  new buildings become occupied.  Elsewhere in  the District, the

volume of  new construction in  northern New Jersey and Fairfield County has slowed

somewhat  and some observers believe  this  represents a turning point  in  the prolonged

and  rapid expansion of  those suburban areas.

Financial Developments

Senior  officers of most  small and mid-sized banks in  the Second District

survey reported  that demand  for home mortgages is  approximately the same as last

spring.  Responses were mixed  regarding  the  strength of the bankers'  local

residential  real estate market.  About half described their  local  real estate market

as  active, while half,  particularly those  in  the New York City metropolitan area,

characterized it  as soft.  Most  of the respondents have noticed that homebuyers are

currently showing greater  interest  in fixed-rate  loans, possibly because the  rise in

interest  rates  from a year ago has  been less for  fixed-rate  loans than for

adjustable-rate mortgages.  Others speculated  that  buyers have become more favorable

toward  fixed-rate mortgages because of uncertainty about the future course of

interest  rates.  Moreover,  despite aggressive marketing of  home mortgages at  some of

the banks,  few were offering concessionary, or so-called  "teaser",  first-year  rates

on adjustable-rate  loans.  Though  some surveyed  bankers believe  rates will  remain

stable, most  expect  rates will  decline somewhat over  the next six months.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT  - PHILADELPHIA

Reports  from  most  sectors  of  the  Third  District  economy  in  mid-April

suggest  little 

growth  overall  in  the  past  two months.  Manufacturers  in general

indicate that business has been just steady, although nondurable goods producers

note  a pickup  in  April.  Retailers  report  only  slight year-over-year  gains  in

total  sales  for March and April,  and an actual  decline  in  sales  of  big-ticket

items in  recent weeks.  Auto  dealers say sales slipped in March and continue  to

run  below  the  annual  selling  rate  achieved  earlier  in  the  year. 

Bankers

generally  report  that  overall  loan  growth  continues  at  a  healthy  pace,  but

several major banks note some easing  in  the rate  at which they are adding to the

volume of commercial and industrial loans outstanding.  Deposit growth continues

to  run  below  targeted  rates  at  many  banks,  but  none  indicate  that  they  are

restricting asset growth due to  funding constraints.  Several banks have gained

new funds  with promotions of  18-to-24-month certificates of  deposit.

Looking  ahead,  Third  District  business  contacts  see  only  slight

improvement, at  best.  Manufacturers expect only steady business over  the next

six months.  Retailers  expect dollar sales  for the spring and  summer to run  even

with  or  just  marginally  above  the  same  period  last  year,  and  auto  dealers

anticipate unit sales  for all  of  1989  to  fall as much as  10  percent  below last

year.  Bankers  expect overall loan growth to stay close  to its current pace,  but

they  anticipate some  slackening  in  the  expansion  of  commercial  and  industrial

lending  in the  second half of  the year.

MANUFACTURING

Activity  in the  Third District  industrial  sector appears to  be  easing to

a steady pace.  Just over half of the manufacturers contacted in  late March and

III-2

early April reported that business was stable, and the number noting improvement

barely exceeded the number  indicating that their business was slowing.  Reports

of  improvement were common among  nondurable goods  producers while  most makers

of  durables said business has been  flat  in recent weeks.

Overall,  executives  at  area  industrial  firms  generally  noted  modest

increases in new orders and a fractional rise in shipments but no change in order

backlogs during March.  On balance,  area firms are permitting inventories to  run

down  for  the  fourth  month  in  a  row. 

Employment  is  holding  up  as  area

manufacturing firms  added marginally to  payrolls during March.

Industrial  prices  in  the  region  continue  to  rise.  Nearly  half  of  the

manufacturers contacted  in April said input  costs moved up from a month earlier

and one-quarter raised the prices  of the products  they make.  The increases do

not appear to be accelerating, however, as reports of higher prices are not quite

as  widespread  now  as  they  were  over  the  winter. 

Nevertheless,  local

manufacturers generally expect  continued upward price pressure.

Looking  ahead,  local manufacturers  see virtually  steady  conditions  over

the next  six months.  About a third of those polled  in April  expect  improvement

while  nearly as  many anticipate  slower  business  between now and  October.  On

balance,  managers  at  area  plants  foresee  modest  growth  in  new  orders  and

shipments, but they expect order backlogs to remain steady and they plan  to work

inventories  down  further  from  current  levels. 

On  the  employment  front,

industrial firms  in the region plan to maintain payrolls at current levels,  but

they may make  some reductions  in the workweek during the  spring and summer.  On

balance,  local firms  continue to  schedule hikes  in  capital  spending, although

there  are  increasing  reports  of  projects being  postponed, especially  in heavy

industries.

III-3

RETAIL

Third District retailers  contacted in mid-April generally indicated that

sales  for  March  and  early  April  were  only  slightly  above  sales  for  the  same

period  last year, on  a current  dollar basis.  While some  stores,  particularly

those selling upscale goods,  reported satisfactory year-over-year  growth, many

merchants  describe  the  current  situation  as  "difficult." 

Several  retailers

noted  that  sales of  big-ticket items  have edged down recently.

Store  officials  expect  dollar  sales  for  the  balance  of  the  spring  and

summer to  run  about  even with or  marginally above the  year-ago pace,  but they

are concerned that consumers could grow cautious  in the months  immediately ahead

if  economic news  is  not  good.

Labor  costs  are still considered a problem by Third District merchants as

the pool of qualified job applicants, especially in suburban areas, remains well

below retailers' needs.  Several large discount  chains  have announced plans to

enter the region, and local  merchants expect  the competition for workers  to  be

as  intense  as  the competition for  customers.

Third District auto dealers report  that sales  slipped in March and remain

below the annual selling rate recorded  earlier this  year.  Import dealers  have

suffered a worse decline  than domestic  dealers have,  but  the domestic  dealers

note that  sales  of  light  trucks, which had been strong  for  the past few years,

have  fallen  off  recently.  Despite  the  introduction  of  rebates and  incentive

financing by  the manufacturers, area dealers expect unit sales  for  this year to

be  as  much as  10  percent below  last year's  level.

FINANCE

Total loan volume outstanding at  major Third District banks  at the end of

March was  13  percent above  March  1988,  marking  a year of  steady growth.  Real

estate lending remains the  fastest growing major  loan category.  Commercial and

III-4

industrial  lending  is growing at a healthy rate, according to  bankers contacted

in mid-April, although  they note some  slowing from the growth rate recorded  in

the first quarter.  Consumer lending is expanding but at a slower pace than other

loan categories, and bankers  believe growth may ease further.

Total deposits  at  large Third District banks  at  the end of March were

8 percent above  the March 1988  level,  with demand deposits  virtually unchanged

from a year ago and other checkable deposits up  about 5 percent.  Bankers report

that  growth  in  the  volume  of  money  market  deposit  accounts  has  eased

substantially since  January  while  time  deposits  continue  to  expand at  a good

pace.  Several  banks  are promoting  certificates  of  deposit with maturities up

to  two years,  and they  are obtaining significant  amounts of  new funds  at  less

than 50  basis points  above the federal funds  rate.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT  - CLEVELAND

The  economy shows  some  mixed signs  of  slowing,  led by consumer  spending

and residential  construction.  The worst of  the  surge  in  food and energy

prices  is  probably over, assuming  improved supplies.  Higher  interest  rates

are generally not  considered to  have had much effect on housing  and other

construction, or  on capital goods  industries.  Thrifts  continue  to  experience

deposit outflows,  although the  April outflow apparently was  not  as  severe  as

in previous months  this  year.

Consumer  Spending.  Several  retailers  report sales were

better-than-expected over the  past  6 weeks,  and better than what has been

reported  in national data.  Some  retailers  expect sales  to  soften  this

quarter, especially because  of higher gasoline  prices.  An upscale  retailer,

however, noted a double-digit increase  in spending last  quarter  and believes

his  upper-income customers are  not much affected by a rise  in  interest  rates.

The automotive industry apparently  is  successfully offsetting higher

interest rates by offering  special  financing rates  and cash  rebates that are

the broadest and,  in  some cases,  the  most generous  yet offered.  Incentives

are  not  as  broad for  foreign  cars.  Auto  dealers  report  strengthening sales  in

early April.  They generally are  guardedly optimistic over  spring and summer

sales  but are  more cautious  than dealers  surveyed  in early March.  Dealers  and

consumers  appear concerned over  the  course of  the  economy  and interest  rates,

and  dealers  are  cautious  in placing orders  that may add  to  their

inventory.  Moreover,  liberalized lending terms have  been attracting higher

credit-risk buyers.

IV-2

Construction. Interest rate  effects  on construction activity  appear  to be

marginal.  Some realtors  report  sales  of  existing houses  fell  in April  for  the

second successive month, which  some attribute  to  sizable price  increases  over

the  past year.  Two nonresidential builders  acknowledged that interest rates

may be having  a dampening effect on construction but  assert  that  is  a

relatively small factor in  investment  decisions. Respondents  report no

shortages of  labor or  supplies,  except  for engineers and some  construction

steels.

Capital Goods.  Producers  of  durable  goods  remain optimistic  about  sales

prospects  for 1989  and report no apparent effects  from higher  interest  rates.

Metal  cutting  tool  orders  slid  in January and February but rebounded  since

then;  orders  for  the year are  still  expected to  at least match those of  1988.

Orders  for industrial  controls  also  rebounded in March following softness  in

late  1988,  and lead times have been reduced because of  an  improved supply  of

computer chips.  A semiconductor and electronics  supplier also  reported a

rebound  in  their orders  since  last February, which they  believe is  consistent

with their  forecast of record sales  again this year.  In general,  capital

goods  producers  report capacity is  still available,  and  they expect  selective

price  increases  to  restore eroded profit margins.

Steel  operations  are still  at  full capacity  for  cold-rolled and galvanized

sheets, but producers report capacity  is  available  for  some  other  types  of

steel  products.  Some  producers also  note  recent softening  for bar products

(for machinery and automotive  industries)  and structural  steels  (for

buildings).

Inflation.  Food prices are  expected  to moderate by summer,  following the

first-quarter  surge.  Prices  are  expected  to  increase  4% to  4 1/2%  in  1989,

IV-3

although beef prices may rise by late  summer, according to  a national  food

chain.  A food processor reports  a substantial  increase  in corn sweetener

costs  since  late  1988  because  of the  drought,  but they  expect prices  to  ease

by late  summer.  Packaging costs,  however, have been increasing  recently

because of higher energy costs.  Food  industry respondents report no buyer

resistance  to  the jump  in food prices.

Gasoline  prices  are  probably close  to  a peak, barring additional  supply

constraints,  and crude oil  prices will probably be under  downward pressure

over  the next  few months  as  additional  supplies  become available.  The  Alaska

pipeline  is  already back to  capacity,  although deliveries are  still  limited.

Financial  Institutions.  Net deposit outflows  continued in April, but

were  not as  severe  as  earlier in  the year.  Some  of the  larger  thrifts  are

deliberately reducing their  brokered deposits.  A few thrifts  that  experienced

large  inflows  in March will apparently show either a small  inflow or  small

outflow  in April because  they have become less competitive on rates.  A  small

well-capitalized thrift  reports  that  deposits  rose  in April because  they were

able  to  sell  their CDs  in  other parts  of the  country where  interest  rates  are

lower  than in local markets.  Most thrifts report  little  consumer  resistance

to  higher  interest rates, but mortgage loans have  softened probably because

prices of new and  existing homes have risen rapidly  relative to  incomes over

the  past year.

Banks  report  a softening  in consumer  installment and mortgage loans  in

recent weeks,  and a reduced volume of commercial  and industrial  loans.

FIFTH  DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview

Signs  of  slower  growth  in the  District economy were  apparent during  the

first  half of April.  Retail  sales  were weaker, especially  auto sales.

Manufacturing  activity expanded  in late  March  and  early April,  but  less  than

in February,  while  the  prices  of raw materials  continued  to  rise.  Export

activity  at District seaports  was  higher,  but  import  activity was  mixed.

Both  residential  and  non-residential  building were weaker.  In agriculture,

persistent  rainfall  has  kept  farmers  out  of  their fields,  delaying normal

spring  planting.  Among  financial  institutions,  higher  interest  rates  appear

to  have  encouraged more  savings,  while  the  impact  of these higher  rates  on

loan  activity has  been  mixed.

Consumer Spending

District retail  activity  slowed  during  the  first half of April  according

to  our regular  mail  survey.  About  40  percent of the  respondents  said  their

sales  decreased while  less  than  one-third  reported increases.  The  proportion

of  respondents  indicating  lower sales  was  slightly greater  than  in February.

Department  stores  reported that  sales  were  generally flat  except  for  somewhat

stronger sales  of big  ticket  items.  Almost  three-fourths  of the  car  dealers

surveyed indicated  lower sales.  Most  retailers  expect  their  sales  to

increase  in the  next  six  months.

Manufacturing

District manufacturing activity  grew at  a moderate  rate  in late  March

and  early  April,  although the  pace  of growth was  somewhat  slower  than  in

February.  Smaller  proportions  of our regular survey  respondents  reported

increases  in shipments,  new orders,  backlogs  of orders,  and  employment  than

in February,  though  reports  of  increases  still  outnumbered  decreases.

Respondents  indicating declines  in the  length of their workweek,  however,

slightly outnumbered  those  reporting  increases.  Growth  in new export  orders

was  reported  to  have slowed  since  February.

Manufacturers  reported  that  the  prices  of both  finished  products  and  raw

materials  continued  to  rise  in recent weeks  at  about  the  same  rate as  in

February.  A number of  respondents  indicated  their  profits  would  suffer

because  they were  afraid  to  pass  along the  increases  in raw materials  prices.

District  manufacturers  remain optimistic  about prospects  for  continued

economic  growth  in the  nation  and for  their  businesses  in the  next  six

months,  although  their optimism has  diminished  somewhat from  our  February

survey.  In the current month's  survey,  as  in  the  previous  one,  the  number of

respondents  expecting  increases  in shipments  and  new orders  exceeded  the

number  expecting declines.  In a reversal  of  the  results  of our February

survey,  however, the  majority of  respondents  to  our current  survey now expect

backlogs  of orders,  employment,  and  the  length of the  workweek  to  decline  in

the  next  six  months.

Ports

Reports  received  from  the  three major  District ports--Hampton  Roads

(Norfolk),  Charleston,  and  Baltimore--showed  increased  export shipments  so

far  in April  compared to  the  same period  in March.  The  import  picture was

mixed with  shipments  reported  to  be  about the  same  at  Charleston  and

Baltimore  but  slightly  lower  at  Hampton  Roads.  All  ports  indicated that,

compared  to  a year ago,  export  activity was  outpacing  that  of  imports,  and

port  representatives  expect  this  trend  to  continue  during  the  next  six

months.

Financial

A telephone  survey of Fifth  District  bankers  indicated that  the demand

for  consumer credit  grew slightly  in the  first half of April.  Demand  for

home  equity loans  continued strong,  while  the demand  for  auto  loans  was

reported as  mixed.  Most  of those  contacted  reported that  their  commercial

loan  activity was  either unchanged  or  slightly higher.  Nearly  all

respondents  reported increases  in consumers'  savings, which  several

attributed  to  higher  interest  rates.  Over  sixty percent  of  the  respondents

said  they  have  seen  no  signs  of a slowdown  in their local  economies.

Agriculture

District farmers  intend to  plant  about  10  to  12  percent  more acres  of

corn,  soybeans,  and  barley  this year,  but  recent  rainfall  has  saturated

fields  in much  of the  District, delaying  planting activity.  Only  about  five

percent  of the  corn  acreage  is in the  ground,  compared to  18  to  20  percent

considered  normal  for mid-April.  If  fields  do  not  dry  soon,  some  farmers  may

not  be  able  to  get  corn  planted  in time and may wait  until  June and  plant

soybeans  instead.

A late  freeze  killed  a large  number  of fruit  blossoms  in Virginia  and

the  Carolinas,  but yields  are  not  expected to  be  reduced appreciably.

VI-1

SIXTH  DISTRICT  - ATLANTA

Overview:  Firms  headquartered  in  the  Southeast  report  that  business  activity

continues  to  move  ahead  at  a  moderately  healthy  pace.  Some  shortages  of  both  skilled

and  unskilled  workers  are  reported  by  firms  in  both  the  manufacturing  and  service

sectors.  Most  contacts,  however,  say  that  sufficient  labor  is  available  and  continue  to

report  that  wage  rates  are  rising  at  a  3-5  percent  range.  Increases  in  prices  of  materials

and  final  products  are  showing  some  acceleration,  particularly  where  imported  goods  are

a significant  component.  At  the  same  time,  order backlogs  appear  to be  easing  a  bit  and

vendor  delays  as  well  as  inventories  are  said  to  be  generally  acceptable  relative  to

sales.  Capital  spending  plans  of  businesses,  although  decelerating,  remain  stronger  than

a  year  ago;  there  are  still  more  reports  of  spending  for  modernization  rather  than  for

outright  expansion.  Loan  growth  is  weakening  in  both  the  consumer  and  real  estate

categories.  Delinquencies  are  not  a  major  problem  but  real  estate  lenders  express

concern  about  housing  and  commercial  properties  in  overbuilt  areas.

Labor  Markets:  Wage  increases  remain  mostly  in  the  3-5  percent  range  although

there  are  a few  notable  exceptions.  One  manufacturer  reports  wage  hikes  in  the  10  to  15

percent  range  for low  skilled  workers  in  certain  fields;  the  wage  increase  is  estimated  to

be  less  costly  than  the  turnover  that  would  occur  without  it.  Welders,  pipe  fitters,

machinists,  engineers,  and  nurses  are  reported  to  be  in  short  supply  and  are  contributing

to  upward  wage  pressures  in  affected  businesses.  An  acute  shortage  of  nurses  in  the

Southeast  is  expected  to further  escalate  hospital  costs.

Prices:  Most  input  and  product  prices  are  said  to  be  rising  at  a  faster  pace  than

last  year  at  this  time,  but  reported  rates  of  increase  vary  widely  by  industry.  A  major

distributor  of  auto,  office  machine  and  industrial  parts  notes  that  prices  have  been

accelerating  and  pressures  are  the  most  intense  in  three  years.  Year-to-date  in  the

firm's  industrial  supply  division,  price 

increases  have  averaged  about  6  percent  and

forecasts  are  for  some  acceleration  for  the  remainder  of  the  year.  Back  orders  at

VI-2

suppliers  are  huge  and  delivery  delays  have  been  severe  although  some  improvement  has

been  noted  in  the  last few  weeks.

At  the  other  extreme,  prices  of  construction  materials  and  products  associated

with  the  slowing  building  industry  are  generally  feeling  little  or  no upward  pressure.  The

major  exception  is  the  price  of  cement  which  has  increased  10  to  12  percent  so  far  this

year. 

Imported  cement  is  primarily  responsible  for  the  upward  price  pressure.  On  the

other  hand,  demand  is  slowing  for  lumber  and  additional  softness  is  anticipated  because

of  the  slowdown  in  residential  housing.

In  agriculture,  prices  of  vegetables  have  moderated  with  the  regrowth  of  fresh

vegetable  crops  since  the  February  freeze.  However,  prices  of  broilers  and  eggs  are

holding  at  relatively  high  levels.  The  broiler  industry  is  benefiting  from  rapid  demand

growth  in  the  fast  food  industry,  which  is  supporting  prices  at  a  highly  profitable  level

for  all  chicken  producers.  Feed  costs,  though  higher  than  a  year  ago,  have  not  risen

recently  and  there  is  hope  that  prospects  for  larger  grain  crops  in  1989  may  soon  cause

feed  prices  to  decline.  Last  year's  heavy  losses  drove  egg  producers  out  of  the  business

reducing  supplies  and  contributing  to current  high  egg  prices.

Capacity  Utilization:  Capacity  constraints  appear  to  be  easing  a  bit  throughout

the  Southeast.  One  capital  equipment  manufacturer  notes  that  the  rise  in  interest  rates

has  caused  distributors  to  trim  inventories  of  products  from  a  typical  4  and  1/2  months

supply  to  a  1  and  1/2  months  supply.  This  has  resulted  in  a  slowing  pace  of  new  orders

for  a  formerly  very  active  product  line  and  is,  in  turn,  reducing  pressures  to  expand

capacity.  A  number  of  other  respondents  note  that  new  capacity  is  now  coming  on  line

reflecting  past  expansion  decisions  but  few  new  expansions  are  planned  for  this  year.  A

pickup 

in  utilization  of  idle  capacity 

is  now  anticipated  for  a  number  of  energy

producers.  Spokesmen  relate  that  an  improvement  in  expectations  for  the  oil  industry

over  the  long  run  is  generating  plans  for  some  renewed  activity  in  oil  exploration.  The

natural  gas  industry  is  becoming  especially  active  in  response 

to  brighter  market

prospects.

VI-3

Investment:  Capital  investment  appears  to  be  slowing  across  the  region.  Some

contacts  state  that  uncertainty  regarding  the  possibility  of  a  recession  by  next  year  is

causing  reluctance  in  major  expansion  decisions.  A  medical  services  firm  states  that

investment  is  being  cut  back  from  the  levels  of  recent  years  partially  because  of  efforts

by  businesses, 

insurers, 

and  particularly 

the 

federal  government 

to  manage

reimbursements  of  medical  expenses  more  closely. 

For  example,  Medicare's

reimbursement  for  capital  expenditures  has  declined  10-15  percent  this  year  and  it  is

speculated  that  another  10  percent  reduction  is  in  the offing.

Most  new  capital 

investments  are  expenditures 

to  upgrade  machinery  and

production  techniques  which  will  enhance  the  output  from  the  currently  employed  work

force. 

In  agriculture,  crop  farmers  are  sharply  expanding  purchases  of  machinery  and

equipment  mostly  to  replace  worn  items  that  were  held  in  service  during  the  low-income

period  over  the  past  several  years.  The  broiler  producing  and  processing  industry  is  the

major  exception  to  the  general  trend.  New  processing  plants  are  being  built  to  respond

to  the  brisk  growth  in  the  nationwide  demand  for  chicken  products.  A  significant

investment  to  expand  grower  facilities  is  also  required  to  supply  the  new  processing

capacity.

Credit  Situation:  Delinquency  rates  and  defaults  on  real  estate  loans  have

continued  to  rise  in  the  District  although  the  extent  of  the  problems  is  not  yet  considered

serious. 

Several  lenders  report  that  loan  volumes  are  flat  or  down  reflecting  the

slowdown  in  both  residential  and  commercial  construction. 

A  few  lenders  register

concern  that  problems  with  large  real  estate  development  projects  could  become  more

severe  in an  environment  of  high vacancies  and  rising  interest  rates.

VII-1

SEVENTH  DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary. 

Contacts  in  the  Seventh  District  indicate  that  economic

expansion  is continuing  but  is  less  rapid  than  earlier.  Payroll  employment

through  February  continued  to  trend  upward  in the  District  states  about  in

line with  the  nation.  Unemployment  in the  region  averaged  5.3  percent  of  the

labor  force  in February,  down  nearly  to  the  national  average  of  5.1  percent

after  being  higher  since  1979. 

However,  in  March  unemployment  rose  in

Illinois  and  Michigan  in contrast  with  the  further  national  decline.  Hiring

plans  are  strong  in  the  Midwest.  Chicago  purchasing  managers  surveyed  in

March  indicated  that  expansion  of  production,  orders,  and  backlogs  continued

but  was  less  widespread  than  last  year. 

This  less  heated  expansion  was

reflected  in prices  paid,  which  showed  widespread  increases  but  less  so  than

earlier.  Milwaukee  purchasers'  reports  have  shown  a  similar  trend  over  the

past  year. 

Higher  petroleum  prices  are  boosting  costs  for  industry,

transportation, and  consumers.  Contacts  with  industrial  firms  in the  District

have  noted  slower  increases  in  orders  or  shipments  for  some  types  of

machinery,  paperboard,  electronics,  and 

rail 

transport. 

Others 

noted

continued  strength  in  the  industries  in  which  they  do  business,  including

industrial  chemicals,  industrial  controls,  construction  steel,  and  heavy

trucks.  A diversified  manufacturer  with  sales  growing  more  slowly  indicates

that  the  slowdown  is confined  to  U.S.  markets,  and  that  its  overseas  business

is very  robust.  A minority  among  our  sources  indicated  an  expectation  of  an

imminent  U.S.  recession.  Others  are  cautious,  watching  closely  for  signs  of

weakness.  Farm  field  work  has  been  slowed  by  cool  spring  weather,  and  there

is concern  about  dry  conditions  in part  of  the  District.

Equipment. 

Reports  on  equipment  markets  are  diverse,  with  strength

widespread,  but  some  sectors  softening.  A  producer  of  various  types  of

VII-2

machinery  reported  that  its  commercial  machinery  backlog  is well  above  a year

ago.  Major  home  appliance  shipments  are  at  record  levels.  Demand  is brisk

for  electrical  equipment  installed  in  construction  projects. 

Industrial

markets  for  electrical  controls  and  related  components  are  strong  though  some

buyers  expect  a slowdown  in this  year's  second  half.  Sales  of  equipment  to

utilities  are  holding  up  well  after  being  very  strong  late  last  year.  Demand

for  locomotives  has  improved  but  prospects  are  viewed  very  cautiously.  Orders

for  defense  machinery  have  declined  significantly.  Weakening  was  reported  in

light  construction  equipment,  reflecting  the  housing  slowdown. 

Signs  of

weakness  in  markets  for  material  handling  equipment  were  also  noted.

Petroleum  equipment  orders  are  low.

Construction.  Nonresidential  construction  activity  is  at  a  relatively

high  level  in  the  Midwest. 

Construction  contracts  for  nonresidential

buildings  last  year  were  at  their  peak  for  this  expansion  in  the  District

states. 

Construction  activity  remains  vigorous  on  office  buildings  in

Chicago's  Loop  and  on  industrial  structures.  Chicago-area  shopping  centers,

mostly  in the  suburbs,  are  set  to  open  at  a record pace  in 1989  and  1990,  even

though  some  observers  regard  the  area  as  already  "overstored."  Public  works

construction  is expected to  rise this  year.

Residential  construction  activity  is described  as  still  vigorous  in the

Chicago  area. 

Resales  are  slowing,  however,  attributed  to  higher  interest

rates.  Housing  prices  are  up  sharply.  Mortgage  interest  rates  of  11  percent

for  fixed-rate  loans  became  more  widespread  in  March. 

Interest  rates  on

adjustable-rate  loans  at  area  lenders  climbed  considerably  in  the  year  to

mid-March.  Mortgage  rates,  on  average,  have  edged  down  since  then.

Steel.  Steel  production  in the  District,  through  early  April,  was  above  a

year  earlier. 

Orders  are  also  above  last  year. 

Demand  from  machinery

VII-3

manufacturers  reflects  the  continued  growth  of  capital  spending.  Sales  of

construction  steel  are  particularly  strong--"through  the  roof,"  according  to

one  source--at  variance  with  weaker  indicators  of  the  pace  of  construction

nationwide  such  as  contracts. 

Auto  and  appliance  markets  for  steel  are

holding  up well.

Motor  Vehicles.  After  another  month  of  lackluster car  sales  and  inventory

accumulation  at  dealers,  sales  perked  up  in early  April  following  announcement

of  enhanced  buyer  incentives.  In  addition,  assembly  plans  for  the  second

quarter were  revised  downward  modestly  in the  past  month,  though  they  remain

near  last  year's  strong  pace. 

Industry  observers  speculate  that  auto  makers

will  stretch out  third  quarter model  changeover  shutdowns  to  pare  inventories,

though  components  suppliers  reportedly  are  not  seeing  indications  of  this.

Truck  sales  in the  first  quarter  were  at  a high  level  but  somewhat  below

1988's  all-time  high. 

Truck  production,  on  the  other  hand,  has  been  at  a

record  pace.  The  heavy  truck  market  is strong.

General  Merchandise.  Reports  from  retailers  in  the  District  were  mixed.

One  noted  that  the  shift  in the  timing  of  Easter,  from  April  1988  to  March

this  year,  renders  questionable  both  comparisons  of  the  latest  month  with  a

year  earlier, and  seasonally  adjusted sales.  Inventories  are  regarded  as  low.

Agriculture.  Spring  field  work  in  District  states  is  off  to  a  slower

start  than  in recent  years,  largely  because  of  cool  temperatures.  There  is

considerable  apprehension  about  the  continuing  drought  conditions  in much  of

Iowa  and  western  Illinois.  Elsewhere  in the  District,  soil  moisture  appears

adequate  for  the  start  of  the  growing  season. 

In  general,  however,

precipitation  patterns  over  the  next  few  months  will  be  more  critical  to  the

development  of  spring-planted  crops  than the  pattern of  the  past  few months.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT  - ST.  LOUIS

Summary

Most  sectors  of  the  Eighth  District  economy  continued  to

improve;  however, 

there  are  many  signs  of  weakness. 

Employment  rose  in

all  sectors  except  government  and  construction. 

While  manufacturing

employment  rose, 

recent  sales  declines  of  autos  and  appliances  have  led

to  layoffs.  District  utility 

companies 

report 

increased  usage 

of

electricity.  Nonresidential construction activity  strengthened  recently,

but home  construction and sales  remain weak.  Across virtually every  loan

category,  except  agricultural, 

first 

quarter  loan  volume 

is  well  behind

that  reported a year earlier.

Employment

District  employment  rose  rapidly  in  recent  months,  continuing

the  strong  growth  that  began  last  October.  Payroll  employment  in  the

three  months  through  February  grew  at  a 6.3  percent  annual  rate,  led  by

double-digit gains  in  the  services,  the  transportation and communications

and 

the  manufacturing  sectors. 

On 

the  other  hand, 

construction

employment  fell  at  an  8.2  percent  rate  in  the  same  period,  due  to  sharp

declines  in Missouri and Tennessee.

Implementation of  the  military base  realignment  and closure  plan

recently  approved  by 

the  House  of  Representatives  would  result 

in

additional jobs  at  three  bases within District boundaries but would cause

the  eventual  closing of  a Army  ammunition testing  facility  in  southern

Indiana, eliminating 400 jobs.

VIII-2

Manufacturing

Manufacturing  employment  rose  at  a  10.8  percent  rate  in 

the

December-February  period  with  all  major  industries  except  electrical

equipment producers experiencing gains.  The chemicals  and transportation

equipment  sectors  posted  the  sharpest  job  growth. 

A  St.  Louis  auto

assembly  plant  temporarily  laid  off  workers  for  one  week 

in  March 

to

reduce  auto  inventories.  Weak  refrigerator  sales  prompted  an Arkansas

appliance producer to  plan layoffs  of 200 workers  before May 1.

Transportation and Utilities

During  the  first 

quarter,  District  airports  experienced  flat  or

declining passenger travel  and  cargo  shipments  compared  to  a year  ago.

Barge 

traffic 

on  the  Mississippi  and  Missouri  rivers  is  near  normal

despite  river  levels  remaining two  to  three  feet  below normal.  District

utility 

companies  reported 

that 

increases 

in 

industrial  demand  for

electricity  ranged  from  0.7  percent  to  7.5  percent  during  the  first

quarter  when  compared  to  the  same  period  a  year  ago,  while  increases 

in

commercial demand for  electricity ranged from 2.7  percent to  4.7  percent.

Construction

The value  of  District nonresidential  construction contracts  rose

23.9  percent  in 

the  three  months  through  February,  compared  to  the  three

month  average  ending  in  November.  The  value  of  residential  contracts

rose  moderately  during  the  recent  period,  but  are  no  higher  than  a  year

earlier.  In the  St.  Louis  area,  first  quarter housing  permits  were  down

31.8  percent  from  a  year  earlier. 

A  number  of  "move-up" buyers  were

prevented  from  ordering  new  homes  as  they  were  unable 

to  sell  their

existing homes  at  their desired prices.

VIII-3

Consumer  Spending

Retail  sales  of  general  merchandise  have  been  moderately  strong

in March and early April  in  most areas  of  the District.  In Arkansas  and

Memphis,  however, wet  and  cool  weather  has hampered  sales,  particularly

of  summer  clothes  and merchandise.  Generally,  sales  have met  retailer's

expectations, 

resulting  in  satisfactory  levels  of  inventories.  Sales  of

shoes, jewelry, and women's apparel have  sold particularly well.

Agriculture

Consistent  with farmers'  intentions  to  expand  planted  acreage,

operating loans  this  spring  are  considerably higher  than  a year  earlier.

April  rains  have  helped  drought-stressed  wheat  crops 

in  northeastern

Missouri  and  yields  could be  near  normal.  A heavy  freeze  in  southern

District  states  has  damaged  fruit  and vegetable  crops,  with peach  and

fresh  tomato  growers  experiencing  the  most  damage. 

Consumers  will  only

see  small  price  increases, 

if  any,  due  to  the  freeze,  as  the  damaged

areas  produce  less  than  2 percent  of the  nation's  peaches,  and  less  than

5 percent of  the nation's  fresh  tomatoes.

Banking

Total 

loans  outstanding  at 

the  12 

largest  District  banks

declined  at  a 0.7  percent  annual  rate  in  the  first  quarter,  a sharp  drop

from  the  5.9  percent  rate  of  increase  for  the  same  period 

in  1988.

Commercial  loans  fell  at  a  3.5  percent  annual  rate  in 

the  first 

quarter

compared with a 15.5  percent rate  of  increase  for  same  period  last  year.

Consumer  loan  volume,  which  had  shown  some  signs  of  strength  earlier  in

the year,  returned to  its  sluggish pattern.  Real  estate  lending,  spurred

by  home  equity  financing,  grew  at  a  13.6  percent  rate  for  the  first

quarter,  slightly  less  than the  rate  a year earlier.

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

Ninth  District  economic  conditions  have  been  generally  good.  The

employment  situation  has  been  very  good  throughout  the  district.  Consumer

spending  has  been  generally  strong,  although  automobile  sales  have  declined

sharply. 

There  has  been  some  concern  about  rising  prices. 

Conditions  in

resource-related  industries have been good.

Employment

The  employment  situation  has  been  very  good  throughout  the  dis-

trict.  The  unemployment  rate  in  Minnesota  in  February  was  4.9  percent,  0.2

percentage  points  lower  than  in  January  and  0.1  percentage  points  lower  than

in  February  1988.  The  unemployment  rate  in  the  Minneapolis-St.  Paul  metro-

politan  area  dropped  to  3.8  percent  in  February  from  3.9  percent  in  January.

Although  labor  market  conditions  are  generally  strong  in  Minnesota,  a  large

computer  manufacturing  company  closed  its  supercomputer  division  located  in

St.  Paul  and  dismissed  approximately  800  workers. 

The  move  was  part  of  a

nationwide  cutback by  the  firm, which cost  3,100 workers  their  jobs.

The  unemployment  rate  in  North  Dakota  was  5.3  percent  in  February,

down  from  5.8  percent  in  January and  5.7  percent  in  February  1988.  The  unem-

ployment  rate  in  South  Dakota was 4.5 percent  in  February, slightly  lower  than

the  4.6  percent  rate  of  February  1988.  The  unemployment rate  in  Montana  was

6.4  percent  in  December  1988,  up  from  6.0  percent  in  November  1988. 

The

unemployment  rate  in  the  Upper  Peninsula  of  Michigan  was  11.2  percent  in

January,  up  from  9.7  percent  in  December  1988  but  down  from  the  13.9  percent

rate  in  January  1988.  A director  notes  that  labor  markets  in  western  Wiscon-

sin  are  tight,  especially  in  the  service  sector,  and  that  unemployment  rates

in  the  area are at  their  lowest levels  for  this  decade.

IX-2

Consumer Spending

Consumer  spending  on  general  merchandise  has  been  fairly  strong.

One  retailer  reports  strong  sales  in  February  and  March  with  some  signs  of

softening  in  early  April.  Another  retailer  reports  that  sales  in  March  were

up  14  percent  over  March  1988  and  that  year-to-date  sales  were  up  15  percent

from the  comparable  period  of last year.

Car  sales  were  down  sharply  from  last  year  but  truck  sales  held

their  own. 

Dealers  for  one  domestic  manufacturer  report  that  car  sales  in

March were  27  percent  lower  than  in  March  1988  and  year-to-date sales  were  15

percent  lower  than  in  the  comparable  period  last  year.  However,  they  report

that  truck  sales  were  12  percent  higher  in  March  compared  to  March  1988  and

0.07  percentage  points higher  on  a year-to-date basis.  A dealer  in  the  Minne-

apolis-St.  Paul  metropolitan  area  who  sells  cars  from  a  number  of  manufac-

turers  reports  that  the  first  three months  of  1989  have been  the  worst in  over

twenty years.

Housing activity has been  stable.  The number  of new housing  permits

issued  in  Minnesota  was  2 4  percent  higher  in  February  than  in  January,  al-

though  it  was  down  20  percent  from  February  1988.  Home  sales  in  the  Minne-

apolis-St.  Paul  area  were  11.4  percent  higher  in  March  from  a year  ago,  al-

though  they  were  up  only  1.2  percent  on  a year-to-date  basis.  Reports  from

Montana  and  South  Dakota  suggest  that  although  new  construction  is  slow,  a

substantial  number  of houses are  being  remodeled  and upgraded.

A  director  surveyed  several  firms  in  a  number  of  industries,  from

manufacturing  through wholesaling,  retailing,  and  contracting,  and  found  that

over  50  percent  of  the  firms  projected  an  increase  in  sales  for  the  next

year.  Manufacturing firms,  in  particular, were  very  optimistic.  In  addition,

two  of  the  five  manufacturers  who  were  separately  contacted  reported  plans  to

expand  capacity  this  year.

IX-3

Prices

There  is  some  evidence  of  inflationary  pressures  in  the  Ninth  Dis-

trict.  An  index  of  prices  received  by  Minnesota  farmers  was  3 percent higher

in  March  than  in  February  and  18  percent higher  than  in  March  1988.  Unleaded

gasoline  prices  in  the  Minneapolis-St.  Paul  metropolitan area  were  12  percent

higher  in  April  than  a year  ago.  A director  reports  that  manufacturers have

recently  raised prices  fairly sharply.

Resource-Related  Industries

Conditions  in  resource-related  industries  have  been  generally

good.  Reflecting  the  rise  in  prices  received by  farmers,  the  average value  of

Minnesota  farmland  rose  by  9 percent  during  the  year  ending  July  1988.  Farm-

land  values rose  in  all parts  of the  state except northeastern  Minnesota.  The

greatest  gain,  17  percent,  was  in  the  southwestern  part  of  the  state.  Agri-

cultural  areas  throughout  the  district  reported  adequate  snowfall  in  the

winter.  Soil  moisture  levels  were  slowly  recovering  from  the  effect  of  last

year's  drought. 

Flooding  in  the  Red  River  Valley  of  North  Dakota  has

increased  soil  moisture  content  in  that  area. 

However,  farmers  in  South

Dakota  continued  to  be  concerned  over  low  soil  moisture  levels. 

The

district's  lumber  industry  continued  to  enjoy  strong  demand  for  its

products. 

The  major  problem  facing  the  lumber  industry  has  been  ensuring

adequate  supplies  of raw materials.  Environmental  concern has  delayed  logging

activity.  A large  paper  products  manufacturer plans  to  expand  its  facilities

in  Minnesota, adding  about  190  permanent  jobs and  employing up  to  2,000  people

during  construction.  Mining  activity  in  Montana  and  the  Upper  Peninsula  of

Michigan  continued  to  be  strong.

X-1

TENTH DISTRICT  - KANSAS  CITY

Overview.  The Tenth District economy continues  to  grow slowly.  Retail

sales  are  increasing moderately, though new car  sales  are  down.  Manufacturers

report higher  input prices, but no bottlenecks or  labor  shortages.  The

district's energy industry shows  few  signs  of improvement.  Housing starts

have been relatively weak so  far  this year,  although they were  stronger  in

March.  Mortgage demand is  mixed at  district  savings  and  loan institutions.

Loan demand at  commercial banks  is  steady to  higher, while deposit performance

is  mixed.  Recent rains  have  improved the  outlook  for  spring crops,  but winter

wheat yields  are still  expected to be below normal.  Bankers  report generally

strong financial conditions  among farmers  and ranchers.

Retail  Sales.  Most general merchandisers report  retail  sales performance

has  improved from a year  ago  and over the  last  three months,  although  a few

report decreasing sales.  Retailers  are  attempting to maintain margins by

passing through wholesale price  increases.  In  the near-term, retail  sales  are

expected to  be stable  to  slightly higher.  Inventory levels  are  mostly

satisfactory.  Automobile  sales  are  reported to have  weakened over  the  last

month.  Most dealers  are  trimming inventories  or  maintaining current  inventory

levels.  Most auto  dealers  expect  1989  sales  to be  at or  below 1988  levels.

Manufacturing.  All  respondents  indicate  that input prices  are up

relative  to  a year ago,  with some  increases  over  the past  three months.

Prices  are  expected to  stabilize or  decrease  in  the  future.  Firms  report  few

difficulties  in  acquiring materials,  and lead times have  remained steady or

declined.  Inventory levels  are  generally satisfactory.  Most plants  are

operating near  full  capacity, but no bottlenecks or  labor  shortages  are

reported.

X-2

Energy.  Despite  the  recent run-up  in  oil prices,  the  district's energy

industry  shows  few signs  of  improvement.  Continued uncertainty about  the

future  course  of world oil  markets has held down drilling  activity  in  the

region and nationwide.  The  average number  of active drilling  rigs  in the

district  fell  from  219  in  February to  211  in  March, a fourth below the  average

of  one year  ago.  However,  during the  first  two  weeks  of April, the  district

rig count  increased to  233.

Housing Activity and Finance.  District housing activity through March  is

down  from a year  ago.  However, most homebuilders  report  stronger housing

starts  in March, a rebound from February's weakness.  Single-family

construction continues  to  be  stronger  than multi-family.  New home  sales  and

prices  are  higher, but the higher prices  reflect  larger homes being sold.

Home  inventories  are  relatively low.  Most  respondents  expect steady housing

activity in the  near term,  and slightly  improved activity by year-end.

Most  respondents  from district savings  and  loan institutions  report  a net

outflow of deposits  over the  last  month.  In most cases,  net flows  of  deposits

are  comparable  to  a year  ago.  Respondents' expectations  for  deposit  flows  in

the  near future  are mixed, but  several  expect  further outflows  if  interest

rates  keep  increasing.  Respondents  report mixed demand for  mortgages, with a

pickup expected  during the  summer.  Many respondents  expect mortgage  rates  to

peak within the  next  three months  and then  to  decline  for  the  rest  of  the

year.

Banking.  Most district  commercial bank respondents  report constant or

increased loan demand over the  past month.  The  increases were concentrated in

commercial and  industrial  loans  and  in agricultural  loans.  About half of  the

respondents  increased both their  prime rate  and  their  consumer  loan rates  by

fifty basis  points  in  recent weeks,  while  the  other half reported no  change.

Only  a few banks  expect further increases  in lending rates  in  the  near  future;

the  remaining banks  anticipate no  change.  Deposit behavior varied both across

the  district  and across  types  of deposits.  Approximately equal numbers  of

respondents  reported increases  and decreases  in  deposits.  Decreases were

mostly  in demand deposits, NOW accounts,  and money market  deposit accounts.

Increases were generally  in  IRA and Keogh accounts  and in small  time  and

savings deposits.

Agriculture.  Recent rains  throughout much of  the  Tenth District improved

the  district's  agricultural outlook, but the  rains  came  too  late  for  much of

the  winter wheat crop.  Continued dry conditions  throughout the  spring  and

cold temperatures  in February  severely damaged much of the  crop.  Wheat yields

are  expected to  be well below normal  in parts  of Oklahoma and much of Kansas.

Bankers  in  those areas  report that  some  farmers  are  plowing under  the  wheat

crop  and planting spring crops.  In other areas  of the  district,  the  recent

moisture has  allayed fears  of  losing the wheat  crop,  although  additional rains

are needed to  assure  adequate  spring growth.  District bankers  report most

farmers  will begin planting spring crops within  the next  few weeks.  The

recent rains  have  contributed to  good growing conditions  and an optimistic

outlook for  spring crops,  although more moisture will be needed soon.  Subsoil

moisture  remains below normal  in many areas  of  the  district;  good snowpack in

Colorado will help  replenish depleted water stocks  there.

Results  of spring credit  reviews by district bankers  generally reflect

strong financial  conditions  among farmers  and ranchers.  Most operators had

good financial  performances both last  year and  the year before.  Given the

relatively strong  financial conditions  of borrowers, most bankers  do  not feel

that their  agricultural  loan portfolios are  at  risk, especially if  dry

conditions  affect  only the wheat crop  and normal weather returns  to  the  rest

of  the  district.

XI-1

ELEVENTH  DISTRICT--DALLAS

The District  economy is growing  modestly,  but  persistently.

Manufacturing  sales  are  increasing  at  a slow pace.  Retail  sales  growth

generally  is moderate  to  strong, while auto  dealers  say  their recent  sales  have

been about  the  same  as  last  year's.  Construction  activity  is slipping  a

little.  The oil  and  gas  drilling upturn  that  began  in February continues

unabated.  In agriculture,  the drought  is becoming a more serious  problem,  but

product prices  are  up.

District manufacturing  is expanding overall.  Growth has  recently  been

slow and  respondents  are  expressing  increased  uncertainty, but  most are  still

optimistic.  Sales  by  oilfield equipment producers have not  generally risen,

despite  a recent  upturn in oil  and gas  drilling activity.  Respondents

anticipate modest  increases  in demand  as  the  energy  industry continues  its

recovery.  Although primary metals  orders  have changed  little  in recent

months,  sales  are  up  over a year earlier.  Fabricated metals producers  say

their recent  increases  in orders  mostly reflect  a seasonal  pattern,  but  they

express optimism  about  continued  sales growth  later  in the year.  Demand  for

electronics  has  picked  up  after  some  recent  sluggishness, and  manufacturers

expect  further growth  in 1989,  although at  a slower rate  than during  the first

half of  1988.  A number  of  firms  in this  industry are  planning  significant

increases  in investment  spending.  Some electronics  firms  cite  shortages  of

engineers  and  technical  workers.  Stone, clay  and  glass  sales  are  generally

sluggish,  but  it is widely  believed  in this  industry that  demand  has  reached

its  trough.  Most  lumber  and wood manufacturers  report  no  change  in sales.

XI-2

Apparel  orders  are  up.  Reports on paper  sales  are  mixed,  but  those with

growing  sales express  concern that their  inventories  are  too  low.  Demand  for

District chemical  and plastics products has  lately been  flat  to  down  and

producers  say  uncertainty over future  demand  patterns has  increased. 

Most

manufacturers  still  report  little  or  no  upward wage  pressure, but  more of  them

are  reporting  pressures  than  in  recent  surveys.  Many manufacturers,  however,

note  that  their employee health  insurance  and  workman's  compensation  costs  are

rising  significantly and  one  respondent  cited  these  increases as  a motivation

for  expanded  offshore operations.

District  retail  sales  growth  ranges from  moderate to  strong.  Rates  of

expansion  have  been particularly  high  in the  cities  on the  Mexican  border and

in the  eastern portions of the  Texas gulf  coast.  Growth  has  also  been  brisk  in

Dallas.  The  pace  of growth  has  slowed  somewhat  in Houston  and  San Antonio,

where  expansion was  strong  in 1988,  but  increases  continue.

District  auto  sales  are  generally  little changed  from  a year  ago.  Dealers

expect future  growth  with  the  continuation of  the  District recovery  and  also

because of current  promotion  programs.

Construction activity remains  sluggish.  Contract values  overall  are

slipping a little,  mostly  as  a result  of weakness  in nonbuilding  construction.

Although  gains  in  residential  building  have  lost  some of  the  momentum they

developed  during  1988,  this measure  remains farther  above  its  year-earlier

level  than  at  any  time  in the  last  4 years.  Permit  issuance  for multifamily

residences  is very  low.  Single  family  permits  also have  weakened  somewhat

but,  unlike  the multifamily  side,  are  above  their year-earlier  levels.

Nonresidential  building  activity  has  stabilized  and  is still  showing  year-

XI-3

over-year gains  in contract  values.  Texas  construction  employment  dropped

sharply  in  February,  following  a large  increase  in January.

District oil  and gas  drilling  has  recently  picked  up.  After declining

from June  1988 until  January of  this year,  the  District rotary  rig  count

increased  slightly in February and was  up  strongly  in March.  Recently revised

data  reveal  that oil  consumption  is stronger and  inventories  are  weaker  than

previously estimated.  The new estimates  increase  the  likelihood that  oil

prices  at  or above  $18  per barrel  could  be  sustained  throughout  this  year and

into  next.  Respondents  say that  this  should  stimulate  some  growth  in drilling

although strong  expansion  is not  expected.

Drought remains  a serious  threat  to  District  agriculture  as  soil

conditions continue  to worsen  in Texas  and  New Mexico.  The winter wheat  crop

has  been  seriously damaged by  insufficient moisture  and  by  insects.  In Texas,

85  percent of  the  crop  is rated  either  fair  or  poor,  and  the  damage  is even

greater  in New Mexico.  The  drought  has  affected  livestock  operations  also.

Despite  signs  of  nationwide  herd rebuilding,  cattle  liquidation  continues  in

the  District, due  to  a lack  of  forage availability.  While rainfall  remains

below normal  levels,  moisture  has  been  sufficient for  planting,  but  dry

conditions  have  slowed  seeding operations  in the  southern  half  of  Texas.

Because of  the  composition of  its  output,  the  District's  agricultural  prices

are  rising  faster on  average  than  nationally.

XII  - 1

TWELFTH  DISTRICT  --  SAN  FRANCISCO

Summary

The  Twelfth  District  economy  continues  healthy,  although  there  are  signs  of slowing  in

some  sectors.  Manufacturing  activity  overall  continues  strong,  and  agricultural  conditions  have

improved  in  the  West.  Retail  sales  are  reported  to  be  sluggish.  Most  District  business  contacts

expect  slower  economic  growth  during  the  next  year.  Conditions  in  the  forest  products  and

financial  industries  are  reported  to be  mixed.  Oil  prices  have  risen  sharply  on  the  West  Coast

since  the  Alaska  oil  spill.  Real  estate  activity  continues  strong  in  most  parts  of  the  District,

although  some  signs  of slowing  are  emerging.

Business  Sentiment

Most  Twelfth  District  business  leaders  contacted  in  early  April  expect  slower  economic

growth  during  the  next  year, with  fifty-six  percent  expecting  GNP  growth  during  the  next  four

quarters  to  be  slower  than  it  was  in  1988.  Responses  indicate  weaker  growth  prospects  for

business  investment,  consumer  spending,  housing  starts,  and  the  trade  balance.  Housing  starts

are  the  weakest  sector,  with  92  percent  of District  business  contacts  predicting  slower  activity

during  the  next  year.

Consumer  Spending

Several  respondents  report  sluggish  retail  sales  in  recent  weeks.  One  notes  that  the

weakness  could  be  related  to  the  early  Easter,  or  to  unseasonable  weather.  Several  note  that

sales  of soft  goods,  including  housewares  and  women's  apparel,  are  relatively  stronger  than  are

sales  of big-ticket  durable  items  such  as  furniture  and  electronics.

XII  - 2

Auto  sales  are  reported  to  be  slow  throughout  the  District,  a  condition  many  attribute

to  higher  interest  rates.  One  auto  dealer  reports  that, although  sales were  up  sharply  in  early

April,  the  increase  was  no  more  than  seasonally  expected,  despite  sales  incentives.  Moreover,

he  notes  that  the  recent  jump  was  not  enough  to  take  the  pressure  off dealers.  Prices  are  still

soft, and  dealers  are  ordering very  cautiously  to  avoid  excessive  inventory  buildup.

Manufacturing

Manufacturing  activity  overall  continues  strong.  The  aerospace  industry  continues  to

experience  strong  commercial  aircraft  demand  in  the  face  of limited  production  capacity.

Boeing,  for  example,  currently  has  an  order  backlog  in  excess  of  $55  billion  and  is  late  with

deliveries  of its  747-400.  To  boost  production,  the  company  has  arranged  to  borrow  more  than

600 skilled  mechanics  from  Lockheed  for  periods  ranging  up  to  six  months,  in  addition  to

continued  heavy  hiring  of  permanent  employees.  Local  firms  complain  that  Boeing  is  hiring

workers  away  at wages  they  are  unable  to  match.  Despite  Boeing's  efforts  at  increased

production,  the  backlog  of orders  continues  to  rise  due  to  the  large volume  of new  orders

received.

Most  other  manufacturing  sectors  report  more  moderate  growth,  although  activity

appears  to be  weakening  in  product  lines  tied  to  construction  activity.  For example,  demand

for  paints  and  coatings  is  flat  compared  with  a  year  ago,  and  a  large  floor  covering  distributor

reports  a  12  percent  decline  in  carpeting  sales  from last  year's  level.

Agriculture  and  Resource-Related  Industries

Agricultural  conditions  have  improved  in  the  West  Heavy  March  rains  eased  the

drought  in  most  of  California's  agricultural  regions,  although  water  supplies  remain  low  for

some  areas  of Southern  California,  Arizona,  and  parts  of Idaho.  Unusually  hot  weather  in  early

XII  - 3

April  damaged  the  strawberry  crop  in  California  and  threatens  to  limit  grazing  in  Arizona.  Low

inventories  of grain  seeds  have  caused  seed  prices  to  rise  by  as  much  as  50  percent  over  last

year's  level  Consumption  of apples  and  grapes  is  returning  to  normal,  following  sharp  declines

triggered  by  the  Alar  and  Chilean  grape  scares,  respectively.  Seafood  prices  are  stable  despite

the oil  spill  in  Alaska.

Conditions  in  the  forest  products  industries  are  mixed.  Consumption  of  linerboard  and

boxes  is  rising  at  a 2  percent  rate,  while  newsprint  consumption  has  fallen  with  a  decline  in

classified  advertising.  Shortages  of logs  have  boosted  prices  despite  slowing  consumption  by  the

construction  industry.  Lack  of  available  logs  has  caused  some  lumber  mills  to  reduce  capital

expenditure  plans,  and  one  lumber  industry  contact  reports  reducing  his  firm's  capital

expenditure  budget  to a  third of  its  originally  planned  level.  Further  expansion  is  anticipated  at

paper  mills.

Oil  prices  have  risen  sharply  on  the  West  Coast  in  the  aftermath  of the  Alaska  oil  spill.

Sources  in  Alaska  report  that  the  spill  is  helping  the Alaskan  economy  at  the  moment,  with

fishermen  being paid  $2,500  per  day  for  use  of their  boats  in  the  clean-up  operation.  Exxon

has  told  area  residents  that  the  company  will  compensate  them  for  all  reasonable  claims  of  lost

income  resulting  from  the  spill.

Construction  and  Real  Estate

Real  estate  activity  continues  strong  in  most  parts  of the  Twelfth  District,  although  some

signs  of slowing  are  emerging.  Home  prices  in  California  and  Washington  continue  to escalate,

with  multiple  offers  above  asking  price  now  occurring  frequently  in  Seattle.  However,

construction  activity  is  limited  by  a  lack  of available  urban  land  and,  more  recently,  by  a  more

cautious  attitude  engendered  by  higher  interest  rates.  Moreover,  one  respondent  notes  that  his

company  has  postponed  some  construction  projects  due  to  the  recent  interest  rate  hikes.

XII  - 4

Financial  Sector

Many  banks  and  thrifts  report  that  demand  and  savings  deposit  balances  have  fallen  in

recent  weeks,  as  consumers  shift  funds  toward  money  market  funds,  certificates  of deposit,  or

treasury  bills  in  response  to  higher  interest  rates.  Most  report  weak  demand  for  consumer

loans.  The  relatively  healthier  demand  for  mortgage  and  home  equity  loans  is  attributed  by

many to  federal  income  tax  considerations.  One banker  notes  that  although  his  institution  is

generating  few  new  loans,  most of those  issued  are  going  to  well-qualified  borrowers.  Financial

institutions  are  fairly  evenly  divided  between  those  reporting  narrower  and  wider  interest

spreads  as  rates  have  risen.

