FEDERAL  RESERVE  press release

For Use  at  4:30  p.m. 

July  6, 1990

The  Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market

Committee  today  released the  attached record of policy actions

taken by the  Federal Open Market  Committee at  its meeting on

May 15,  1990.

The  record  for each meeting of the Committee is made

available a few days after the next  regularly scheduled meeting

and subsequently is published in the  Federal Reserve Bulletin

and the Board's Annual Report.  The  summary description of

economic and financial conditions contained in each record is

based solely on the  information that was  available to the

Committee at the time of the meeting.

Attachment

RECORD OF  POLICY ACTIONS OF  THE
FEDERAL OPEN MARKET  COMMITTEE

Meeting  Held on May  15,  1990

Domestic policy directive

The  information reviewed  at  this meeting  suggested that

economic  activity was  continuing to  expand at  a moderate pace.  The

service-producing  sector  remained the  mainstay for growth  in  income  and

employment;  manufacturing was  still  sluggish and construction  activity

was  slipping  after the  weather-related bulge  earlier  in the year.  Some

broad measures  of prices  reflected a partial unwinding  of the  earlier

surge  in  prices  of  food and  energy;  however,  underlying trends  in

consumer prices  and labor  costs  suggested  no weakening in  inflationary

pressures.

Total  nonfarm payroll  employment  increased more  slowly  in March

and April after  sharp weather-related advances  earlier in  the  year;  job

growth thus  far  in  1990  had averaged a little  above  that  in  the  second

half  of  last  year in  part  because of  the  hiring of  temporary workers  for

the  census.  In the  private  sector,  nonfarm employment  fell  in  both

March  and April, partly owing to  an  unwinding of  an earlier surge  in

construction  jobs  during  unseasonably mild winter  weather.  Job  losses

also were  widespread in manufacturing;  and,  with the notable exception

of  health services,  hiring  in  the  services  industries  weakened

considerably  from the  strong pace of  1989  and early 1990.  In April,  the

civilian  unemployment  rate  edged up  to 5.4  percent.

Industrial  production declined  in April,  reflecting a cutback

in  the manufacture of  motor vehicles  that  was  intended to  bring

inventories  of  new  cars into  better balance  with sales.  Industrial

-2-

activity had been buffeted by  a variety  of transitory  influences  in

previous months,  including strike  activity in  the aircraft  industry,

inventory adjustments in  the motor  vehicle industry,  and unusual  winter

weather patterns  that  had affected the energy output  of  utilities;

nevertheless,  production in  April  was about  unchanged from the  levels  of

last  December and a year earlier.  Total  industrial  capacity  utilization

slipped in  April  after a small  rise  in March;  operating rates in

manufacturing had trended down over  the twelve months ending in  April  as

capacity increased while production  remained about  unchanged.

Real  personal  consumption expenditures  edged  lower in March,

reversing a small  net  rise  in the two previous months.  Spending for

goods  was  weak on  balance  over the  three-month period, especially for

food  and apparel  items;  outlays  for  services  continued to  be  robust,

with notably  strong gains  for  spending  on medical  care.  Retail  sales

fell  in  April  as  a result  of  reduced purchases of  motor vehicles,  but

upward revisions  to  data  for  the  two previous months  suggested a little

more  strength  in  consumption  in the  first  quarter than had been

indicated previously.  Housing starts  fell  sharply in March after

surging earlier  in the year.  The March decline  likely reflected the

effect  of  higher mortgage  interest  rates along with some  payback for

unusually  strong housing  construction activity in the  two  previous

months  of atypically mild winter weather.

Business  capital  spending  strengthened in the  first  quarter  of

1990  from a temporarily depressed  fourth-quarter level.  Outlays  for

nondefense  capital goods  rose  sharply,  partly as  a result  of  a rebound

in  shipments  of  aircraft  to  domestic firms  after a strike  late  in  the

-3-

fourth quarter.  Spending for  information-processing equipment, notably

computers, also  increased while acquisitions of  industrial equipment

continued to  languish.  New orders for  business equipment  other than

aircraft  advanced at  a slower pace in the first  quarter.  Favorable

weather aided nonresidential  construction activity in January and

February;  however, the pace  of construction activity  fell  off in March,

and  construction permits  and contracts  continued to trend down.

Manufacturing inventories were  reduced considerably in February  and

March as  factory  shipments  rebounded;  declines were widespread among

producers of durable goods, primary metals,  fabricated metal products,

nonelectrical machinery,  and motor vehicles.  For most  industries,  the

inventory-to-shipments  ratio was  lower in March than at  year-end.  At

the  retail  level, many types of establishments,  including auto dealers,

retail  apparel,  and general merchandise  stores  had trimmed their

inventories  substantially.

The  nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit  narrowed in February

as  imports  declined sharply and exports were little  changed from January

levels.  For the  January-February period, exports were moderately higher

than  in the  fourth quarter,  led by a rebound in shipments  of aircraft.

Over the  same time period, the value of  imports fell;  a sizable  decline

in  non-oil  imports  that  was widespread across  commodity categories

outweighed higher imports of oil  associated with the  rebuilding of

stocks  depleted during the unusually cold weather  in December.  Indica-

tors  of  economic activity in  the major foreign industrial  nations

suggested a continuation of moderate  growth in real  economic  activity in

most major West  European countries  and Japan.  Declines  in industrial

-4-

production  in the  United Kingdom and Canada appeared to be signaling

some  slowing of economic  growth  in these  countries.

Producer prices  for finished goods  dropped somewhat  further  in

April,  reflecting additional unwinding of  the earlier surge  in prices of

food and energy.  Producer  prices for items other than  food and energy

had increased through April  at  a slower rate than in  1989.  By contrast,

consumer  prices  continued to rise in March at  a faster pace than in

1989.  Weather-related jumps  in prices  of  food and energy  accounted for

much of the pickup  in consumer price  inflation  in the first  quarter, but

prices  for a wide  range of  other goods  and services also  increased more

rapidly.  Labor  compensation, as measured by the  employment  cost  index,

rose at  a faster  rate over the twelve months ended in March than in the

year-earlier period;  wage increases  remained fairly stable,  but  the cost

of  benefits  jumped, only partly because  of the  January hike  in social

security  taxes.  Average hourly earnings  increased a little more  slowly

in  April, partly  reflecting a sharp drop in employment  in the  relatively

high-wage  construction  industry.

At  its meeting on March 27,  1990,  the Committee adopted a

directive that called  for maintaining the  existing degree of  pressure on

reserve positions  and that did not  include  any presumption regarding the

likely direction of  any  intermeeting adjustments  in policy.  The

Committee agreed that  some  firming or some  easing in  reserve  conditions

would be  appropriate during the intermeeting period  depending on

progress toward price  stability, the  strength of the business expansion,

the  behavior  of the monetary aggregates, and developments  in  foreign

exchange  and domestic  financial markets.  With unchanged reserve

conditions, M2  and M3 were  expected to grow at  annual  rates of about  6

and 4 percent  respectively over the period from March through June.

Open market operations  in the  intermeeting interval  since  the

March 27  meeting had been directed at  keeping  reserve conditions

essentially unchanged.  Adjustment plus  seasonal borrowing levels moved

up to about  $300  million by the  end of the  intermeeting period from the

$150  million range  prevailing initially,  reflecting a normal rise  in

seasonal  borrowing.  The  federal  funds  rate remained  in the  vicinity of

8-1/4  percent  over the period, although  funds  had tended to trade  a

little  below this level  since late  April as  shortfalls  in  federal tax

receipts  tended to keep nonborrowed reserves  at  higher-than-expected

levels.  Responding to  shifting sentiment  regarding the  strength of the

economy, inflation  prospects, and the  likelihood of a near-term

tightening of monetary policy,  other market  interest  rates  initially

rose  in the  intermeeting period  and then fell  sharply.  Short-term rates

declined a little  on balance over the  period while  rates  in  long-term

debt  markets were  somewhat  higher.

In  foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the

dollar  in terms of the other G-10  currencies  declined considerably over

the  intermeeting period.  Much of the decline  occurred following the

release  in early May of  weaker-than-expected U.S.  employment  data  for

April and the  related drop in  U.S.  interest  rates.  Foreign  interest

rates  showed mixed movements  over  the intermeeting period;  the  Japanese

stock market  rebounded  substantially from its  low  in early April.  The

dollar was  weak against  the German mark, which strengthened against most

currencies  as  developments  appeared to  relieve some  concerns  about  the

outlook  for  inflation  in Germany.  Very  late  in the  intermeeting period

the  dollar weakened against the  yen as well.

Growth of M2  slowed  further in April;  the expansion of this

aggregate  was  damped by the  sizable opportunity costs  of holding retail

deposits as  interest  rates  offered on these accounts continued to  lag

behind earlier increases  in market  rates.  At  thrift  institutions,

conservative rate-setting  reflected the  ongoing contraction of their

funding needs during a period of asset  reduction.  Banks  also held  down

their  deposit  rates,  as  inflows of  retail  deposits were  proving

sufficient  to fund  credit  expansion.  The  apparently steeper  contraction

of thrift  assets,  along with slow  credit  expansion at  banks, held down

overall needs  for  funds  at  depository  institutions  and resulted in

relatively weak M3  growth in April.  Expansion of M2  and M3  through

April was  a little  above  the midpoint  and around the lower end,

respectively, of the  ranges established by the  Committee  for  1990.

The  staff  projection prepared  for this meeting suggested that

the  economy was  likely to  expand at  a moderate  pace over the  balance of

the year.  Consumer demand, especially  for  services,  was  expected to be

a major  source of  support  for  continued growth of the  economy.  Business

capital  spending was projected to  increase  further  in  1990,  but  the

extent  of  the  rise  could be  limited  somewhat  by  low profit  margins

associated with  relatively  slow growth  in  final  demands  and  lower levels

of  capacity utilization.  Nonresidential  construction activity was

expected to  be  held  down by the  overbuilt  condition of  many commercial

real  estate markets  around  the  country along with greater caution on  the

part of  lenders.  Homebuilding was projected to be damped by the

-7-

somewhat  higher mortgage rates  now  in place.  Net  exports of goods  and

services were expected to increase only modestly in real  terms over the

rest  of the year.  The  projection assumed moderate restraint  on

expenditures at  all levels  of government.  Price  inflation was expected

to  ease  substantially in the months  ahead,  following the  bulge earlier

in the year, but  little  improvement  was anticipated in the  underlying

trend of  inflation over the  next  several  quarters and  reductions

in  price pressures might  ultimately  involve  some  additional pressures  in

financial markets.

In  the  Committee's discussion of the  economic  situation and

outlook, members  generally agreed that  the  current  information on

business conditions  pointed on balance to  relatively moderate  but

sustained economic expansion.  Final demands  appeared to be expanding

further, though  not  rapidly, and available  information suggested that

business  inventories  were quite lean.  Fiscal  policy was  an important

source of  uncertainty in the outlook, though there was  some  basis  for

optimism in light of the  discussions on deficit  reductions that  were

just  getting under way between the Administration and the Congress.

Credit  conditions  constituted another major area of uncertainty;  there

were  reports  of tighter  lending constraints, but  the evidence was

fragmentary and difficult  to assess  and on balance  seemed to  indicate

that  the effect  on the overall economy  remained quite limited.  Under

circumstances  in which the economy  seemed likely to retain appreciable

forward momentum, many members were  concerned about the outlook  for

inflation, given currently high levels  of  resource utilization and

information on cost  and price developments earlier  in the  year.  Recent

-8-

data  suggested some  relief  from the bulge in prices  in the first

quarter;  whether underlying  inflationary pressures had intensified was

debatable, but  the members generally agreed that  the prospects for

significant  reductions in inflation pressures  during the quarters

immediately ahead were  not  promising.

With regard to developments  in  specific sectors  of the economy,

members  expected growth in consumer  spending, notably  for services,  to

continue to provide the principal momentum for the expansion.  Exports

also might  expand, given the  outlook for  continuing growth in other

industrial  countries,  the prospects  for increasing,  if  still  limited,

demands  from Eastern Europe,  and more generally the  lagged effects of

the  sizable decline  in the  exchange value of  the dollar  from its  1989

high.  The  outlook for business investment expenditures was  less  clear;

recent  indicators  such as  new orders  for  capital equipment  and surveys

of  business investment plans  suggested continuing expansion--and

possibly some  quickening over the  near term--in  spending for plant and

equipment.  However, the outlook  for  office and other  commercial

building activity appeared less  favorable  in  light  of the  overbuilding

in many areas and indications  of tighter constraints  on the  availability

of  credit  to builders.  The  prospects for  housing construction also were

adversely affected by these  factors  as  well as  the effects  of higher

mortgage  rates.  Members  commented that  outside  the commercial building

and  real estate  sectors  and apart  from lending to finance  equity

retirements, there was  little  evidence  of more than  a mild, if  any,

curtailment  of  credit  to business  firms  in most parts  of the  country.

To  a considerable  extent, the  retrenchment  in business  lending appeared

-9-

to  reflect desirable  reassessments of credit  risks or  reduced demand for

financing.  Nonetheless, the possibility that  lenders might  restrict

credit  further and to a wider range  of borrowers  remained a potential

constraint on aggregate economic activity.  Currently low levels of

business inventories  could be viewed as  an element  of strength in the

outlook,  but  limited inventories  also implied that,  if aggregate  demands

were  to  strengthen materially, production  could accelerate  considerably

and  add to pressures  on productive  resources, especially given high

levels  of  resource  utilization in the United States  and apparently in

many  other  industrial nations.

With regard  to the  outlook  for prices  and wages,  the most

recently  available data  on economic activity and prices  had tended to

ease  concerns  that  inflationary pressures might  be  intensifying.

Producer prices  for  finished goods  had edged lower  in  recent months, and

other  key measures of  inflation were  expected to show  reduced increases

over  the months ahead as  sharp earlier  advances in food  and energy

prices  continued to  unwind.  Nonetheless,  there was  some  risk that  the

core  rate of  inflation,  excluding swings  in food and energy prices,

might edge  higher at  current levels  of resource utilization.  In this

regard,  some members  commented that  increases  in labor  compensation

costs  had tended to accelerate in recent  quarters and that  conditions  in

labor markets continued tight in many parts of the  country.  Prices of

many services,  notably for health care, were  still  increasing very

rapidly.  Commodity prices had been under sporadic upward pressure and

remained substantially above earlier levels.  The  decline in the value

of  the dollar  to its lowest  level  since  late  1988 on a weighted-average

-10-

basis,  if  sustained, could  reverse the  favorable  effects  of earlier

dollar appreciation.  Other members acknowledged the  potential  for a

persisting high rate  of  inflation, but  they continued to anticipate  some

progress toward a lower core  rate  of  inflation over time  if  their

expectations of  relatively moderate growth in economic  activity were

realized.  In  support  of this view, it  was  noted that  competition

remained  strong  in many markets  for goods,  including competition from

imports, and ongoing additions to  capacity in  some key  industries

experiencing  strong demand would help  to hold down  inflationary cost

pressures.  In addition, the  expansion of M2  at  a relatively subdued

pace  over an  extended period suggested that  monetary conditions were

consistent  with progress toward reducing inflation.

Turning to the conduct  of monetary policy in  the  intermeeting

period ahead,  nearly all of the members  supported a proposal to maintain

unchanged conditions  of  reserve  availability at  least  initially follow-

ing  today's meeting.  The members  generally agreed  that  unchanged

reserve conditions  could  reasonably be  expected to be  associated with

continued moderate  expansion in business  activity.  At the  same time,

they remained concerned about  the  lack  of  progress  against inflation,

and some  commented that  the need to contain  and ultimately to  reduce

inflation might well  require a firming  of policy at  some point.  Price

stability,  it was emphasized, was  a vital  objective of monetary policy

and was essential  to the achievement of  overall objectives for  the

economy.  However, recent  data  on the economy and prices provided  some

comfort  that  inflation pressures were not  building, and there were  some

downside risks  to the  economic outlook  stemming from conditions in

-11-

financial markets.  Growth of the monetary aggregates  had slowed

appreciably and,  while there was  considerable uncertainty, credit

conditions also  could be tightening with potential effects on  spending.

Partly in light  of these  developments,  some members stressed that  it  was

too  soon to  conclude  that  current monetary policy would not  have desired

anti-inflationary effects.  Under these circumstances, all  but one

member favored the retention of unchanged reserve conditions,  pending

additional  information that might  tilt  the risks toward greater price

pressures or a weaker  economy.

In the  course  of this discussion, members  referred to a staff

analysis  which  concluded that,  on the assumption of an unchanged degree

of  reserve pressure,  growth of both M2  and M3  was  likely to accelerate

somewhat  from the  recent  pace, with the cumulative  expansion of M3

moving that  aggregate more  comfortably  within the Committee's range  for

the  year.  Several members  observed that  while  the slower  growth of  M2

and M3  might be  explained at  least  in  part  by temporary developments,

notably the  sluggish adjustment  of  deposit  interest  rates  to earlier

increases  in short-term market  rates  and perhaps the effects of large

swings  in deposit  balances associated with April tax payments,  a failure

of  such  growth to pick  up  could be  a matter  of  increasing concern;  in

particular, persisting  sluggishness in monetary growth might  reflect  a

combination  of  underlying  weakness in  the  demand for  loans  in  a

softening economy and growing constraints  on the  availability of credit

to potential borrowers.  However, given the volatility of monetary

growth  rates,  members believed it was  premature to  reach a firm

conclusion  on this  issue.  Moreover,  despite  its  slowing in recent

-12-

months,  growth of M2  for the year to date  was  close  to the midpoint of

the  Committee's range,  reflecting relatively  robust  expansion in  late

1989  and early 1990.

With respect to possible  adjustments  in  the degree  of  reserve

pressure  during the period before  the  next  Committee meeting  in  early

July,  a majority  of the  members  expressed a preference  for  a directive

that  did not  bias prospective  operations toward tightening or  easing but

made an  intermeeting adjustment,  if  any,  equally likely  in  either

direction, depending on  economic and  financial  developments  and the

behavior of the monetary aggregates.  Other members preferred a

directive that  was  tilted toward possible tightening, given their  desire

to  respond promptly to  any  indications  of  greater inflationary pressures

and their  judgment  that  in the  current  inflationary environment  the next

policy move was  likely to  be  in the  tightening direction.  Some  of  these

members  commented that  such a bias  in  the directive  would tend, as  it

became  known, to  enhance  the credibility of  the  System's  anti-

inflationary policy and help  to make  that  policy more  effective over

time.  However,  given the  risks  to the economy  and the uncertainties in

the outlook, these  members also could accept  a symmetric  directive  with

regard to  intermeeting adjustments.

At  the  conclusion  of  the  Committee's discussion, all  except  one

member  indicated that  they preferred or  could accept  a directive  that

called  for  maintaining the existing degree  of  pressure  on  reserve

positions  and that  did not  include any presumption about  the  likely

direction of  adjustments in  policy,  if any, during the intermeeting

period.  With regard to  the  factors that  were  important  in  considering

-13-

the  need for any intermeeting changes in  reserve conditions, the

Committee  continued to give primary weight to those bearing on the

inflation outlook.  Accordingly, slightly more or slightly less pressure

on  reserve positions would be appropriate  during the period ahead

depending  on progress toward price  stability, the strength of the

business  expansion, the  behavior of the monetary aggregates, and

developments in foreign exchange  and domestic financial markets.  The

maintenance of  steady  reserve conditions was  expected to be  consistent

with  somewhat  slower monetary expansion in the  current  quarter than the

members  had anticipated  at  the  time of  the March meeting, including

growth of M2 and M3  at  annual rates  of  about  4 and 3 percent

respectively over  the three-month period ending in June.  The

intermeeting range  for  the  federal  funds  rate,  which provides one

mechanism for initiating  consultation of the  Committee when its

boundaries are  persistently exceeded, was  left  unchanged  at  6 to 10

percent.

At  the  conclusion of the meeting, the  following domestic policy

directive was  issued to the  Federal Reserve Bank  of New York:

The  information  reviewed at this meeting suggests

that  economic  activity is  continuing to expand
moderately.  Total nonfarm payroll employment
increased more  slowly  in March and April after  sharp
advances  earlier  in the year;  its  average growth thus
far  this  year has  been above that  in the  second half
of  1989,  in part  because of the  hiring of temporary
workers for the  census.  In April,  the  civilian
unemployment  rate moved up to 5.4  percent.  Industrial
production declined in April,  reflecting what  appears
to be a temporary cutback in  the manufacture of motor
vehicles.  Consumer spending  has been sluggish  on
balance  in  recent months;  outlays  for goods have been
weak  while  expenditures  for services  have  remained
strong.  Business  spending for  equipment  has been
rising, but  construction activity, both residential
and nonresidential, appears  to have  weakened after a

-14-

temporary boost early in the year.  The nominal U.S.
merchandise trade deficit narrowed somewhat  in January
and February  from its  average rate  in the  fourth
quarter.  Consumer prices continued to rise  at  a
faster pace  in March than in 1989;  producer prices
were  down somewhat  further  in April, reflecting
additional  unwinding of the  earlier surge  in prices of
food and  energy.  The  latest  data on employment  costs
suggest  some deterioration  in underlying trends.

Short-term interest  rates  have  declined a little

on balance  since the  Committee meeting on March 27,
while rates in long-term debt markets have  risen
slightly over the period.  In  foreign exchange
markets, the  trade-weighted value of the dollar in
terms of the  other G-10  currencies declined  con-
siderably over  the intermeeting period.

Growth of M2  slowed in April and that  of M3
remained relatively weak.  Through April, expansion  of
M2  and M3  was  a little  above the midpoint and  around
the lower end, respectively,  of the  ranges established
by the  Committee  for 1990.

The Federal Open Market  Committee  seeks monetary

and financial  conditions that  will  foster price
stability,  promote growth in output  on a sustainable
basis, and contribute to an improved pattern of inter-
national transactions.  In  furtherance  of these
objectives,  the Committee at  its meeting in  February
established ranges  for  growth of M2  and M3  of 3 to 7
percent  and 2-1/2 to  6-1/2  percent  respectively,
measured from the  fourth quarter of  1989 to the fourth
quarter of 1990.  The monitoring  range  for growth of
total domestic nonfinancial  debt was  set  at  5 to  9
percent  for the year.  The behavior of the monetary
aggregates  will continue  to be evaluated in the light
of progress toward price level  stability, movements in
their velocities, and  developments  in the  economy and
financial markets.

In the  implementation of policy  for the immediate

future, the Committee  seeks  to maintain the existing
degree  of pressure on reserve positions.  Taking
account  of progress toward price  stability, the
strength of the business expansion, the behavior of
the monetary aggregates,  and developments in  foreign
exchange and domestic financial markets,  slightly
greater  reserve  restraint or slightly lesser  reserve
restraint  would be acceptable  in the  intermeeting
period.  The  contemplated reserve  conditions are
expected to be  consistent with growth of M2  and M3
over the period from March through June at  annual

-15-

rates  of about  4 and 3 percent  respectively.  The
Chairman may call  for  Committee  consultation if  it
appears to the Manager  for Domestic Operations  that
reserve conditions  during the period before  the  next
meeting are  likely to  be  associated with a federal
funds  rate  persistently outside a range  of  6 to  10
percent.

Votes  for this  action:  Messrs.  Greenspan,

Corrigan, Angell,  Boehne,  Boykin,  Johnson,
Kelley, LaWare, Ms. Seger,  and Mr. Stern.
Vote  against  this  action:  Mr. Hoskins.

Mr.  Hoskins dissented because he  preferred a tightening of

reserve  conditions  to  help  assure  that  progress  would be  made toward a

reduced rate  of  inflation and  the Committee's  ultimate objective  of

price  stability.  Although price  pressures appeared  to  be  receding  from

the pace  of  early in  the  year,  inflation remained  too high.  He

recognized that  M2  growth had  slowed and there were  potential  financial

developments  that might  have  adverse consequences  for  the expansion, but

he  believed that  growth of  M2  in the bottom half of  the  1990  target

range  would be  desirable in  order  to  achieve a gradual  reduction in

inflation  in  1991  and thereafter.  Moreover, a timely move toward

greater monetary  restraint  would enhance the  credibility and effective-

ness  of monetary policy  in  countering the persisting  strength of

inflationary pressures.

