SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY  ON CURRENT  ECONOMIC  CONDITIONS

BY  FEDERAL  RESERVE  DISTRICT

September  1990

TABLE OF  CONTENTS

SUMMARY ..... 

...............................................  ........ 

i

First  District--Boston........................................... 

I-1

Second  District--New York.............................  ............ 

II-

Third  District--Philadelphia ...  ............................. 

...... 

III-1

Fourth  District--Cleveland......................... 

...... .... ....... 

IV-1

Fifth  District--Richmond.......... ............  .................... .

V-

Sixth District--Atlanta .......................................... 

VI-1

Seventh District--Chicago............................................ 

VII-1

Eighth  District--St.  Louis............  ............................. 

. VIII-1

Ninth  District--Minneapolis  ..  ........ 

.............  ........................... 
IX-1

Tenth District--Kansas  City......................... 

... ............ 

X-1

Eleventh  District--Dallas........................................... 

XI-1

Twelfth  District--San  Francisco.................................... 

XII-1

i

SUMMARY*

Economic  activity is expanding more  slowly  or  declining  in most  Federal

Reserve districts,  but  several  districts  report  continued, modest  growth.

Weakness  is most  apparent  in the  northeastern  and mid-Atlantic  districts.

Although  patterns of  consumer spending vary widely among  districts,  rates  of

increase  are  generally  slowing.  The districts'  assessments  of manufacturing

activity range from moderate  expansion  to  absolute  declines.  On  average,

however, there  seems  to  be  little  movement  in orders  or production.  Signs  of

a construction downturn  are widespread,  but  not  universal.  While  drought

persists  in some  agricultural  areas,  soil  moisture conditions  are  good or  at

least  improved  in most  reporting  districts.  So  far, the  recent  increase  in

oil  prices  has  not  affected domestic oil  and gas  drilling.  Several  district

reports  of credit markets  focus  on  soft loan  demand  and  some  district banks

offer examples of  tighter credit  conditions.

Consumer Spending

Retail  sales  patterns vary  widely among  districts,  but  growth appears  to

be  ebbing.  While Minneapolis  cites  "good"  sales  increases,  Atlanta  and  Boston

note  flat  to modest  expansion.  New York  and  Philadelphia report absolute

declines  in dollar volumes  from  a year earlier.  Sales  of big  ticket  items  are

said  to  be particularly  soft,  but  clothing  sales  continue to  show  strength  in

some  districts.  Several  districts mention  the negative  impacts  of  higher

*Prepared  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank of Dallas  and  based on  information
gathered  before  September  11,  1990.  This document  summarizes  comments
received  from businesses  and other  contacts outside the  Federal  Reserve
and  is not  a commentary on  the  views  of Federal  Reserve officials.

ii

oil  prices.  Despite demand weakness  in some districts, most  retailers  say

their  inventories are  at  desired  levels.

Auto  sales  are up  in Minneapolis  and  Cleveland but  are  weak or  slowing

in Atlanta, St.  Louis,  Kansas  City,  and  San  Francisco.  One district  says  that

credit  tightening  has caused  some  potential  auto  buyers  difficulty  in finding

financing.

Manufacturing

Demand for manufactured  products shows  little  overall  change  in either

direction.  Minneapolis  and  San  Francisco  characterize their manufacturing

sectors'  performances  as mixed, while  growth  in Atlanta  is moderate except  for

construction  and  auto-related  products.  Orders  to  Boston,  Richmond  and

Philadelphia  firms  are down,  and  sales  have  not  changed lately  in the Dallas

District.

Sales  patterns differ  greatly among  industries.  Atlanta, Chicago,

Cleveland,  Dallas,  and  San  Francisco mention  strength  in demand  for primary

metals, while  Boston  and  Dallas  note weakness  in orders  for computer,  and  some

construction-related products.  Some  districts report  increased  producer

uncertainty about  future  demand.

In some cases,  export demand  appears  to  be  stronger than domestic  sales.

Richmond notes exports  of manufactures  as  among  the  few district manufacturing

indicators  that  are  not  negative.  Minneapolis says  that  strong  foreign  demand

for producers'  equipment has  more than  compensated  for declines  in domestic

orders.  In the Boston  district, however, export  sales  are  below a year

earlier.

With  respect to  changing costs  of operation,  a number  of districts cite

rising  freight  costs  in the  wake of energy  price  hikes.  Several  districts,

iii

including  Philadelphia, Richmond,  and  Chicago report  increasing  prices  of

inputs,  but  Atlanta  reports  prices  of  industrial  commodities  as  steady.

Construction  and  Real  Estate

References  to  declining construction activity  and weakening  real  estate

markets  are  common.  Increases  in homebuilding  in the  Dallas  and  Minneapolis

markets  are  exceptions,  but  Minneapolis  also notes  marked declines  in overall

construction  contract values  in the  Minneapolis-St.  Paul  area.  While  Kansas

City mentions  recent  upturns  in housing  starts,  homebuilding  there  remains

below  a year earlier.  According to  the  San  Francisco  report,  construction

activity  is slowing  in many parts  of the  west.  Moreover,  Boston,  Chicago,  St.

Louis  and  New York all  refer to  weakening residential  construction or weak

housing  sales  and  Cleveland  notes  high  office  and  retail  vacancy rates.

Several  reports  say that  respondents  expect  continued  construction weakness  in

the  near  future.

Agriculture

Reports on  agricultural  production  are generally positive,  in

part,  because  the  soil  moisture problems mentioned  in the  last  beige  book  have

ameliorated.  In the  Richmond District, rainfall  in August  was mostly above

normal  and  soil  moisture  levels  are now  said to  be  adequate,  but  the dry

weather  in  June  has  lowered corn  yields.  The Dallas  District reports that

rainfall  has  improved  soil  conditions  there.  Crop  conditions are  also good  in

the  Chicago, Kansas City  and Minneapolis districts.  Inadequate  soil  moisture

continues  to  impede crop  development  in portions of the  St.  Louis  district.

The St.  Louis  and  Dallas  districts  discuss  the  negative effects  upon  rice

prices  of  the  embargo on  sales to  Iraq.  St.  Louis  also  notes that  recent

increases  in freight and  insurance  costs  have discouraged  exports  to  other

Middle  Eastern countries.  Several  district reports mention  generally  falling

iv

grain  prices.

Energy

Despite marked  increases  in oil  prices  in the  wake of  Iraq's  invasion  of

Kuwait,  reporting districts  say  they have  seen  few effects on  drilling  so  far.

Dallas  and Kansas  City  note  recent  declines  in drilling  activity, although  the

rig  count  remains  above  a year  earlier  in both  districts.  Moreover,  industry

observers  in both  districts  say they do not expect  the  recent  price  shock to

have much  of an  effect  until  oil  prices  remain high  for an  extended period  and

natural  gas  prices  rise  as well.

Finance  and  Credit

Most  reporting districts  say that  lending  activity is soft.  Atlanta,

Cleveland,  and  Philadelphia all  mention recent  slowdowns  in lending, while New

York notes  signs  of weaker demand  for business  loans.  St.  Louis  cites  slow

loan  growth at  the  large  banks,  but Kansas  City district  bankers  report

moderate  increases  in loan demand  - including  demand  for commercial  and

industrial,  consumer,  and  home mortgage  loans.  Financial  organizations  in

several  districts note  tightening  credit  policies for at  least  some  borrower

groups.  Banks'  and thrifts'  concerns  over the viability of economic growth  is

said  to have  discouraged some  lending.

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

Economic activity  continues  to  slow  in the  First  District.

Retailers and wholesalers  generally report  flat or marginally higher sales

compared to  a year  ago, but  some are recording  substantial declines.  Most

manufacturers  are  finding 1990  tougher than expected.  A majority of

manufacturing  contacts  face sales below year-ago levels,  and several are

eating  into  their order backlogs.  Three-fourths have cut  employment

levels,  and half are paring  their capital spending plans.  Neither

retailers nor manufacturers see reason to  expect  improvement during the

next 6 to  12  months, although some retailers  believe their promotional

activities or  cost  controls provide a buffer against the poor  economic

climate.

Retail

For  the  most part,  retailers  and wholesalers  report  flat or

marginally higher sales  compared to  a year ago.  Only pharmaceutical sales

are  said to  be rising  at  a double-digit rate.  Some retailers are

experiencing declines  of up  to  20  to  30  percent  for building materials and

higher-priced clothing.  Respondents generally note that  consumers  are

emphasizing essentials, trading down, and  shopping around  for bargains.

Sales in the northern areas are holding up better than  in the  three

southern states  and the  southern parts of New Hampshire and Maine.

Respondents report  little  increase in prices,  and many durable goods

prices  are down from a year ago.  About half the sample  reported that  gross

margins are stable,  and half declining.

I-2

In the  context of much negative economic news,  the majority  of

respondents expressed satisfaction with successful strategies  in

advertising and promotions,  or  in  control  of  inventory and capital costs.

No  respondent  expects  an upturn soon.  The majority think that  demand will

be  flat  for  another year, but a significant minority expect  further

declines before the  economy stabilizes.

Manufacturing

According  to First  District manufacturers, this  year  is  turning out

to  be  "rougher  than expected."  A majority of these  firms  report  that

shipments are  flat  to  down from year-ago levels,  with declines  ranging from

2 to  10 percent.  The respondents  with sales  increases  saw gains of 2 to  6

percent.  Companies reporting slowing orders  or  dwindling backlogs

outnumber  those  seeing  improvement.

Products  reported to  be  facing  relatively strong demand include

"recession proof" consumer necessities, plastics  for  the auto  industry

(where current production levels may reflect strike preparations) and

equipment with long  lead times,  such as  power-generating and medical

systems.  Demand is weak for paper  goods  and for  products  related to  the

computer, construction or  defense industries.  Even the  export markets

appear less  robust.  Only one  firm reports  strong  export growth  (albeit

slower than  in  1989);  others mentioning  exports  say they are  flat  or down

versus  their  1989 performance.  Accordingly, while a majority  of contacts

describe  their inventory  levels as  satisfactory, a sizable minority  find

them excessive  and are  trying  to  bring  them down.

In this  environment,  all  respondents describe materials prices  as

stable or below 1989  levels  so  far.  They mention declines  in prices  for

metals and computer  components  in particular.  By  contrast,  in  the

I-3

aftermath of recent  oil price  increases,  plastics prices  are expected to

rise by year-end.  As for  selling prices, while discounting prevails  in the

computer industry,  one-half of all respondents have raised prices  in 1990,

generally by 3 to  5 percent.

Employment and capital  spending plans  are being cut.  Three-fourths

of the First  District manufacturing respondents have reduced their

employment levels  - by 2 to  15  percent - during  1990.  Over one-fourth

expect  additional  layoffs before year-end.  Most contacts had budgeted

capital spending  for  1990  to  be  equal  to  or  less  than 1989  levels.  Half

have now pared these  spending plans or  have made "judicious delays."

A minority of First District manufacturers contacted  expect  1991  to

be  flat with 1990.  The rest  are less  sanguine and,  "seeing problems

everywhere,"  are revising their  forecasts downward.  They cite the  bite of

decreased defense spending, deferred  capital spending, declining consumer

confidence, high debt  levels,  conservative banks,  and, most  recently,

uncertainty about the  Middle East  and the  price of oil.

Residential Real Estate

First  District  realtors agree that  the  real  estate market  is  slow

this  summer.  A general uneasiness about the  regional  economy  is  the most

frequently cited cause.  Realtors  also  feel  that  recent world  events  and

uncertainty over  the national economy have  contributed to  the slowdown.

Prices  are  falling;  sellers are  listing their homes at  more realistic

levels  in order  to move them, and  smaller homes  (for  first-time buyers) are

selling better than larger homes.  New contruction has slowed  considerably

since  this  time  last  year.  Realtors  do not expect  an upswing  in home sales

this  fall unless the  regional economy turns  around.

II-I

Second District--New York

Developments  in the  Second District  economy continued mixed to

somewhat  soft  during  recent  weeks.  On  the positive  side,  unemployment  rates

remained below the  national  average  and the pace  of  office  leasing was  good

in  much of  the  region.  Retailers  reported disappointing  sales  results,

however,  and homebuilders  reported no  improvement  in market  conditions.

Most  respondents  surveyed at  small  and medium-size banks  described current

economic  conditions  as  soft  or  slow.

Consumer  Spending

District  retailers  reported disappointing sales  results  since  they

were  last  contacted and a worsening of  conditions  as  the  period progressed.

All  our contacts  reported  year-over-year declines  in August  as  consumers

seemed  increasingly reluctant  to spend.  This  compares  with over-the-year

sales  gains  that were somewhat  below plan but,  in most  cases,  positive

during  July.  Big ticket  items  such  as  furniture  and  rugs  were especially

hard-hit  and other  types  of  home  furnishing were  also  weak.  Sales  of men's

and women's  apparel  showed  some improvement,  though.

Over-the-year sales  results  in  July  ranged widely--from -6 percent to

+14  percent--but  in August  results  clustered in  a -10  percent  to  -2 percent

range.  Despite  the below-plan  sales  volume,  however,  inventories  were

reported  at  comfortable  levels  and, in  some  cases,  below plan.  One retailer

did remark  that  if  consumer  spending  continues  weak,  a cutback in  the

targeted level  of inventories  will probably take place.

Residential Construction  and Real Estate

District  homebuilders report  no  improvement  in market  conditions

during recent weeks.  In  downstate New York and northern  New Jersey

residential  construction activity  continues  to be  very slow and respondents

II-2

do  not anticipate  an  improvement  in the  foreseeable  future.  Housing  starts

have  also  declined in  some  upstate New York  areas,  but the  over-the-year

slowdown was  from a previously high  level  of  activity and has  not been as

severe as  in  other parts  of  the  region.  The  shortage  of  credit  for

acquisition  and construction  loans  continues  to  be a problem.  In  addition,

some  respondents  noted that  potential  buyers  are  hesitant because  of

softness  in the  economy  and uncertainty  about  the  impact  of the Middle  East

crisis.

The  pace  of  office  leasing  remained good in much  of  the District

during  recent weeks  as  tenants  continued to  avail themselves  of  generous

landlord  concessions.  Leasing in midtown Manhattan was the  highest  in

several months  and leasing  in downtown Manhattan  also expanded.  However,

with the  addition  of  two newly  completed buildings  in mid-Manhattan, the

midtown vacancy rate  moved somewhat  higher though  the  downtown  rate held

steady.  Westchester County  reports  a reduction  in the  amount  of  leasing

activity  as  very  few  large-scale  transactions have  recently taken place,  and

the  absorption  of vacant  space  in  northern New Jersey has  also  slowed.

Other Business  Activity

District  unemployment rates  remained below the national  average  in

August.  New York's  rate  declined to  5.0 percent  from 5.3  percent in  July

while New Jersey's  rate  was  unchanged  at  4.8 percent.  Employment  conditions

vary  greatly  within the District, however,  with  increased weakness  in the

New York metropolitan  area  coupled with  strength  in  some  other  areas.  A

recent BLS  study found that  during the  first  five  months  of  this  year  a loss

of  several  thousand private  sector  jobs  occurred in New York City  and

northeastern New Jersey--the  first  drop in  local private  employment  since

1982.  On the  other  hand,  some  areas in  upstate New York  and parts  of  New

Jersey  have reportedly been experiencing  labor shortages.

II-3

The percentage  of  Buffalo purchasing managers  reporting  an increase  in

new orders  rebounded in August  after a sharp drop in  July.  The percentage

with  stable  or  greater production also  rose.  In  the July  survey of

Rochester managers,  however,  only 25 percent  of  respondents  anticipated

improved conditions  over the  next  three months,  down  from 47  percent in

June.  The  outlook  for  capital investment  in  both areas  was described as

generally weak.

Financial  Developments

Most  respondents  surveyed at  small  and medium-size banks  in the

District  described current  economic conditions  as  soft  or  slow.  All  of the

banks  that make business  loans  reported weaker  demand, while  demand for

consumer and home  equity  loans  has been mixed.  Although  several bankers

stated that  real  estate loan  demand had declined  significantly, two bankers

noted increased activity in August  after a decline  in July.

Just  under  half  of the bankers  surveyed  said that  they had begun  to

tighten credit  standards  on  all types  of  loans.  Over sixty percent  of those

making business  loans  had tightened standards  on  those  loans.  While  none  of

the  surveyed  banks  have raised  interest  rates  as  a means  of tightening

credit,  about half  have reduced the maximum lines  of  credit available  to new

borrowers  and  increased collateral  requirements.  One banker  stated that  his

bank will  scrutinize  loan  applications more  carefully because  of  an

anticipated recession.  All  of the bankers tightening  credit gave  a less

favorable  economic  outlook  as  the main reason,  and almost  three quarters

cited a deterioration  in the  quality of  their loan  portfolios as  well.

About  half mentioned that  they had faced more  loan  defaults  and  increasing

regulatory pressures.  Of  the banks  which had not  tightened credit  only one

expected to do so  in  the near  future.  Most  of the  others  will  continue to

lend both because  they have  an  adequate supply  of  funds,  and because

qualified borrowers  are  still  in the  market.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT  - PHILADELPHIA

Economic activity in the  Third District appeared to be  slowing across  the

board in August and early September.  Manufacturers reported a continuing decline

in business, leading them to trim employment.  Retailers generally indicated that

sales  in  August  fell  from  the  prior  month  and  year,  and  they  said  that  the

slowdown  was  continuing  in  September.  Bankers  reported  a  decline  in  overall

lending  triggered by  a  falloff  in  business  and  real  estate  lending;  consumer

lending continued  to  increase, but  the  pace  of growth was  slackening.

Business  contacts expect the  downward trend in business to  continue.  For

the most part, they do  not have positive views regardless  of the  outcome  of  the

Middle  East  crisis.  Manufacturers  forecast  declining  activity  over  the  next

six  months,  and  they  plan  to  trim  capital  spending  and  to  make  more  cuts  in

employment. 

Retailers  say  consumer  confidence  is  ebbing,  and  they  expect

consumer  spending  this  fall  to  drop  below  the  year-ago  level,  in  real  terms.

Bankers  anticipate continued  declines  in business and real  estate  lending, and

they expect consumer loan growth to slacken further.  In general, bankers expect

business  to  decline  well  into  next year.

MANUFACTURING

According to Third District manufacturers contacted in late August business

was generally declining.  Half of the  firms  queried reported a drop  in activity,

and  almost  half  indicated  that  business  was  flat;  very  few  were  experiencing

improvement.  Among the major manufacturing industries  in the district, slowing

business  was  reported  by  producers  of  lumber,  rubber  and  plastics,  primary

metals,  nonelectrical  machinery,  and  transportation  equipment.  Business  was

generally  steady  for  makers  of  apparel,  textiles,  electrical  machinery,  and

fabricated metal products.  Improvement was common only among chemical companies

III-2

and producers  of  stone, clay,  and glass products.

For  the  Third  District  manufacturing  sector  as  a  whole,  shipments  and

orders were  declining, prompting area  firms  to  cut working hours  and payrolls.

In particular, makers  of  consumer  goods  reported  that  cutbacks  in  orders  from

retailers  were  becoming  more  widespread. 

Despite  the  drop  in  activity,

inventories  were  edging down, overall.

The balance of opinion among Third District manufacturers contacted in late

August  is  that  business  will  continue  to  ease  over  the  next  two  quarters.

Overall,  area firms plan to make further reductions  in employment  over the fall

and winter months,  and  they plan to  trim capital  spending.

Despite their  assessment  that business  is  slowing,  and will  continue  to

do  so,  manufacturers  reported  spreading  increases  in  input  prices,  and  they

expect  further  hikes. 

Most  indicated  that  cost  increases,  current  and

anticipated, are  for specialized  inputs  used directly  in  the  production of the

goods they make, and not necessarily for petroleum-based materials or for energy.

RETAIL

Third District retailers contacted in early September generally indicated

that  sales  in  August  slowed  from  their  early  summer  rate  and  that  the  dollar

volume of sales  for  the month was below that of August of last year.  Most also

said that  sales  in  the  first week of  September were below the  year-ago period.

According  to  merchants  the  slowdown  has  affected  all  categories  of  goods,

including back-to-school merchandise.

Retailers said they believe consumer confidence is  ebbing, and they expect

the rest of the  fall season to be slow.  The consensus of forecasts is  that sales

through  the  rest  of  the  year,  in  current  dollars,  will  only  equal  the  year-

earlier period.  Store officials did not express concern about current inventory

levels, but they were being very cautious  in their orders to  suppliers, and they

III-3

said extensive price markdowns are a possibility later in the season if consumer

spending declines  much further.

FINANCE

Total  loan volume outstanding at major Third District banks has  declined

since mid-July, and bankers contacted in early September said the downtrend was

continuing.  Commercial and industrial lending was edging down, according to bank

loan  officers,  partly  due  to  implementation  of  tighter  credit  standards  but

mainly because  of  a falloff  in  demand  for  business  credit.  Real  estate  loan

volume was  declining as  payoffs  reduced  outstandings  at  area banks while  they

were booking virtually no new real  estate-based loans  except home equity credit

lines.  Bankers generally reported increases  in personal lending, but they said

the  rate  of growth appeared  to be  slipping.  Auto  loans  were  declining at  most

banks, while credit card lending was described as  flat to up slightly by bankers.

Looking ahead, Third District bankers expect total loan volume to continue

to  fall.  Several banks  noted that requests  for business  financing, especially

for  capital  investment, were  tapering off.  Most of the bankers  contacted  said

they anticipate flat or declining economic activity through the rest of this year

and  into  next, and  they  expect business  lending  to  shrink  over  the  same  time

period.  They  also  expect  real  estate  lending  to  continue  to  fade,  and  they

anticipate  slackening consumer  loan demand.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT  - CLEVELAND

Summary.  Fourth District  respondents expect  that  the  economic expansion

will be  sustained at  least  through the  final quarter  of 1991,  despite

short-run effects  of the  oil-price  shock.  The worst of the  inflation bubble

is  expected  to occur next quarter.  The  oil-price  shock is  expected to weaken

consumer  spending  further, but District  retailers  generally report their

August  sales  turned out  to be better  than expected.  Manufacturers are

cautious  about  short-term prospects  for  output, but generally acknowledge  that

effects of  the  oil-price  shock so  far have been relatively minimal.  Lending

activity by banks  and thrifts  appears to have  slowed further  in recent weeks.

The National Economy.  District  respondents  generally expect that  the

expansion will be  sustained at  least  through 1991,  despite short-term

dampening effects of  the  oil-price  shock.  A panel  of 21  Fourth District

economists  expects  that  growth in  real GNP will  slow to  about 1% between

1989:IVQ and 1990:IVQ, which is  about one-half the  increase  they expected last

May.  Only a handful expect  a two  to  three  quarter contraction in real  GNP,  of

1% to  3% at annual rates,  beginning either in  1990:IIIQ or 1990:IVQ, and

extending into  1991:IQ. For 1991,  the panel  expects  slow but  steadily rising

growth in  output  from the  first  quarter through the  fourth quarter.  The

median forecast of  real GNP  shows  growth of 1.9%  for  the  year,  somewhat less

than they expected last May.  There are  no  recession forecasts  for 1991.

Inflation Outlook.  The  recent jump  in  crude  oil prices  is  generally

expected to have temporary effects  on inflation.  An  inflation bubble  is

expected between 1990:IIIQ and 1991:IQ, with  the worst of  inflation expected

to be  at nearly a 5% annual rate next  quarter.  Thereafter, inflation is

IV-2

expected to  revert to  a 4% rate  through the balance  of the  1991.  While most

of the  panel of  21  forecasters  expects  a temporary burst  in prices at  slightly

below a 5% rate,  several expect that  the  GNP implicit-price deflator will rise

between a 5% and 9.5%  rate  into  early 1991 before moderating.

Consumer  Spending.  The oil-price  shock has weakened  the near-term outlook

for  real  consumer  spending, according to  the  Fourth District panel  of

forecasters.  They now believe  that  real  consumer spending between 1990:IIQ

and 1990:IVQ will  increase by about  1% instead of the  2% they  expected last

May.  Nevertheless,  sales  reported by retailers  and producers of consumer

goods  in August were  generally as  good as,  or better than,  sales  in July.

Department store  retailers  in  this  District are  less  optimistic  about

sales  prospects for  the  fall  season.  Most report, however,  that  sales  in

August rose  from July, but that  increases were  smaller  than in  the previous

month.  Retailers  generally expect  that price promotions  will be necessary  to

sustain sales  over  the next  few months.  Retailers  in  Cleveland report  that

their back-to-school  sales  in August were  as  good as,  or better  than,

sales  last year.  Auto retailers  report August sales were  about as  expected,

and, in  some  cases,  better than in July.  Some  report a step-up  in  consumer

interest  in  fuel-efficient  cars,  and most  dealers  report buyers  are  still

leaning toward more  expensive  rather  than mid-priced cars.

According to  some  auto  producers,  car sales  in August were  better than

they expected in their pre-oil-shock forecasts.  Some believe  that  the  timing

of  the  consumer confidence  surveys may have biased the  survey results,  and

expect  future  surveys  to  show some  recovery in  consumer confidence.

Manufacturing.  District  respondents  in manufacturing and utilities  are

typically cautious about  short-term prospects  for production and profits

IV-3

because  of uncertainties  over the  oil  situation.  They report no  unusual

deferments  or  cancellations  of  orders  or  spending in  response to  the  oil-price

shock.  They emphasize a  lessened dependence on oil,  a  more  efficient capital

stock that has  been installed in  anticipation of even higher  real  prices  for

oil  than at  present, and  the  relatively small price  increase  in  crude  oil  now

compared with episodes  in  the  1970s.

The  steel  industry  is  still  operating at  close  to  effective  capacity, and

producers  report a  strong third quarter  for orders  and production.  A  producer

reports  that orders  for October  are being booked at  a  good pace.  There  is  a

tone  of  less confidence  over the  short-term outlook because  of uncertainty

about the  effects  of  the  oil  situation on  the auto  and  appliance  industries.

Steel producers point  out  that  their  industry  is  more energy  efficient now

than even  five years ago.  Crude-oil  costs  are  a relatively  small  part of

production costs,  but  the  added fuel  cost will hurt  already squeezed profit

margins because  additional  costs cannot be passed  through  to  steel  consumers.

Some  capital-goods producers are  less optimistic  about  short-term output

and spending plans, because  they expect  that  the  uncertainty  over the  oil

situation will  temporarily erode business  confidence.  Some  expect  that  there

could be  a  temporary  deferring, or postponing,  of short-lead-time  equipment

from this  year  into early next year.  They also  emphasize  that  capital  stock

additions  in recent years anticipated real  oil  prices even higher than at

present prices.

Auto production next quarter  will  likely exceed new car sales,  barring

work stoppages, but  dealers'  caution about holding inventories  and

deterioration  in consumer  confidence  are  likely to be  constraints  on auto

output plans.  Light  truck output will be hampered by a  100-day  inventory.

IV-4

Heavy-duty truck output  is  reviving slowly  from a trough in  late  1989  and

early 1990,  and output  this quarter will  likely be  the best so  far  this  year.

A major electric  power utility  in Ohio believes  that  the  effect of the

oil-price  shock  is  minimal because  their  facilities have become  marginal users

of  crude  oil.  Also, more  efficient energy use by the utility's  industrial

accounts  have sharply reduced  the  effects  of oil price  increases.

Financial Developments.  Some banks  and thrifts  report a further  slowing

in  lending activity  in recent weeks.  Mortgage  interest  rate  increases  of at

least one-half point on  fixed-rate mortgages  since  early August have dulled

mortgage lending.  Some  lenders  also  state  that  concerns  about rising

delinquencies and  increasing nonperforming loans  that  are reported nationally

are  contributing to more  cautious  lending policies.  While  some  expect

near-term cutbacks  in  consumer spending,  they  also believe  that  consumers will

not  curtail spending  as much as  most  forecasters  expect.

High office and retail vacancy rates  in many metropolitan centers,

coupled with tightened lending terms,  have moved some  developers  to  shift

their  operations  into  other kinds  of construction.  A large  shopping mall

developer, for  example, will increasingly focus  on construction of residential

communities. Another developer has been moving  into apartment construction

from office building.

FIFTH  DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview

District economic  activity slowed  somewhat  in recent  weeks.  Retail

stores,  tourist  areas,  and manufacturing  plants  reported that  business

conditions  softened.  Higher oil  prices  raised  manufacturers' costs and  pushed

up  prices  for finished goods.  At financial  institutions,  the demand for

consumer  loans  fell  slightly.  In most  District areas  that  are  highly sensitive

to  defense  spending,  business  continued  to  slow.  In some local  economies

heavily dependent  on  military personnel,  the  Mideast deployment  crimped

consumer demand.  On  a positive note,  exports  rose  more  than  imports  at

District  ports,  and  prospects  for District  farmers  are generally  good.

Consumer  Spending

Retail  activity  apparently  softened  in August while  profit margins  shrank.

Responses  to  our regular mail  survey  of retailers  indicated  that  sales,

especially of big  ticket  items,  declined  from July  to August.  Retail

employment was  also  down  from our  previous survey.  Two-thirds of our  survey

respondents reported  increases  in the  prices  they paid, while only one-third

noted  increases  in the  prices  they charged.

District tourism was  lackluster in the  last  month of the  summer season.

Our telephone  survey of hotels, motels,  and  resorts  indicated  a slower August

and  Labor Day weekend  than  a year ago.  Respondents  who experienced

declines  blamed  a generally weaker economy.  Only one resort manager thought

that  higher gasoline  prices  kept  tourists away.  Most of  those surveyed

reported that  fall  bookings were  about  even  with last  year's.  Respondents

remained  optimistic  about  tourist  activity in coming  months,  but  they were less

so than  in our previous  survey.

Manufacturing

Our regular mail  survey  showed  that manufacturing  activity slowed  from a

month  earlier.  All  survey  indicators except prices  and  new export  orders

declined.  Almost  half of the producers  identified poor  sales  as  the most

important  problem they  faced.

Virtually all  manufacturers were adversely  affected by higher crude  oil

prices.  Raw materials prices  and  transportation costs  rose  for all  but  a few

respondents.  To  adjust  to  these  increased expenses,  half said they had  raised

or would  raise their prices,  a third  said they would  try to decrease other

nonemployment  costs,  and  one-tenth planned to  cut  employment.

Manufacturers'  assessments  of  current conditions  and  their forecasts were

more  pessimistic  in August than  in July.  A larger majority believed  that  their

local  economies  and  the  national  economy weakened  in the latest  month,  and  only

one-fifth  now expect business  conditions  to improve  in the next  six months.

Ports

District  port activity continued  to  shift  toward exports, which  rose  in

August  from July and  from a year ago.  Imports  were down from July  but  were

generally unchanged  from a year ago.  All  three major District  ports--

Baltimore, Charleston,  and  Hampton Roads  (Norfolk)--expect exports  to  increase

faster than  imports  in coming months.

The volume of  coal  exports has  apparently  not yet been  affected  by

developments  in the Middle  East.  Some of the largest coal  shippers,  however,

expect to  export more  if crude oil  prices  remain  high.

Financial

A telephone  survey of District  financial  institutions  suggested  that the

demand  for consumer loans  fell  slightly in August  from July.  More  lenders

reported decreases than  increases  in new consumer loans.  Respondents  indicated

that declines  in installment  credit more  than  offset  increases  in revolving

credit.  Additionally, nearly all  lenders  reported no change  in the  rates

charged on  consumer  loans  in August.

Agriculture

As  of  the  second week of September,  the fall  harvest  was on  schedule and

most crop yields were  expected to be  about  average  around  the District.  Corn

yields,  however, will  probably be  below  average  in Virginia  and  in the

Carolinas,  due  to  June's  hot,  dry weather during the corn  crop's  crucial

pollination  period.  Rainfall  in August was  above normal  across most  of the

District,  and  soil  moisture  levels were reported to  be generally adequate.

Defense  Impacts

Business leaders  in the  Washington  and  Norfolk areas  indicated  that the

adverse economic effects of defense  budget cuts  intensified  this  summer.  They

said  that  cutbacks  in current  and  projected defense  spending lowered the use  of

contract personnel  and  support  services  such  as  advertising, printing,  and

travel;  they blamed  these effects,  in part,  for continued declines  in real

estate values  and  construction  activity.

The Mideast military  deployment slowed  business  in parts  of  Virginia and

the Carolinas.  In areas where  large numbers of military  and support  personnel

had  been  stationed and were  sent  overseas, local  business  leaders said  that

retail  sales were  off sharply;  automobiles,  appliances,  and  fast  food were

particularly hard  hit.  Contacts  in the  Washington  area noted  that the Mideast

crisis  diverted defense  funds  away from local  contractors  that primarily

provide  long-term, research-oriented  services,  and toward  items of  immediate

use  in the field.  The call-up of reserves  and  the departure of troops,  many  of

whom held second  jobs, depleted  the supply  of workers  in some areas  where  labor

markets were  already tight.  The Mideast deployment,  however, evidently gave  a

boost to  some  District manufacturers.  A textile producer, for example,

recently received  a large government  order for  tent fabric.

VI-1

SIXTH  DISTRICT  - ATLANTA

Overview: 

Business  contacts  throughout 

the  Southeast  indicate  some  further

deceleration  from  the  slow  pace of growth  reported  in  recent months.  Uncertainties  associated

with  the  Mid  East  crisis  and  higher  oil  prices  are  reportedly  adding  to  consumer  caution.

Retailers  report that  they are  generally reducing  orders  for new  inventory  in light of anticipated

consumer  resistance  and  their expectations  that  sales  growth  will  remain  sluggish  through  the

fourth  quarter.  Auto  dealers  confirm  that sales remain  soft  and  note particular  weakness  in  the

markets  for high priced  autos  and used cars.  District bankers  indicate  that growth  in consumer

and real estate lending  was weak while commercial  lending declined  this past summer.  Southeast

manufacturers,  however,  still report generally  moderate growth except for products related to the

construction  and  auto  industries.  Shortages  of skilled  workers  continue  in  a number  of areas.

Retail:  Reports  from southeastern retailers  indicate flat to modest sales growth  during

July  and  August  relative  to  the  same  period  in  1989.  Expenditures  on  both  durable  and

nondurable goods varied considerably around  the District but generally durables were weak while

apparel  sales  showed  a  bit  of  strength  associated  with  back-to-school  clothes  purchases  and

summer  clearances.  A  representative  of a  large  retail  chain  indicated  that  furniture  and  fine

jewelry  sales were off significantly  from  1989 levels  in July  and early  August,  for the first time

this  year.  The  general  sentiment  among  southeastern  retailers  is that  already  weak  consumer

confidence  has been negatively  impacted by  the Mid  East crisis  and oil price advances during  the

last  six weeks.  As  a result,  these retailers  are reducing  the  size of their orders to  manufacturers

expecting  that  growth  in  sales  will  remain  sluggish  through  the  fourth  quarter.

Auto  dealers  continue  to  report  that  sales  were  well  below  levels  seen  a  year  ago,

especially during the first two  weeks of August.  Foreign  models again  sold better than domestic

ones.  A  few dealers indicated  consumers  are more resistant to the higher  priced models and said

VI-2

that  sales of new  autos priced  under $15,000  were comparatively  better.  Some noted that it was

too  soon  to  detect  any  switch  toward  more  fuel-efficient  models.

Financial  Services:  Bankers  in  the District  generally  report that  slow growth  in real

estate  and  consumer  loans over  the  summer was  not sufficient  to offset  declines  in commercial

lending.  The  weakness  in  commercial  lending  is  said  to  be  related  to  some  deferred  capital

expansion  plans and  lean business  inventories.  A  few  bank contacts  indicated  they  had  further

tightened  credit  standards  in  the last  month.  A  number  of others  said  they  had  not  tightened

standards  but  were  adhering  more  closely  to  existing  criteria.  Most  bankers,  however,  agreed

that  money  is  available  for good  projects  and  that  reports  of tighter  credit  seem  exaggerated.

Growth  of  consumer  loans  in  July  and  August  was  reportedly  "anemic."  Bankers

indicate  that demand  for auto loans continues to weaken,  but they continue to indicate a moderate

expansion  in  home  equity  lending  and  single  family  mortgages.

Manufacturing:  Manufacturers  in  the  Southeast  indicate  moderate  growth  in  sales

except  for  construction  and  auto-related  products.  Paper  mills  are  reported  to  be  running  at

capacity  levels,  partially  due  to  export  activities  and  coal  production  is  picking  up.  Pipe

manufacturers  report  demand  by  the  domestic  oil  and  gas  industry  is  strong.  Chemical  and

plastic  producers  also  noted  a continuation  of a recent  slowdown  from  strong  growth.

Weak new and existing home sales continue to impact the southeastern textile industry.

Carpet  producers  indicate  demand  continues  to  be  soft  and  that downward  price  pressures  are

evident at  the  wholesale  level.  They  do  not anticipate  any improvement  for some  time.  New

layoffs by  southeastern  tire producers  were reported  and  an auto  assembly plant was  closed  for

a  week  due  to  poor  orders.  Apparel  producers  note  continuing  weakness,  adding  that

competition  from  imports  is intense.

VI-3

Wages  and  Prices:  Scattered  reports  that skilled  workers are  in short  supply continue

to come  in from  around  the region,  especially  from  the oil and  gas producing  areas.  But  these

shortages  have  not resulted  in  any new  upward  wage  pressures.  A  union contact  indicates  that

wages  among  his  constituents rose 3.8 percent  during  the last 6 months  compared  to 3.5 percent

for the previous  6  months.  Prices  of industrial  commodities were  steady,  with the exception  of

sharp  increases  in  the  energy  sector.  Freight  costs  are  reportedly  up  1.5  percent  since  early

August  due to the recent fuel price increases.  Most industries report that the higher  energy  costs

are  not  yet  being passed  on  to  consumers.

VII-1

SEVENTH DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.  Economic  conditions  in the  Midwest were  somewhat uneven  in August,  but

most of the District's economy continued on the  slow  growth path reported in recent  months.

Consumer  spending in the  District generally  showed modest  growth,  except in Michigan.

Purchasing  manager surveys  around the District  gave mixed signals,  but  anecdotal  evidence

indicated  slow expansion in the  manufacturing  sector.  Construction  and real estate  activity

slowed, but remained healthier in the Midwest than  in the  nation as  a whole.  While  most large

banks have  not changed lending  standards,  some District loan officers  reported a  slight

tightening, citing a  less  favorable  economic outlook.  District reports indicated no acceleration  in

the  overall inflation  rate since the  recent rise in the price of oil.  Crop conditions  continued  to be

favorable.

Consumer  Spending.  Consumer spending  growth  in the District has been  modest but

stable  in recent  weeks,  although  local surveys  conducted  after the Middle  East crisis  showed

sharp  declines  in consumer confidence.  A  spokesman  for a department  store chain reported

"below-plan"  national  sales growth  in recent  months, but noted that growth  in the Midwest

remained intact during  the summer.  A representative  of a discount  chain  stated that  sales of

back-to-school  items  were  "very good,"  but overall  sales  in the  Midwest were weak relative  to

other regions,  in part due to unseasonably cool weather limiting sales of fans  and air

conditioners.  An  analyst for a  general  merchandise  chain reported that August sales,  after being

down in the first week  of the month,  increased over the year-earlier period.  District sales were

mixed for this chain, however,  with  strength in  some  Midwestern  markets partially  offset by

significant  weakness  in those  areas of Michigan  and Indiana  linked to the auto  industry.  Results

of several  independent  surveys in August,  however, showed  sharp declines  in consumer

confidence  around the District.

Auto sales  nationally  were little changed in August  from recent months,  with  sources

indicating that the Middle East  situation has not yet influenced  sales.  One Midwest  dealers'

association  executive  noted that  orders for larger cars have  not yet been cancelled.  A District

VII-2

import car distributor experienced  record July sales  and reported that August  sales were on track

to be the  best  single month  in the history of the distributorship.  However,  a domestic automaker

estimated  car sales in the remainder  of 1990 could drop  roughly  500,000 units  (saar) below

previous  estimates,  if oil prices  stabilize  in the  neighborhood of $25 per barrel.

Manufacturing.  Manufacturing  activity  in the  District generally  continued to  expand at a

slow pace  in recent weeks,  although  some  soft spots exist.  An auto economist  reported

production  in the summer months to be  slightly above normal,  due to model changeovers  taking

place  earlier in the  year than normal.  Downward  revisions  in production  schedules  over the

remainder of the  year will  be resisted, in the hope of addressing  union  concerns  about job

security.  A supplier of truck engines  reported that sales  softened  in late July and early August,

however,  and  truck producers recently  lowered their  1990  sales  estimates, citing  the  absence  of a

previously  anticipated increase in demand  for trucks produced prior to the  introduction  of new

fuel efficiency  standards for  1991 models.  A  steel economist reported full order books  for the

third quarter,  and stated that  fourth quarter bookings  were doing "quite well."  A major capital

goods  producer reported little change  in July shipment  growth  from the  steady growth

experienced  in earlier months,  and new orders continued  their slow  upward trend.  A producer of

electronic  and computer components,  however, reported lower domestic  sales  growth  than

expected, which was  attributed  primarily  to a  slowdown  in the  development of new technology

rather than to a fundamental  shift in demand.

Purchasing  manager  surveys  in the District showed mixed results for August, continuing

an  uneven pattern.  On a seasonally  adjusted basis, the Chicago  index  showed conditions

improving  slightly  in August,  led by production, new orders,  and prices.  The  Milwaukee  report

was  mixed, but indicated new  strength in the new  orders component.  The Detroit index in

August  showed its  sharpest drop since  November  1987, with  both the automotive  and non-

automotive  sector indexes  showing contraction.  On balance, however, recent  District activity

has been relatively  stronger than that reported in  the national  survey.

VII-3

Construction  and Real  Estate.  District construction  and real estate  activity  slowed

somewhat in recent weeks,  but continue to fare  well relative  to the  national trend.  A supplier of

gypsum  board reported that Midwest residential  and non-residential  contract awards  (in floor

area) posted solid gains  year-to-date  (through  July) in  1990, while  awards declined  nationally.  A

cement producer reported that industry  shipments  in the Great Lakes  region grew on a year-over-

year basis in the first  half of the  year,  and that the firm's  Chicago-area  backlog  in early August

increased  significantly  from both  a month earlier and a year earlier.  However,  a District  service

firm involved in the early  construction process reported recent  new building  activity  in several

major metropolitan  areas of the District has  "slowed to a trickle."

Area housing sales  grew in July, compared  to a national  decline.  The  Midwestern  market

remains  one of the "healthiest  in the nation,"  according  to a District realtor.  However,  this

contact reported  softening overall housing  sales in recent  weeks,  citing a recent  rise  in mortgage

rates, increased  uncertainty  generated by the Middle Eastern crisis,  and a  slowdown in company

transfers.  The Detroit market was  reported to be running  below last year's pace in the first  half

of the year, and slowed further recently.

Financial  Markets.  While  lending  standards at several  large District  commercial  banks

have  changed little in recent  weeks,  their loan officers  cited  some tightening in selected  sectors.

Several loan officers  told of tighter standards  for middle market  commercial  and industrial

customers,  while one reported  stricter standards  for both  large and small  firms.  Stricter

standards  were  generally  attributed  to  a less favorable economic outlook, but one contact cited

stress  on the bank's  capital position.  Tightening  occurred most often in the  form of stricter

covenants  and collateral  requirements.  To the extent that tightening has  occurred, standards  for

construction, land development, and other commercial  real estate  loans have been tightened

somewhat  more than for commercial  and industrial loans.

Prices.  Despite  the recent rise in the price  of oil, several  District contacts reported

downward  pressures  on the prices  of a  variety of goods.  An analyst with a major retail  chain

reported that pre-Christmas  type discounting  by competitors  is already  beginning to occur.

VII-4

Although housing prices  are  holding up relatively  well in the Midwest, the  rate of increase  has

slowed substantially in  recent months.  On the manufacturing  side, the price component  of the

Chicago purchasing manager  survey indicated  more  respondents  paying  increased prices  in

August than  in  July,  although the trend was basically  unchanged from  that in June  and July.  One

District manufacturer  of heavy moving  equipment reported prices  declining in  the face  of weaker

demand.  Crop  prices have  fallen in recent  weeks.

Agriculture.  Midwest  crop conditions  appear  favorable.  A  high proportion  of the corn

and soybean  acreage  is rated good-to-excellent  in District  states.  Recent warm  temperatures  are

believed  to have added  somewhat to  the harvest potential  and eased concerns  about an early  frost

on this  year's late  maturing  crops.  Crop  prices,  especially for corn,  have retreated  considerably

in  recent weeks  as export prospects  have  deteriorated  and the  forthcoming harvest promises

adequate  (but still relatively  tight) supplies  for the year ahead.  The  declining corn  export

prospects  reflect a large world wheat  harvest this year and the likelihood that wheat  will displace

some corn in livestock feeding rations.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT  - ST.  LOUIS

Summary

District contacts  indicate  that  the  economy has weakened  slightly  in

recent  weeks,  implying  that  the  District's  growth  rate  borders  on  zero.

Higher  oil  prices  and  consumer  uncertainty  stemming  from  the  Persian  Gulf

crisis  are  expected  to  exacerbate  the  economic  slowdown.  The  level  of

District  employment  has  fallen  this  summer.  Retail  sales  are  reported  as

flat  to  up moderately  and several  contacts  have  an optimistic  outlook  for

the  rest  of  the  year.  Manufacturing  activity  has  weakened 

in 

recent

months, 

as  have  the  construction  and  real  estate  industries. 

Despite

moderate  deposit  growth, 

loan  growth  is 

flat 

at  the  District's 

largest

banks.  Most  District  crops  are  in  fair-to-good  condition,  although  some

are  being stressed by extreme heat and inadequate  soil moisture.

Consumer  Spending

Reports  on recent  District  retail  sales  are  mixed. Most  contacts,

however, 

report  sales  as  flat 

to  up  moderately  from  a  year  ago.  Many

retailers  report  that  recent  sales  met  or  exceeded  their  expectations  and

were  obtained without  excessive  price-cutting.  Inventories  are  generally

at  desired  levels.  Several  contacts  have  an  optimistic  outlook  for  the

rest  of  the  year,  but  some  are  concerned  about  the  potential  negative

effects  of  higher  oil  prices. 

Most  retailers  expect  retail  prices  to

remain  stable  through  the  end  of  the  year,  although  a  few  think  prices

will  rise  this  fall,  in  part  because  of higher  oil  prices.  It  is  feared

that  the  deployment  of  soldiers  from  a  base  in  Kentucky  will  result  in  a

VIII-2

sharp  decline 

in  business  activity 

in  nearby  communities. 

Contacts

indicate  that  sales  of  new autos  are  generally weak while  sales  of used

cars  are  strong.

Manufacturing

District  manufacturing  activity  has  weakened  since 

the 

first

quarter.  Producers  of  home  appliances,  chemicals  and electrical equipment

expect  flat  or  weakening  demand 

in 

the  next  few  months,  as  much  of  their

demand 

is 

related 

to  activity  in 

the  motor  vehicle  and  construction

industries,  sectors  that have been weak and  are  not expected  to  grow  soon.

One  home  appliance  producer  plans 

to 

lay  off  more 

than  a 

thousand

production  workers 

in  September,  partly  because  of  planned  seasonal

cutbacks,  partly  in 

response  to  a  recent  weakening  of  demand  that  is

expected  to  persist.  A  car  manufacturer  recently  announced  that  it  will

postpone  the  closing of  a Missouri  assembly plant until  May 1991,  delaying

the  expected November  layoff of  approximately 2,000 workers.

The  conflict  in 

the  Persian  Gulf  has  caused  two  manufacturers 

to  be

more  cautious  in  extending  credit  to  customers  in  the  Middle  East;  one  is

holding  up  shipments  of  capital  goods  until  previous  bills  are  paid.  No

substantial  price  increases  in  chemical  products  due  to  higher  oil  prices

are  expected.

Construction and Real  Estate

Residential  real  estate  contacts  in  Little  Rock,  Memphis  and  St.

Louis  report  weakness 

in  new  and  existing  home  sales. 

These  contacts

believe  residential  real  estate  conditions  will  worsen  in 

the  next  few

months  and anticipate no  increase  in  construction over  the  next 12  months.

Residential  construction  unemployment 

is  high  relative 

to  historical

levels  in  St.  Louis  and  Little  Rock  and  is  expected  to  increase  in 

the

VIII-3

next  several  months. 

Contacts 

in  Louisville,  however, 

report 

that

residential real  estate  conditions  are better than they had anticipated.

Banking and Credit

Despite  moderate  deposit  growth,  loan  growth  continues  to  be very

slow  at  the  District's  11  largest  banks. 

Although  real  estate  and

consumer  lending  are  up  substantially  from  year-ago  levels,  overall  loan

growth 

remains  weak  because  of  a  marked  decline 

in 

commercial  and

industrial  loans  at  Louisville  and Memphis  banks.  Sluggishness  in  the

residential  housing  market  appears 

to  be  more  demand-driven 

than

supply-driven, as  mortgage  financing is  plentiful.

Agriculture and Natural Resources

Most  District  crops  are  in  fair-to-good  condition. 

In  some  areas,

however, 

a  lack  of  adequate  soil  moisture  and  extreme  heat  are  hampering

crop  development, 

especially  soybeans  and  pastures. 

District  coal

production  is  running  about  7 percent  above  last  year because  of  strong

exports,  stockpile  rebuilding  and  increased U.S.  electric  output.  Recent

oil  price  increases  are  not  expected  to  have  a  significant  effect  on  the

demand for  coal  or  coal  prices.  Contacts  report  that  exports  of rice  and

Southern pine  lumber will be  lower  than previously expected because  of  the

embargo  of  exports  to  Iraq  and  recent  increases 

in  freight  and  insurance

costs  for  shipments 

to  other  Middle  Eastern  countries. 

Nonetheless,

Southern pine  lumber  mills  report  that  orders, production  and shipments

are  all  up  compared to  a year ago.

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

Ninth  District  economic  conditions  have  been  moderately  good

lately.  While  labor  market and  manufacturing  conditions  have  been  mixed  and

construction  activity  has  been  weak,  tourist  spending  has  been  strong,  and

new-car  sales  and  retail  sales  in  general  have  been  fairly  good.  Resource-

related industries  have been doing  well.  In  general,  wage  and price  increases

have  been  moderate. 

The  Gulf  crisis  has  not  yet  affected  the  district's

economy much.

Employment, Wages, and  Prices

Labor  market  conditions  have  been  mixed  in  the  district. 

After

showing  signs  of  improvement  during  the  second  quarter  of  the  year,

Minnesota's  unemployment  rates  have  begun  to  drift  up.  The  state's  overall

unemployment rate  was 4.6 percent  in July,  up  from 4.2  percent  in  June  and 4.1

percent  in  July  1989.  In  the  district's  other  states,  unemployment rates  in

June  and  July  were  roughly  at  the  same  level  as  last year.  At  the  same time,

firms  throughout  the  district  continue  to  report  difficulties  in  filling

entry-level  and  part-time  positions,  even  at  wages  well  above  the  minimum

wage.

Wage  and  price  increases  in  the  district  have  remained  moderate.

Wages  have  generally  increased  only  at  annual  rates  of  3 to  5  percent.  The

Gulf  crisis  has  not  resulted  in  a  sharp  acceleration  in  the  district's

inflation  rate--though,  as  is  to  be  expected,  gasoline  prices  have  risen

sharply. 

Some  prices  charged  by  freight  companies  have  also  increased.

Prices  of agricultural products  have  recently  been  declining,  though  they  are

still well above  the levels  of a year ago.

IX-2

Consumer Spending

District  retailers  of  general  merchandise  report  good  sales  growth

lately.  One major retailer  reports  that,  compared  to a year  earlier,  sales  in

August  were  up  8 percent  and  sales  in  the  first  eight months of the year were

up  6.1  percent.  An  appliance  retailer  reports  that  sales  in  August  were  3

percent  higher  this  year  than  last.  In  North  Dakota  and  Montana,  retailers

report  that  shoppers  from  Canada  have  contributed  to  strong  sales.  In  North

Dakota,  sales  tax  collections have  risen  sharply  from  a year  ago.  Throughout

the district,  inventories are  reported to  be at acceptable  levels.

Tourism  remains  the  brightest  spot  in  the  district's  economy.

Motorcycle  enthusiasts  recently  held  their  50th  annual  gathering  in  the  Black

Hills  of South Dakota.  This rally  reportedly  brought an  estimated $30 million

into  the  local  economy. 

Also,  resort  owners  in  the  Upper  Peninsula  of

Michigan,  Wisconsin's  Arrowhead  region,  and  northern  Minnesota  report  fairly

high  levels  of  reservations  for  the  fall  colors  viewing  season. 

However,

district  resort  owners  generally  are  apprehensive  that  the  recent  rise  in

gasoline prices may  crimp  tourist activity.

New-car  sales  have  been  fairly  good  recently. 

One  major  dealer

reports  that  sales  at  the  end  of  August were  strong.  Dealers are  cautiously

optimistic  about  prospects  for  the  second  half of  the  year.  Inventories  of

cars and  trucks  are  reportedly at  comfortable levels.

The  district's  housing  activity  has  improved  recently, after  having

shown  signs  of  softening  earlier  in  the  year. 

The  number  of  new  housing

permits  issued  in  Minnesota,  for  example,  was  6 percent higher  this  July  than

last.  The  number  of  houses  sold  in  the Minneapolis-St.  Paul  area  during  the

first eight months of the year was  6.6  percent higher  than a year ago.

IX-3

Construction and Manufacturing

Conditions  in  the  district's  construction  industry  in  general  have

been  weak  recently,  particularly  in  the  Minneapolis-St.  Paul  metropolitan

area.  In  that  area,  the  dollar  value  of  contracts  for  future  construction  in

June  was  27  percent  below  the  value  a  year  ago. 

This  area's  weakness  is

expected to  continue for  at least  a couple of years.

Conditions  in  the  district's  manufacturing  industries  have  been

mixed  lately. 

Domestic  orders  for  producer  equipment  have  been  lower  than

last  year,  but  strong  foreign  demand  has  more  than  made  up  for  that.  The

medical  technology  industry  has  grown  strongly,  but  the  electronics  industry

has  continued  to  struggle.  Manufacturing  firms,  in  general,  express  serious

concern about  the  increased probability of a recession.

Resource-Related  Industries

The  district's  resource-related  industries  appear  to  be  fairly

healthy.  Excellent  rainfall  throughout  the  district  has  improved  the  outlook

for  farmers.  The  spring wheat harvest  in  Minnesota  is  expected  to  be  the  best

in  three  years.  In  that  state,  the  corn  harvest  is  expected  to  be  5 percent

higher  than  last  year,  but  the  soybean  harvest  is  expected  to  be  10  percent

lower,  due  primarily  to  fewer  acres  being  planted.  Farmers  in  North  Dakota

have  had  the  best  wheat  crop  on  record.  The  mining  industry  is  also  doing

well.  However,  the lumber  and  paper products  industry,  which has been growing

strongly  for  the  last  two  years,  reports  recent  setbacks.  Prices of products

used  in  home  construction  have  declined  sharply.  And  according  to  several

firms,  finished  paper  inventories have been  rising.

X-1

TENTH DISTRICT  - KANSAS CITY

Overview.  The  Tenth District economy  is  growing  slowly.  Retail  sales

have weakened  over the  last  three months,  with auto  sales  slumping as  some

potential buyers  are  finding  it difficult  to  obtain  financing.  But rural

business  conditions  generally continue  to  reflect  the  improvement  in  the  farm

economy over  the past  three years,  an  improvement  that  is  expected to  continue

as  bumper crops  are harvested this  fall.  Retailers are  trimming inventories,

while  manufacturers are  trying to  maintain or  reduce  their stocks.  In  the

energy sector,  drilling activity has  slipped in  recent months but  remains

above the  level  of  a year  ago.  Housing starts  are  up  from  last month despite

a slight  increase  in mortgage  rates.

Retail Sales.  Most district retailers have been  trimming inventories  in

light  of weakening  sales  over  the past  three months,  especially in July.

Expectations are mixed for  sales  over the next  three  months, while prices  are

expected to  change  little.  New auto  sales have  dropped  in most district

states  over  the  last month and are  expected to  drop  further  during the  rest  of

the year.  Some  potential buyers  are having financing problems  due  to  credit

tightening.  Most dealers are  trimming inventory  levels  to  make  room for new

models.

Manufacturing.  Purchasing agents  report higher  input prices  from a year

ago but generally stable  prices  over the  last  three  months.  Some  prices have

risen recently due  to  the Gulf  crisis  as  fuel price  increases have  pushed up

transportation costs.  Agents  generally expect more  increases  in  input  prices

in  the next  three  months.  Agents  are having little  difficulty in obtaining

inputs  and most expect  few problems  for  the  rest  of the  year.  Most firms  are

maintaining or  reducing  inventories.

X-2

Energy.  Despite  significantly higher oil prices  since  Iraq  invaded

Kuwait,  exploration and  development activity in  the  district has declined

recently.  The district rig  count  fell  from 303  in July to  282  in August.

Nonetheless, the  rig count  remains about  9 percent  above  the  year-ago  level.

Industry observers  do  not anticipate  much  improvement  in  drilling activity

unless  oil  prices remain above  $25  a barrel  for an  extended period and

natural  gas prices  are  eventually pulled up  by higher oil prices.

Housing  Activity and Finance.  Housing  starts  in most areas  of  the

district  are  up  from  last month, though  still below levels  a year ago.  Sales

of new homes  remain mixed.  Several builders  report  increases  in  lumber  costs

and  a shortage  of labor.  The outlook for  new home  sales  is  mixed but biased

toward a slowdown for  the  remainder of the  year.

Most district savings  and loan respondents  report net  outflows  of

deposits  over both the  last month and the  last  year.  Mortgage  demand is

constant  to  down slightly and  is  expected to  decline over  the next  three

months due  to  seasonal factors.  Mortgage  rates have  risen  slightly at most

institutions  but are  expected to  decline slightly in the  near future.

Banking.  Commercial bankers  report that  total  loan demand rose

moderately over  the  last month.  Demand increased for  commercial and

industrial  loans,  consumer  loans,  and home mortgages, while demand for

commercial real  estate  loans  and agricultural loans  decreased.  Loan-to-

deposit ratios  did not  change over the  last month but  are down slightly from a

year ago.  Total  deposits  increased moderately over the  last month, with

increases  in demand deposits, NOW accounts, MMDAs,  and small  time  and savings

deposits.  Large certificates  of deposit,  IRAs,  and Keogh accounts were

unchanged.  Bankers report no major changes  in  their  prime rates  or  consumer

X-3

lending rates,  and few expect any changes  in the  near  future.  About half of

the  respondents  report that  other  loan  terms--for example,  collateral

requirements  and loan covenants--have recently been  tightened or are  being

reviewed for possible  future  tightening.  Although a few rural bankers  report

that  credit  standards have been tightened due  to  regulatory pressures  or

concerns  about  an economic  slowdown, most  indicate  that  credit standards  for

small businesses have not  changed.

Agriculture.  District  crops  are  generally  in excellent  condition.

Bumper  crops  of  corn, soybeans,  and milo  are  expected in Kansas, where a

record wheat crop  was harvested earlier this  year.  The Oklahoma cotton and

peanut  crops  could be  the best in  years.  Development of  late-planted crops  in

eastern Kansas, Missouri,  and Nebraska, however,  is  one  to  three weeks behind

normal, making crops  in  those  areas vulnerable to  substantial yield reductions

if  an early  frost  occurs.

Higher  fuel prices have not yet  affected district  farming activities,

although harvesting costs  will be pushed up.  Prices  of  some  fertilizers,

pesticides,  and other petroleum-based products may also  rise  if petroleum

prices  remain high.  If  this happens,  farmers will  reduce  their use  of  these

products next  spring.

Business  conditions  in  rural  communities  across  the  district  generally

reflect  the  rebound  in  the  farm economy over the  past  three years.  Still,  the

improvement  in  the district's  Main Street businesses has  not been uniform.

Small businesses continue  to  struggle  in  some  rural  communities, while  both

established and new businesses thrive  in  others.

XI-1

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

The District  economy continues  to  grow slowly.  Orders  for manufactured

goods  have  shown little  overall change.  Retail  sales have  recently slowed.

Auto  sales  slowed in  early August but have  since  improved.  Economic  activity

has  increased in  the  service  sector.  The construction sector  continues  a mild

improvement.  Higher oil  prices  are  stimulating  increased production from

existing wells but have  not yet motivated new drilling.  Recent  rains have

improved conditions  for  District farmers  and ranchers.

Overall,  manufacturing production and orders  have not changed

significantly  during the  past month, although orders  for construction-related

products  have declined.  Manufacturing  inventories  generally are  at  desired

levels.  Most respondents  are  concerned about the  outlook  for  the U.S.  economy

now that  oil  prices have  risen.  Also, many industries  are  concerned about

higher transportation costs  due to  the  jump in  oil prices.  One  food

wholesaler  is  already planning to  curtail  costs by reducing  deliveries  from

five  to  four  per week.  Recent  oil  price  increases have had only  a small

effect on  the  demand for  oil  field machinery but respondents  expect strong

gains  next year  if  oil prices  remain high.  Chemical producers  say that

product demand remains  strong and they  are  switching feedstocks  to  reduce  the

impact  of  rising  oil prices.  Orders  and production continue  strong in  the

petroleum refining  industry  and producers  are  increasing product prices  in

line with crude  costs.  Refiners  say  that  they have  not experienced any

shortages  of  oil.  Steel  production continues  at  high rates  due  to  declines  in

imports,  and producers continue  to  be  optimistic  about demand in  the  near

future.  Primary metal producers  in  the  District generally say that  oil  is  not

XI-2

a significant energy  source  in  their production process.  Respondents  in  the

apparel  industry  note  a mild increase  in  sales  and are  cautiously  optimistic

about  the  next  few months.  For  electronics  producers, orders  generally remain

weak but several noted that  sales  to  the  telecommunications  industry  are

strong.  Demand for  fabricated metals  remains  soft.  Among stone,  clay,  and

glass  producers, a glass producer  says  sales have  decreased significantly and

a producer of concrete  pipe  notes  a gradual  slowing.  Lumber  and wood products

producers  say  that  demand from home builders has  declined but  one producer

noted  an increase  in  demand from lumber  yards.

District retail  sales have  slowed significantly over  the  last  few weeks.

Respondents  feel  that uncertainty about problems  in  the Middle  East has  caused

consumers  to  hold back purchases.  Weakness  is  widespread across most  product

lines but  respondents note  a particular softness  in  durable goods.  Discount

stores  continue  to  experience  slightly  stronger  sales  than other retailers.

District auto  sales  increased moderately in July.  Sales  growth  was

strong in  the  Houston area and mild in  the Dallas/Ft. Worth area.  Sales

flattened in  the  first  two weeks  of August  but picked up  slightly during  the

second half of  the month.  Respondents  note no  increase  in  the  relative  demand

for  fuel-efficient vehicles.

Activity  in  the  District service  sector  has  increased.  Temporary

employment agencies  say that  demand  is  increasing  strongly.  A respondent  in

San Antonio  said much of the  demand  is  from firms which are  reluctant to  hire

full  time workers because  the  economy is  slow.  An accounting firm  says  that

activity has picked up  due  to demand  from the Resolution Trust Corporation.

Consulting firms  note continued  increases  in  the  demand for office  automation

XI-3

and management services.  An  increase  in economic  activity  in Austin and

Houston has  created a slight  increase  in demand  for  legal  services.

District  construction activity continues  to  grow  slowly.  Most of  the

recent growth  stems  from  increased residential construction in  Texas.  Single

and multifamily building permits have  increased.  District nonresidential and

nonbuilding construction remain weak.  Nonresidential  contract values  are  up

but  remain below levels  reached last  year.  Respondents  do not  expect  an

upturn  in commercial  and  industrial construction  for at  least  another year.

Nonbuilding contract values  have  fallen and respondents  note  that  expenditures

on  state  highways  should continue  to  decrease  in Texas but increase  in

Louisiana.

Recent gains  in  the  oil  price have  not  stimulated new drilling.  The

District drilling  rig count declined  in July and August.  Respondents  in  the

energy  industry  say that  they  are  uncertain about  what price will  be

sustained.  Production from  existing wells  should  increase,  though, as

increased revenues  are  used  to  upgrade old wells  and reopen dormant wells.

Most  of the  work will be  done  on stripper wells  which produce  less  than  ten

barrels  of oil  per  day.  Some  enhanced recovery procedures have  also  become

profitable.  Production should  increase  about  1.1 percent  due  to  the  lifting

of  production ceilings  by the  Texas  Railroad Commission.  One respondent  noted

that  about half of  the  current drilling  is  for natural  gas which has not yet

increased  in price.

Recent rainfall has  improved conditions  for District  farmers  and

ranchers,  although  some  dryland cotton and corn crops  were  already destroyed.

Ranges  and pastures have  improved  significantly in many areas.  August prices

XI-4

received by Texas  farmers  and ranchers  increased 7 percent  from last  year  and

2 percent from July.  Rice prices continue  to  drop  and are now 9 percent below

a year  earlier.  Rice  prices are  expected  to  remain depressed until mills  find

alternatives  to  their  Iraqi  customers.

XII  -1

TWELFTH  DISTRICT  -- SAN  FRANCISCO

Summary

Economic  activity  in the  West  is growing  at  a  modest  pace,  following  some slowing  in

recent months.  Since  the  Iraqi invasion  of Kuwait,  western  business  leaders'  expectations  of

future  national  economic  growth  have  weakened  sharply.  Price  inflation  remains  around  5

percent, with the  exception  of the  recent  large  increase  in  oil  prices.  Retail  activity  appears  to  be

softening  in  most  parts  of the District.  Manufacturing  conditions  are  mixed,  with  strength  in

commercial  aircraft  and  aluminum  offset  by weakness  in  some  other  sectors.  The situation  in  the

Middle  East  has  shaken  up  energy-related  industries,  while  agricultural  conditions  remain

generally  strong.  Real  estate  and  construction  activity  continue  to cool  off in  the District's  coastal

areas, while  most  inland  areas  remain  strong.  Financial  institutions  note recent  weakening  in

lending activity.

Business  Sentiment

Western  business  leaders'  expectations  of future  economic  activity  have  deteriorated

significantly  since  Iraq's  invasion  of Kuwait.  39 percent  now  expect  a  national  recession  during

the  next  12 months,  compared with  only 4 percent  six weeks  ago,  and only  5  percent  of

respondents  now  anticipate  that  growth  will  be  as  strong  as  2  1/2  percent,  compared with  30

percent  last time.  Most  respondents  indicate  that the  Iraqi  invasion  has  not yet  caused  changes  in

their  business  plans,  beyond  a  renewed  interest  in energy  conservation.  One  firm, however,  has

put new  Middle  East business  on  hold while  a  few others  are  approaching  future  capital

investments  with  increasing  caution.

Wages  and  Prices

Price inflation  remains  around 5 percent,  with  the  exception  of the  recent large  increase

XII-2

in  oil prices.  Gasoline  prices  are  up  sharply  throughout  the  District.  Jet  airplane  fuel  prices  in

Seattle  are  up  62 percent  since  the  end  of July.

Most  respondents  indicate  that wages  have  risen  by  about  3 to 5  percent  from  their  year-

earlier levels.  However,  the cost  of benefits  continues  to  rise  at  a faster  pace, with  rising  health

care  costs  cited  as  the  major factor.

Retail  Trade

Retail  activity  appears  to  be  softening  in most  parts  of the  District.  Auto  sales  have

slowed  and  auto  manufacturers  continue  to fatten  rebates  to prevent  sales  from eroding  further.

Sales  of other durable  goods,  like  farm  machinery  and home  furnishings,  also  are  reported  to have

weakened.  Sales  of nondurable  goods  are  reported  to be softening.  A retailer  in Southern

California  indicates that, excluding  the effects  of promotions,  sales  fell 5  to  6 percent  in August

from  a year ago.  Another  West  Coast  retailer  reports  that, since  July, sales  have  been  up just  3

percent from  a  year  ago, well off the  10  percent  growth  seen  in  earlier  months.  However,  reports

indicate  that  sales gains  were  considerably  more  robust  in  California's  Central  Valley,  Alaska,

Hawaii,  and  Utah.

Manufacturing

Manufacturing  activity  in  the District  is  reported  to be  mixed  overall.  Aluminum

manufacturers  continue  to run  at about  90  percent  of capacity,  and one  observer  suggests  that  an

increase  in demand  for aluminum  products  may  occur as  the  Defense  Department  builds  up its

inventory  of spare parts.  Newsprint  manufacturers  continue  to  do well, but the  packaging  and

paperboard  side of the industry  has  slowed  significantly  since last  year.  Orders  for commercial

aircraft  have  been relatively  stable  for the  past  three  months,  and  most  manufacturers  continue  to

face multi-year  backlogs.  A paint and  coatings  manufacturer  reports  that some of his  markets  are

starting  to show  signs  of slowing, which  represents  a  deterioration  from  last year  when  all  markets

XII  - 3

were  accelerating.

Agriculture  and  Resource-Related  Industries

Conditions  in  agriculture  remain  good  overall.  Agricultural  prices continue  strong  for

most  crops  except wheat  and  some  feed grains,  and livestock  markets  have  held up  better  than

expected.  California's  almond  crop  will  be  the  largest  ever, but the  resulting  downward  price

pressure  may  put  prices  below  production  costs.  In  the  lumber  industry, weaker  sales  are

depressing  prices  and  increasing  inventories.

Interest  in  new oil  drilling  activity  has  increased  in  some  areas  of the  District  since  the

Iraqi invasion  of Kuwait.  One  natural gas  firm  plans  to  increase  capital  expenditures  by  65

percent  this year  over last year's  level.

Construction  and  Real  Estate

Real  estate  activity  continues  to  cool  in  the  District's  coastal  areas,  but conditions  inland

remain strong.  Home  price  appreciation  in  the  Seattle  area  is slowing  and the  inventory  of  unsold

homes is  growing.  Commercial  leasing  activity in  southern  California  continues  at  a  good  pace,

but  net  effective  rents  have  declined  4  to  6 percent  from  last year  as  a  result  of persistently high

vacancy  rates.  Home  prices in  Bakersfield  and Sacramento  continue  to  rise,  but  reports  suggest

that  price  increases  may  be  slowing  from  their  earlier  phenomenal  paces.  Construction  activity  is

slowing  in  many  parts of  the West.

Financial  Sector

Financial  institutions  report  generally  good  conditions,  despite  weakness  in lending  activity.

One  southern  Californian  bank reports  declining  deposit  levels  while  another  indicates  that

consumer, commercial,  and  construction  loan  volumes  have  weakened  in  recent weeks.  One

banker  reports  that  loan  activity  continues  to  grow  in Oregon  and Washington,  but at  half of last

year's  pace.

