SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON  CURRENT  ECONOMIC CONDITIONS

BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICTS

May  1990

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY  .

. . . . . .. . .

. . . . . . .

.

.

.

. . . . .

. .

i

First District  - Boston 

. .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I-

Second District  - New York

. . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

II-

Third District  - Philadelphia

. . . . . . . . . . .

.

II  -1

Fourth District  - Cleveland

. . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . IV-1

Fifth District  - Richmond  . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. V-

Sixth District  - Atlanta  . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. VI-1

Seventh District  - Chicago

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . VII-1

Eighth District  - St.  Louis

. . . . . . . . . . . . .

. VIII-1

Ninth District  - Minneapolis

. . . . . .

. . . . . . .

. IX-1

Tenth  District  - Kansas  City

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X-l

Eleventh District  - Dallas

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XI-1

Twelfth  District  - San Francisco

XII-1

SUMMARY*

District  reports  indicate  that  overall  economic  activity  continues  to  expand  slowly

in  April.  The  agriculture  sector  reports  some  weather-related  damage  to  specific  crops,  but

drought  fears  have  been  alleviated  by  recent  rains,  and  the  farm  outlook  is  generally

optimistic.  Natural  resource  industries  are  generally  reported  to be  healthy,  with

exploration  and  drilling  holding  up  well  in  the  oil  and  gas  industry.  Residential  real  estate

markets  remain  generally  weak,  but  with  some  specific  geographic  areas  doing  well.

Nonresidential  construction  is mixed,  with  public  works  projects  supplying  some  strength.

Manufacturing  is  also  mixed,  with  some  improvement  noted  in  half  of  the  districts.  Plants

are  still  apparently  operating  below  capacity,  however,  and  there  has  been  little  upward

pressure  on  industrial  prices.  Retail  spending  has  been  growing  slowly  in  general,  and

merchants  are  looking  for  small  real  gains  throughout  the  rest  of  the  year.  Auto  sales,

however,  remain  weak.  In  the  financial  sector,  demand  for  loans  is  varied  but  generally

flat,  with  loans  for  commercial  real  estate  down  in  most  districts.  There  is  little  evidence

that  a  general  "credit  crunch"  is  developing;  the  majority  of  businesses  say  they  have  not

seen  any  change  in  credit  terms  and  have  had  no  trouble  getting  credit.  Where  credit

tightening  by  banks  and  thrift institutions  has  been  noted,  however,  it  has  mainly  affected

newer  small  businesses  and  the  real  estate  industry.

AGRICULTURE

The  cold,  wet  weather  that  dominated  much  of  the  nation  through  spring  took  its

toll  on  some  crops.  Richmond,  Atlanta,  and  St.  Louis  say  apple  and  peach  crops  were

damaged,  in some  cases  severely,  and  inclement  weather  has  delayed  field  work  and

planting  in  the  Atlanta,  St.  Louis,  and  Kansas  City districts.  However,  soil  moisture  levels

have  now  reached  adequate,  or  even  surplus,  levels  in  most  areas,  with  the  exception  of

some  parts  of  the  Minneapolis  district  and  California.

*Prepared at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Philadelphia  and  based  on  information  collected
before  April  20,  1990.  This  document  summarizes  comments  received  from  businesses  and
other  contacts  outside  the  Federal  Reserve  and  is  not  a  commentary  on  the  views  of
Federal  Reserve  officials.

Although  winter  wheat  sustained  some  weather-related  damage  in  the  Richmond  and  St.

Louis  districts, Minneapolis  says  losses  were  small  in  that  district, and  farmers  in  contact

with  Kansas  City  and  Dallas  are  optimistic  about  the  wheat  crop  this  year.

Atlanta  and  St.  Louis  say  farmers  intend  to  plant  more  cotton,  rice,  and  soybeans

this  year.  Atlanta  adds  that  higher  cotton  and  grain  prices  may  bring  some  previously

idled  land  back  into  production.

NATURAL  RESOURCES

Although  oil  and  gas  prices  have  fallen  from  year-ago  levels,  they  remain  at  a  level

high enough  to  encourage  continued  drilling  and  exploration,  according  to  Kansas  City  and

Dallas.  Dallas  says  the  industry  is  "healthy";  Kansas  City  reports  that  the  rig  count, while

down  from  the  February  level,  is  higher  than  a  year  ago;  Atlanta  says  domestic  drilling  is

holding steady  and  that  no  change  is  expected.

Minneapolis  says  mining,  especially  for  precious  metals,  remains  strong.  Atlanta

and  St.  Louis  both  report  increased  coal  exports.  Forest  product  industries  are  also  healthy,

according  to  San  Francisco  and  Minneapolis,  although  concern  about  environmental  issues

is  causing  uncertainty  about  expansion  plans.

REAL  ESTATE  AND  CONSTRUCTION

Housing  remains  weak  in  most  parts  of  the  nation,  with  multifamily  activity

relatively  weaker  than  single-family  activity.  Although  a  recent  weather-related  increase

in  activity  is  noted  by  several  districts,  no  signs  of  a  sustained  turnaround  are  evident.

Housing  prices  remain  generally  sluggish  and  are  reported  by  Boston  and  New  York  to  be

falling  further;  New  York,  however,  indicates  that  price  declines  are  confined  to  the  New

York  metropolitan  area.  Real  estate  activity  in  Michigan  has  been  weak  also  as  a  result of

softness  in  the  auto  industry.  Pockets  of strength  in  real  estate  are  reported  in

Minneapolis-St.  Paul,  in  parts  of  California,  and  in  upstate  and  western  New  York.

Although  industry  representatives  expect  some  improvement  in  1990,  most  anticipate  a  slow

year,  with  sales  dampened  in  part by  tighter  credit  standards  imposed  by  banks.

Nonresidential  activity  is  mixed.  In  Atlanta,  the  office  market  remains  "subdued,"

New  York  says  the  pace  of  leasing  is  good  (but  that  renters  are  getting  significant

iii

concessions),  and  Dallas  says  the  nonresidential  market  is  weak.  Atlanta  and  Philadelphia

report  strength  in  public  construction  projects.

MANUFACTURING

Manufacturing  activity  is  mixed  across  the  nation;  a  majority  of  the  districts  report

some  improvement,  or  expectations  of  improvement,  in  the  coming  quarters.  Cleveland,

Richmond,  Atlanta,  Chicago,  Dallas,  and  San  Francisco  all  indicate  that  industrial  activity

is  increasing.  St.  Louis  says  the  sector  is  weak,  while  Boston  and  Philadelphia  report  mixed

conditions.  New  orders  and  shipments  are  up  in  most  districts,  although  no  general  upward

pressure  on  industrial  prices  is  noted.  Those  areas  that  mention  inventories  indicate  that

they  are  in  line  with  expectations;  no  district  report  indicates  that  stock  levels  are

excessive.

Chicago  says  auto  production  is  leading  the  pickup,  despite  continued  sluggishness  in

sales,  and  that  all  auto  facilities  are  expected  to  be  operating  by  the  end  of  April.

Cleveland  agrees  that  the  auto  industry  is  rebounding,  but  says  contacts  in  that  region  still

expect  second-quarter  output  to  be  lower  than  a  year  ago.  Other  strong  industries  include

apparel  (Atlanta),  steel  (Chicago),  and  various  capital  goods  (Chicago).  The  commercial

aerospace  industry  is  also  among  the  stronger  industries  in  the  Boston  and  San  Francisco

districts.  Atlanta,  however,  says  there  is  concern  in  the  southeast  that  the  industry  may

soon  show  weakness  in  that  region  as  a  result  of  possible  Defense  Department  cutbacks.

Several  Districts  say  auto-related  products  are  still  in  the  doldrums.

The  outlook  for  the  industrial  sector  is  improving.  Manufacturers  in  the  Philadelphia

region  say  they  expect  a  pickup  within  six  months  and  are  planning  to  boost  capital

spending.  Cleveland's  report  indicates  that  the  "worst  of  the  production  cutbacks  are  over."

Manufacturers  in  the  Richmond  area  are  also  more  optimistic;  a  recent  survey  indicates

that  developments  in Eastern  Europe  are  expected  to  give  sales  a  push  over  the  next  two

years,  but  that  most  businesses  will  benefit  later  rather  than  sooner.

CONSUMER  SPENDING

Retail  sales  vary  by  district,  but  reports  generally  reflect  slow,  positive  growth.  Sales

growth  was  strongest  in  the  Cleveland,  Richmond,  Minneapolis,  and  San  Francisco  districts

and  weakest  in  St.  Louis  and  Dallas.  Kansas  City  says  sales  are  above  year-ago  levels  but

have  been  mixed  recently.  Philadelphia  and  Chicago  note  that sales  gains  in  their  areas

have  been  achieved  without  resorting  to  promotions  or  markdowns.  Retailers  generally  say

inventories  are  in  line  with  projected  sales.

Apparel  has  been  an  especially  strong  seller  in  most  districts.  Hard  goods,  such  as

furniture,  appliances,  and  other  household  items,  while  strong  in  some  areas,  are

contributing  less  to  overall  growth.

The  outlook  for  consumer  spending  also  varies  by  region,  but  retailers  are generally

looking  for  modest  gains  in  1990  as  a  whole.  Boston  merchants  say  1990  will  be  "difficult,"

and  contacts  in  Philadelphia  say  they  are  looking  for  niches;  they  do  not  anticipate  a

broad-based  surge  in  sales  this  year.  Only  in St.  Louis  are  store  managers  overtly

pessimistic,  expecting  the  softness  noted  in  that  region  to  continue  throughout  the  year.

There  is  some  concern  in  several  districts  that  unseasonably  warm  weather  led  to  sales  that

were  borrowed,  in  part,  from  the  second  quarter,  and  that  second-quarter  sales  will  now

suffer  as  a  result.  In  addition,  the  uncertain  outlook  for  the  housing  sector  is  blurring  the

outlook  for  sales  of  household  goods  and  making  many  merchants  cautious  in  developing

projections.

Auto  sales  are  reported  to  be  spotty  but  generally  weak  across  the  nation,  and  little

improvement  is  expected  in  the  near  future.  The  profitability  of  auto  dealers  also  varies.

Atlanta  reports  that,  while  many  dealers  are  increasing  profits  and  some  popular  models

are  in  short  supply,  some  small  dealers  in  rural  areas  have  gone  out  of  business.

FINANCIAL

Total  loan  demand  varies  by  district  but  is  generally  flat.  In  Philadelphia  and  St.

Louis,  loan  volume  is  higher,  while  San  Francisco  and  Kansas  City  say  volume  is  stable.

Richmond  reports  a  slight  increase  in  problem  loans.  Activity  in  specific  categories  also

varies  by  District.  In  Philadelphia,  business  loans,  especially  to  manufacturers,  are  leading

the  growth  noted  there,  while  New  York  says  business  loans  to  retailers  have  been

providing  strength.  In  St.  Louis,  business  loans  in  general  have  been  growing,  along  with

loans  in  other  categories  as  well.  However,  most  districts  report  that  commercial  real  estate

loans  are  down  because  of  a  number  of  factors:  tightened  lending  requirements,  more

scrutiny  by  regulators,  overbuilding  in  many  markets,  and  locally  sluggish  economies.

Credit  Conditions.  Although  virtually  every  District cites  some  specific  cases  of

credit  tightening  by  banks,  with  the  most  significant  action  taken  by  New  England  banks,

there  is  little  evidence  of  a  general  "credit crunch."  Many  banks  have  reviewed  lending

policies  in  recent  months,  cutting  back  on  loans  to  the  real  estate  industry  and  newer  small

businesses,  or  tightening  up  lending  requirements  by  increasing  collateral  requirements  or

shortening  loan  terms.  In  addition,  many  builders  are  having  a  more  difficult  time

securing  financing  because  of  the  new  lending  limits  in  the  thrift  industry.  Still,  the

majority  of  businesses  say  they  have  not  seen  any  change  in credit  terms,  and  have  not  had

trouble  getting  loans.

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

First District economic activity continues at  a slow pace.  Manufacturing

activity varies considerably by industry, but most contacts report slowing orders

compared with previous  months.  Retail  sales  have  stabilized, but respondents

expect another difficult year.  Residential real estate markets remain slow, with

sizable  inventories  of unsold homes.  According  to  industry contacts and media

accounts,  small businesses are experiencing (or anticipate) difficulty securing

credit.

Retail

With Easter  late this year, New England retail contacts find sales  trends

hard  to  read.  Large  chains  expect comparable-store  sales  for March  and April

to be  3 to  10  percent above  last year's  levels.  Sales  at smaller stores and at

those  selling discretionary  items  continue  to decline.

Although retail conditions in the region remain very competitive and highly

promotional,  inventory  levels  are  generally  in  line,  and  less  distress

merchandise  is reaching  the  marketplace.  Profits,  on balance,  are  lower than

last  year's  levels.

Some  First  District  retailers  find  wholesale prices  rising  at  a steady

pace, while others  report some  acceleration.  In contrast  to  the  mid-April CPI

reading, the panel reports no significant increases in apparel prices.  However,

prices for health and beauty aids and pharmaceuticals have accelerated in recent

months.

Labor markets continue to loosen, especially at the managerial level.  Wage

increases have moderated to  a 4 percent annual pace.

Retailers  found  1989  to be a difficult year and generally expect  1990  to

be similar.  However, most contacts do not anticipate any further deterioration.

Manufacturing

Reports from First District manufacturers suggest that business conditions

continue mixed but generally softened during the first quarter.  While a majority

of contacts indicate that shipments exceeded year-ago levels, several respondents

face declining backlogs.  Only one-quarter of the  firms report new orders above

year-ago levels.  Market  conditions vary  considerably by  industry  and product

line.  In general,  consumer  luxuries, office  supplies,  and products related  to

autos,  construction and defense remain relatively weak;  however, a few contacts

noted a recent pick-up in major appliances, and in automotive and paper products.

While soft, defense generally held up better than contacts expected.  Commercial

aircraft, power  systems,  and computer-related supplies  face  relatively  strong

demand,  and exports continue  to  provide welcome  support.  Inventory levels  are

generally satisfactory.

In the face of anemic business  conditions, selling prices are flat to down

at  a majority  of  contacts.  By  contrast,  two  firms  raised  prices  by  5  to  8

percent  on  selected products  and hope  to  introduce  similar  increases  on other

lines later  this year.  All contacts  report that materials prices are  stable  or

falling.  Among firms  discussing profit margins,  improvements exceed declines.

Regional  employment levels  are  stable  to  down.  One  firm  that had hoped

to  reduce  employment gradually  through attrition has  already had two  lay-offs.

Two  recent  wage  settlements  resulted  in  a 5 percent  and  a  3 1/2  percent  wage

increase  for 1990.

Capital spending plans vary.  Half of the firms expect significant declines

from year-ago  levels,  and  two  firms have  recently cut back on projects planned

for 1990.  Elsewhere, capital  spending should continue at  1989  levels  or

increase by as  much as  25  percent.

Most  respondents view the  prospects  for  1990 with  concern.  They  expect

very slow  growth  throughout  the nation,  not just within  the  region, and a few

have downgraded their outlook on the basis of first quarter sales.  Although most

contacts  believe that  their  firms  are  on solid ground, few expect to  make much

headway during  1990.

Credit Availability

Contacts  in small businesses and in organizations serving them claim that

financial difficulties at some of the  region's banks have made it more difficult

and costly  than previously  for  small  business  to  obtain credit.  According to

these contacts, banks are requiring small firms to increase  their collateral and

provide  personal  guarantees;  some  current loans  are  being called.  Most  large

and medium-sized manufacturers,  in  contrast,  are  experiencing no  difficulties

obtaining credit.

Residential Real  Estate

First District realtors report that March-April sales were slightly below

year-ago  levels.  Homes  are  reaching  the market  faster  than they  are  selling,

and  most  realtors  have  large  inventories  of  unsold homes.  While  prices  are

falling, realtors  claim that buyers' unrealistic impressions of market weakness

can  delay  agreement on  a purchase  price.  Mid- to  low-priced homes  are  moving

better  than  more  expensive  houses.  Expectations  are  mixed.  Most  realtors

anticipate  a seasonal  upturn this  summer but are uncertain about the  timing of

a genuine recovery.

II-I

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Developments  in the  Second District economy since the last  report  have

again been mixed, with no clear signs of  overall  strengthening or weakening.

Homebuilders report  some  increased buyer  interest with the arrival of  spring, and

the  pace of  office leasing has been good  in many areas.  Sales  results at District

department stores were mixed, however,  in recent weeks and unemployment  rates  showed

little change.  Most officers at  small  and medium-sized banks noted an over-the-year

weakening in  commercial  loan demand.

Consumer Spending

Sales  results at District department  stores were mixed in recent weeks with

some  at or  above  targeted levels and others  falling below.  Year-to-year  changes

during February ranged between -3 percent and  +8 percent while the March range was

-9 percent  to +15  percent.  To obtain a clearer picture of their  Easter  season

performance, however,  most  respondents  intend to  look at  the combined March and

April  results since the  holiday occurred  a month later  this year than last.

In  general, women's apparel  continued to be  the strongest selling item with

some  retailers noting a pickup in men's apparel  as well.  Sales of  furniture and

home furnishings  tended  to  be sluggish, however,  though one  contact reported  strong

demand for  floor covering ana bedding.  Inventories are  generally on target, due  in

part to  cautious  stocking for  the  spring  season.  Merchanaise is  reportedly  still

below desired levels  at  some Campeau stores, though most  suppliers have now resumed

shipments to them.  With the  recently begun  liquidation of  yet  another District

department  store chain  and the closing of many small  Financial District  stores in

the  wake of  the cutbacks  in that  area,  some  contacts  expressed concern  about  the

local  retail  industry.

Residential  Construction and Real  Estate

II-2

District  homebuilders  report some  increased buyer  interest  with  the arrival

of  spring,  but most expect  that  regional housing  starts will decline  further  in

1990.  In the  face of  a  continuing glut of  existing  homes for  resale  and,  in some

areas, a  number  of  new houses and condos on the market as well, additional  price

markdowns and other  concessions are being offered  in much of  the New York

metropolitan  area and further  reductions  are seen as possible.  However,  in upstate

and western New York, where demand remains  relatively strong, home prices  increased

at  double digit rates  in  some areas during 1989  and the uptrend  is expected to

continue this year.

The pace  of office  leasing has recently been good  in much of the District,

with tenants  reportedly availing themselves of generous  landlord concessions.

However, as  substantial  amounts of both new and existing space continued to  be

marketed, Manhattan office vacancy rates moved somewhat higher.  As a result,

reactions have been mixed to the announcement that,  after  a six-year  legal  battle,

New York State has finally acquired most  of  the 13-acre site for  the redevelopment

of the Times Square area.  While the  transformation of  that badly deteriorated area

is  generally applauded, many critics are apprehensive because the plan includes  the

addition of  four  more large  office towers  in  the midtown area.

Other  Business Activity

District  unemployment  rates showed  little change in  March.  New Jersey's

rate rose  0.2 percentage point from February to  4.7%  while New York's rate  was

unchanged at  5.0%.  While these rates  remain below the national average, they  have

deteriorated both absolutely and relative to  the nation over  the past year.  A

recent U. S. Department of  Labor report  stated  that  job  growth in New York State

fell  to a 7-year  low in  1989  due to a faltering downstate economy and major

manufacturing losses  throughout the  state.  A positive development for  District

employment is  General Motor's announced plans  to spend $140  million retooling its

II-3

Linden, New Jersey plant  for  the production of light  trucks.  The plant had been

scheduled to end  auto  production next year.

The March survey of  Buffalo purchasing managers showed an increase  in the

percentage of  firms  reporting improvement  or  stability in production and new orders.

Eighty percent of  the managers noted stable input  prices, up from 64  percent in

February.  The Department of Labor  study mentioned above cited Buffalo as  one of three

metropolitan areas in which most of  New York  State's  job growth occurred in  1989.

Reports from firms  in  the Second  District suggest that  in most instances

operations have not been affected by any shift toward more restrictive lending

practices.  While some manufacturers and homebuilders noted a withdrawing of  credit

lines and  increased collateral  requirements, others, especially in upstate and western

New York,  have seen  little  or  no evidence of credit tightening.

Financial Developments

Based on a survey of  senior  officers  at  small and medium-sized banks  in  the

Second District, demand for  commercial  loans  is weaker than a year  ago.  Most bankers

agreed  that the  general decline  in  interest  rates over  the last year  failed  to

stimulate much loan activity, and cited the weak economy and cautious investing as  the

main factors for  falling demand.  One banker noted  that  any interest-rate-induced

increase  "would have been offset by the current economic climate".  When asked  if any

particular  sectors showed unusually strong  or  weak demand,  two-thirds of  the bankers

cited a weakness  in  real  estate and manufacturing loans, while a couple  noted strength

among retailers.  Almost all respondents described their  local economies as  stable or

weak.  Signs of  weakness cited were higher  vacancy rates, more delinquent  loans,

contracting  real estate markets  and layoffs.  The two  bankers who characterized their

economies as  strong also described them as  diversified.  When asked about expectations

of future  loan demand, the majority of  the  bankers forecasted stable or  lower  demand.

The bankers anticipate weak real  estate markets and cautious attitudes  by both

investors and lenders for  the  remainder  of  1990.

III-I

THIRD  DISTRICT  - PHILADELPHIA

The  Third  District  economy  showed  some  signs  of  improvement  in  April  although

measures  of  current  business  conditions  indicate  just  slight  gains  from  the  first  quarter,

overall.  Manufacturers  continue  to report  declining  business,  but the  extent  of  the slowdown

among  area  firms has  abated  recently.  Retailers  generally  report  marginal  gains  in  real  sales

in  recent  weeks,  an  improvement  from  the  pace  of sales  earlier  in  the  year.

Most  sectors  of  the  Third  District  economy  are  not  experiencing  any  difficulty

obtaining  credit,  and  evidence  of  a  "credit  crunch"  is  largely  confined  to  commercial  real

estate.  Bankers  note  steady  growth  in  overall  loan  demand;  they  were  posting  business  loans

at  a  somewhat  greater  rate  in  March  and  April  than  they  had  in  the  first  two  months  of  the

year,  although  consumer  lending  was  growing  only  slowly.

The  outlook  in the  Third  District  business  community  is  generally  for  modest  growth,

overall,  and  there  is  some  confidence  that  the  downturn  in  the  region's  industrial  sector  may

soon  be  reversed.  Among  manufacturers,  more  foresee  a  rebound  in  the  second  half  rather

than  further  slowing.  Retailers  generally  think  they  will  continue  to  post  real  gains  through

the  rest  of  the  year  although  they  do  not  expect  a  broad  upturn  in  sales.  Bankers  expect

lending  to  rise  steadily,  boosted  by  increased  industrial  loan  demand,  but  they  anticipate

further  constriction  of  real  estate  financing  and  only  slight  gains  in  personal  lending.

MANUFACTURING

Manufacturing  activity  in the  Third District  edged  down  again in  April,  but the extent

of  the  decline  among  the  firms  surveyed  appeared  to  be  easing.  After  relatively  widespread

reports  of  slowing  business  in  February  and  March,  the  number  of  companies  that  reported

weaker  activity  in  April  only  marginally  exceeded  the  number  noting  improvement.

Although  some specific  indicators of  industrial  activity  showed  improvement  in April,

most  continued  to  signal  weakness.  Shipments  were  increasing  and  new  orders  were  inching

up,  reversing  two  months  of  decline.  But  other  measures  of  business  conditions  were  still

falling.  Managers  at area  plants said  the  increase  in  new  orders  from  March  to  April  was  not

III-2

enough  to  boost  order  backlogs,  which  continued  on  a  nearly  year-long  decline.  Other  signs

of the  ongoing  downtrend  in  the  manufacturing  sector  are  delivery  times,  which  continued  to

decrease,  and  employment;  on  balance,  both  personnel  and  working  hours  were  being  reduced

at  area  plants  in  April.  Slack  conditions  in  manufacturing  are  also  reflected  in  stable

industrial prices.  Most  local  companies  reported  steady  prices in  April  for  their own  products

as  well  as  for  purchased  inputs.

Looking  ahead,  manufacturing  contacts  expressed  some  optimism  despite  lackluster

current conditions.  In their forecasts  for the six months ahead,  two-out-of-five  expect  business

to  pick  up  while  one-in-five  think  the  current  downturn  has  further  to  run. 

In  general,

executives  at  area  firms  expect  the  decline  in  order  backlogs  to  level  off,  but  they  do  not

expect  business  to  improve  enough  in  the  next  two  quarters  to  increase  that  backlog.  They

do not  foresee  any  improvement  in  employment,  either;  although  they  intend  to  hold  payrolls

steady,  they  plan  further  reductions  in  working  hours, on  balance.  Some  indication  of a  more

optimistic  outlook  for  business  in  the  longer  term  is  given  by  capital  spending  plans  at  area

plants.  After  two  months  in  which  more  companies  reduced  spending  plans  than  increased

them,  scheduled  expenditures  for  new  plant  and  equipment  were  being  boosted  marginally  in

April.

RETAIL

Retail  sales  in  the  Third  District  in  March  and  the  first  half of April  were  marginally

above  sales  in  the  same  period  last  year,  in  real  terms,  according  to  area  merchants,  and  most

of  those  contacted  in  late  April  said  sales  appeared  to  be  continuing  on  a  trend  of  slight  but

steady  real  growth.  Sales  of  spring  apparel  and  other  seasonal  items  have  been  meeting  most

retailers'  expectations,  and without  recourse  to deep  price  markdowns.  Several  merchants  also

mentioned  a  continuing  healthy  sales  pace  for  furniture  and  home  furnishings.

The  general  tone  of  the  forecasts  being  made  by  Third  District  retailers  is  for  very

modest  real  growth  during  the  rest  of  the  year.  Several  described  the  immediate  outlook  as

unsettled  due  to  financial  turmoil  in  the  industry  and  heightened  caution  among  consumers.

In  their own  planning, store executives  are looking  for niches  of  opportunities to expand  sales;

they  do  not  expect  sales  to  grow  across  a  broad  range  of  goods.

FINANCE

III-3

Total  loan  volume  at major  Third  District  banks  in  late  March  was  approximately  17

percent  above  the  level  for the  same  time  last  year,  and  bankers  contacted  in  late  April  said

overall  loan  growth  was  continuing  at  about  this  pace.  Third  District  bankers  generally

reported  increased 

loan  demand  from  builders  and  developers,  and,  although  they  are

approving  new  loans selectively,  they are  being more cautious  about real estate  lending in  light

of  increased  regulatory  concern  and  evidence  of  softening  markets  both  for  office space  and

for  residential  development.

Lending  officers  at  commercial  banks  in  the  District  say  business  loan  demand  is

picking  up  somewhat  from  the  first  quarter,  and  some  note  an  increase  in  requests  for  funds

to finance capital  investments  in the  manufacturing  sector.  Also mentioned  was increased  loan

demand  from  construction  firms  engaged  in  road  and  bridge  building  in  the  District.

Consumer  loan  growth  was  described  as  sluggish  by  most  bankers  surveyed  for  this

report.  Some  noted  what  they  considered  seasonal  increases  in  utilization  of credit  cards and

home  equity  credit  lines,  but most said  overall  personal  lending  was not  growing  appreciably.

Looking ahead,  Third District bankers  generally  expect overall loan growth to continue

at  about  its  current  pace.  They  believe  business  lending  may  accelerate,  with  the  expansion

mainly  in  loans  to  manufacturers;  but  they  expect  loan  volume  outstanding  to  builders  and

developers  to  remain  at  current  levels  or  decline,  and  lending  to  wholesalers  and  retailers  to

show little  growth.  Lending  to  individuals,  both  for  consumption  expenditures  and  for  home

mortgages  is  expected  to  rise  only  marginally.

Credit  conditions.  Bankers  note  that,  with  a  few  exceptions,  they  are  restricting

commercial  real estate  financing  to  current  customers  and limiting  the amount  of  new  money

extended  to  them;  but  they  say  a  general  restriction  of  credit--such  as  is  implied  by a  "credit

crunch"--is  not  being implemented.  Creditworthy  industrial  firms are  generally  finding  their

requests  for  funds well-received,  according  to  both bankers  and  businessmen.  However,  some

entrepreneurs  with  very small or start-up businesses say they have been  experiencing  somewhat

III-4

greater  difficulty  obtaining  funds  in  recent  months,  and  there  are  some  indications  that

apparel  manufacturers'  requests  for  loans  are  receiving  greater  scrutiny  in  light  of  the

financial  difficulties  of  certain  retailers  to  whom  they  sell.

IV  - 1

FOURTH DISTRICT  - CLEVELAND

Summary.  Respondents  in  the  Fourth District  are  increasingly  concerned

that  the  inflation rate  for  1990 will  exceed 4%.  Consumer  spending in  recent

months  has  been better  than many  retailers  expected.  A  strengthening  in

manufacturing  output  is  generally expected  to be mild.  Respondents  suggest

there  is  little  evidence  of a  "credit crunch"  in  the  Fourth District, although

credit  standards  are  said to have  tightened.

Inflation.  The  surge  in  consumer prices  in March has  led many

respondents  to believe  that  the 4%  rate  of  inflation they expected for  1990

may be  too  low.  Some  expect  that  the  increase  in  the  GNP  implicit price

deflator was  in  a  5  percent  to  6 percent  range  last quarter,  although

moderation  in price  increases  is  widely expected  this  quarter.  A  common

concern seems  to be  that  commodity prices  continue  to  firm gradually,  and

service  prices have been  accelerating.  Some  point out  that  the hike  in the

minimum wage  will  add to  wage  costs  especially  in  the  trade  sector of  the

economy.  Moreover, food prices  this year  could  increase  more  than  the  average

in  recent years because  of environmental  restrictions  on use  of herbicides

that  can constrain yields  and output.

Consumer  Spending.  Retailers  descriptions of  sales  in recent  months

range  from  "better than expected"  to  "very strong."  One  retailer  reported

that  even furniture  and appliance  sales were  "good,"  although  consumers are

resisting higher prices.  Apparel  sales were  especially  strong  despite  the

IV  - 2

surge  in  prices  in February  and March.  A retailer  asserted that  the  price

hikes  were  associated with consumers buying higher quality  goods  and with new

fashions.  Others stated  that retailers  are  trying  to  restore profit margins

that deteriorated badly during  the  Christmas  season.  In  addition, higher raw

materials prices  and the  increase  in  the minimum wage  have added to  retail

costs  and prices.

With both the  level  of  sales  and profits better than  expected last

quarter,  retailers  appear guardedly optimistic  about near-term prospects.

There  is  some  concern, however,  that  some  sales  last  quarter may borrow  from

the  second quarter,  and that  demand for household goods  may soften because of

further weakening in housing.  In general,  retail  economists  still  expect

about  a 2% increase  in  real  consumer spending  this year  from last.

Auto  producers  and dealers have mixed reports  on sales  and prospects.  For

some,  retail sales  in  February and March rebounded enough  to  bring inventories

down to  a desired  level.  April  sales  so  far have been soft  despite  generous

incentives.  Dealers  report floor  plan costs  have been held down because  of

smaller  inventories  this  year  than  last,  and some  report shortages  for  some

mid-sized cars.  Profits  are  still being strained because  incentives  and

marketing costs  are  said  to  average as  much as  $1200  per  car and

are considerably higher  for mid-sized cars.  Incentives  on some  Japanese  cars

have  increased by  about  $500.00.

Manufacturing Conditions.  District respondents  generally  agree  that  the

worst  of  the production cutbacks  are  over,  although most  expect  strengthening

this  quarter  and next will  be  mild.  Low-technology producers of  industrial

IV  - 3

and electrical machinery  equipment  expect  only a few percent  increase  in

output  over  the  next few quarters.  Auto production  is  rebounding from a poor

first  quarter,  and cutbacks  in  second quarter plans  are  being

rescinded, although  output  is  still  expected  to be  slightly below a year  ago.

Steel  producers  are  raising their  forecasts  of production  slightly for  1990

from earlier  this  year.  Auto bookings  for  the  second quarter have picked up

from the  first  quarter,  and steel warehouses  have  stepped up  orders,  probably

in  anticipation of a small  increase  in  sheet steel  prices  announced for July.

Also,  the volume of  imports has been less  than expected and exports  a little

larger than expected.

Production and shipments  of machine  cutting tools  continue  to  rise  but

solely on  the  strength of backlogs  that have been dwindling rapidly because  of

the  lag  in orders.

An expected revival  in heavy-duty truck business has  been slow  to  develop.

Orders  in February  fell below the  low of last  August,  and a comeback  in March

only matched the  relatively low average  of  last  fall.

Cincinnati  Purchasing Agents  report orders  and production  rose  for  the

third  successive month  in March, and commodity prices  firmed again  after

several  months  of  decline.  A commercial bank shows  that  durable goods

manufacturers  expect  a rebound  in  their business  following  declines  in  the

previous  three-month period.

Financial Conditions.  Respondents  suggest there  is  little  evidence of  a

credit  crunch  in  this District.  There  are,  however, reports  of some

IV  - 4

tightening  of  credit standards.  Nonetheless,  lenders  report  that  credit  is

available  to  qualified borrowers.

Small  business  firms  in  the  District reported no  awareness of credit

restraints,  although perceptions  are  that  some  lenders  are  tightening  credit

standards.  Only  one  small business  firm reported  that banks  are  not  lending,

especially  for commercial  real  estate because  of depressed  prices  due  to high

vacancy  rates.  Several new car  dealers  reported some  tightening  in credit

standards by  both banks  and  thrifts.

Small builders  apparently have  not been  shut  off  from credit, although

FIRREA  legislation has  made  it more  difficult to  obtain  sufficient credit  from

a  single  lender.  Thrifts  contacted  assert  there  is  no  lack  of  funds  in  the

mortgage  market  for  qualified builders  and buyers,  and reported  that  their

loan volume  so  far  this year  exceeds  the  same period last  year.  They

acknowledged  that  the  15%  limit  on loans  is  an  inconvenience  to  some builders

and developers.  Several  banks  in  the  District  also  reported that  their  loans

so  far  this year  exceed  last year,  although  some  tightening  in  credit

standards  has  taken place  in view of rising office  vacancy rates,

foreclosures,  and nonperforming real  estate  loans.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview

The District  economy continued  to  grow at  a moderate pace  in early April.

Retail  sales  rose  in most  areas  of the  District, though  big-ticket  items

contributed less  than  in late March.  Manufacturing  activity again  posted

modest  gains,  and  shipments  at  District  seaports were generally stronger.

Financial  institutions,  however,  experienced a slight  increase  in problem

loans,  particularly  in commercial  real  estate.  Also,  large  financial

institutions  and  their borrowers  reported  tighter lending requirements,

especially for commercial  real  estate  and  some other  types  of  business loans.

In agriculture, cold  and wet April  weather  proved  to  be  a mixed

blessing--benefiting  some  crops while  harming  others.

Consumer Spending

Responses  to our telephone  survey  of state  retail  associations  indicated

that  all  District states  except West  Virginia experienced  increased  sales  of

general  merchandise during  the  first  two weeks  of April  as  compared  with the

last half  of March.  Sales of apparel  were  especially strong  in Virginia,

Maryland,  and the  District of Columbia.  Sales  of big  ticket  items  declined

relative to total  sales  in the  District of Columbia, West  Virginia,  and

Maryland  while they  remained about  the  same  in Virginia  and  South  Carolina.

All  of the respondents  expect  sales  to  increase  during  the  next  six months.

Manufacturing

The  results  of our  regular mail  survey  of manufacturers showed  that

District manufacturing  activity in April  continued  to  grow at  about the  same

slow rate  that was  indicated  in our previous survey  in February.  In April  as

well  as  in February more respondents  reported  increases  than  decreases  in

shipments  and  new orders.  New orders  for  exports were  reported  to  be  higher by

V-2

25  percent  of the  April  respondents--up  from  13  percent who  reported  increases

in February.  Unfilled orders,  employment,  and the  length  of the  workweek,

however, were  largely unchanged.  Prices  for  raw materials  rose  at  the  same

moderate pace  reported  in February.  Inventories  of materials  and  finished

goods were largely  unchanged.

District manufacturers were more  optimistic  than  earlier  this year about

prospects  for  growth  in their businesses  and  in the  national  economy.  More

than  half of the  April  respondents,  up  from 38 percent  in February,  look  for

their shipments  and  new orders  to  increase  during  the  next  six months,  and  the

proportion who  expect  an  increase  in national  economic activity  rose  from  31

percent  in February to  42  percent  in April.

In the April  survey  we asked  manufacturers how  foreign  developments might

affect  their  sales.  The table  below summarizes  manufacturers'  responses  to  the

question:  How do you  expect  the  movement toward  free markets  in Eastern  Europe

to  affect  your firm's  sales  in the  next...

No  Effect 
Sales  Will  Increase 
Sales  Will  Decrease 

Ports

six months, 

92% 
6% 
1% 

year, 
77% 
19% 
3% 

two  years?

51%
42%
6%

Representatives from the  three major  District ports--Baltimore,

Charleston,  and  Hampton Roads  (Norfolk)--noted steady  to  higher  shipments  in

April  compared  to March.  Exports were higher  at  both  Hampton Roads  and

Baltimore  and  about  the  same  at  Charleston.  Import  shipments  were  also

generally higher with  volume up  at  Hampton Roads  and  Charleston  and  about  the

same  at  Baltimore.  When  compared to  a year  ago, export  activity was  higher

at  Hampton Roads,  lower  at  Baltimore, and  unchanged  at  Charleston while

import  activity was  higher  at  Hampton  Roads  but  lower  at  Charleston and  at

Baltimore.  Representatives at  all  District ports  expect  exports  to  grow

faster than  imports  during the  next  six  months.

Financial

A telephone  survey of District  financial  institutions  suggested  that  the

number of problem loans  increased  slightly  in recent  weeks.  Half  of the

respondents  reported a small  increase  in the  volume  of nonperforming  loans,

while the  other  half reported no  change.  Those contacted  indicated  that  the

problem loans were  concentrated  in the  commercial  sector,  particularly  in

commercial  real  estate.

A special  telephone  survey  of business and  financial  people  in the  region

revealed that  most  financial  institutions  had  tightened  lending  requirements,

especially for  loans  for  the  start-up or  expansion of  small  businesses  and  for

the speculative development of real  estate.  According to  borrowers  from the

regional  banks,  new lending  for commercial  real  estate has  nearly dried  up,  and

there  has  also  been  a definite but  less pronounced  tightening of certain  other

types  of  business credit.  The  borrowers  from  smaller banks  and  the  smaller

banks  themselves,  however, reported limited  if  any tightening  of credit.  Most

manufacturers,  retailers,  and  other businesses  that borrow  from  smaller banks

reported no  change  in credit  conditions.

Lenders  were also  asked  about  their expectations  for  interest  rates.  Most

expect  rates  to  remain  essentially unchanged  or trend downward  slightly  in the

coming  months.

Agriculture

The effects  of three  weeks of cold,  wet weather  in April  on  District

agriculture were mixed.  Despite rain-shortened  farm workweeks,  the  planting of

corn and  the  transplanting  of tobacco progressed  at  faster  than  normal  rates.

In addition,  the recent  precipitation raised  moisture  levels  to  adequate  or

surplus  in all  areas  of  the District  except  South  Carolina.  Dry  conditions

V-4

prevailed  there through  mid April,  especially  in the state's  mid  to  southern

portions.

We received mixed  reports  on  crops.  The  abundant rains  were good for hay

and  pasture conditions  around  the  District.  Wheat was  maturing  rapidly but

beetle  infestations  and  mildew were  reported in some wheat-growing  areas.  The

recent  cold weather damaged  apple  and peach  crops  in Virginia  and  in the

Carolinas.  The  losses were  severe  in some  areas.

VI-1

SIXTH  DISTRICT  - ATLANTA

Overview:  Our  contacts  continue  to  report  steady growth  in  the  Sixth  District at

a  pace  that  shows,  on  balance,  a  little  slowing  from  that  of  last  year.  They  note  that

prices  of  most  raw  materials  have  been  steady  in  the  past  few  months,  and  there  are  no

signs  of  added  wage  pressures.  Manufacturers  of  consumer  durables  continue  to  report

weak  demand  for  their  products,  while  producers  of  chemicals  note  strong  business

activity.  Retailers  report  modest  increases  in  sales  from  a  year  ago,  with  apparel  sales

being  particularly  strong.  Real  estate  markets  are  described  as  being generally  soft,  and

lenders  are  said 

to  have  become 

increasingly  cautious 

in  financing  new  building

projects.  Exports  of  raw  materials  and  natural  resources  are reported  to  be  strong.

Wages  and  Prices:  Prices  of  raw  materials  are  generally  reported  as  stable.  A

manufacturer  of  chemicals  and  plastics  reports  that  the  prices  of  chemicals  used  in

construction  and  of  some  input  chemicals  like  benzene  are  down  slightly  this  year.  A

producer  of  heating  and  cooling  equipment  noted  that  aluminum  prices  continue  to  fall

slowly  but  that  copper  prices  are  now  steady.  Several  of retailers  in  the  District  indicate

that  they  see  no  significant  increases  in  their  prices.  A  furniture  distributer  pointed  out

that  there  has  been  no  upward  pressure  on  prices  from  manufacturers  because  of  weak

demand  for  furniture.

Few  employers  reported  any  new  wage  pressures,  and  most  indicate  that  they  are

seeing  wage  increases  of  about  5  percent  at  most.  The  cost  of  employee  health  benefits,

however,  remains  high  and is  still  increasing.

Manufacturing  and  Employment:  Contacts  in  the  chemical  industry  continue  to

report  strong  demand  for  most  of  their  products,  especially  from  the  paper  and  pulp

industry.  One  manufacturer  noted  that  exports  of  chemicals  to  the  Far  East  have  been

down  recently,  owing  to  new  plants  in  Korea  and  Taiwan,  but  that  exports  to  Europe

continue  to  increase.  He  added  that  because  of  strong  domestic  demand,  his  firm  was

increasing  capital  spending  substantially  over  1989's  level  to  modernize  equipment  and

expand  capacity.

VI-2

Apparel  producers  report  that  they  expect  their  sales  to  increase  as  consumers

spend  less  on  autos  and  other durable  goods.  A  carpet  manufacturer  expects  1990  to  be  a

good  year  for  the  carpet  industry  because  replacement  demand  should  continue  to

support  sales.  He  explained  that  carpet  tends  to  be  replaced  in  roughly  ten-year  cycles.

Because  1979  was  a  very  strong  year,  they  are  now  seeing  increases  in  replacement

demand.

Contacts  in  the  aerospace  industry  expect  an  increase  in  layoffs  as  a  result  of

budget  reductions  at  the  Department  of  Defense.  Firms  in  Georgia  and  Florida  reported

the  largest  cutbacks  in  employment.  Aerospace  firms  related  to  the  space  program,

however,  report  increased  hiring  as  a  result  of  renewed  growth.  Florida,  Alabama,  and

Louisiana  are  gaining jobs  as  a  result.

Retail  Sales:  Most  District  retailers  indicate  that  sales  in  March  met  or

exceeded  their  goals  and  in  real  terms  were  slightly  above  year-ago  levels.  They  also

expect  the  modest  real  growth  to  continue  for  the  next  few  months.  Contacts  point  out

that  apparel  sales  have  been  very  strong  in  comparison  to  durable  goods  like  appliances

and  furniture.

Auto  dealers  note  that  sales  have  been  slightly  below  year-ago  levels  recently.

But  because  they  have  been  able  to  reduce  their  inventories  and,  therefore,  interest

costs,  several  large  dealers  said  that  profits  are  up  over  last  year.  A  few  dealers  expect

that  sales  will  be  up  slightly  this  year,  and  some  dealers  noted  that  a  few  popular  models

are  in  short  supply.  Nevertheless,  contacts  continue  to  report  that  small  dealers,

particularly  those  in  nonmetropolitan  areas,  are  not  doing  well  and  that  many  have  gone

out  of  business.

Real  Estate  and  Construction: 

Several  home  builders  have  reported  that

residential  construction  remains  weak  after  an  abnormally  strong  January.  A  number  of

contacts  indicate  that  housing  sales  throughout  Florida  are  down  substantially  compared

to  a  year  ago.  Commercial  developers  mentioned  that  the  value  of  nonresidential

construction  is  up  over  last  year,  but  they  added  that  most  of  the  strength  has  been  in

VI-3

public  building  projects  in  Florida  and  Georgia.  Office  construction  remains  subdued  in

much  of  the  District.

Developers  and  builders  across  the  District  pointed  out  that  it  is  becoming  more

difficult  to  obtain  financing  for  new  real  estate  projects.  Much  of  the  reluctance  on  the

part  of  lenders  has  been  a  response  to  overbuilt  markets,  but  builders  are  now  saying  the

increased  surveillance  by  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency 

is  adding  to  the  already

cautious  lending  attitudes.

Natural  Resources:  Domestic  oil  drilling  remains  steady,  and  most  contacts  do

not  expect  significant  growth  in  the  next  few  months.  Several  producers  in  Louisiana

felt  that  increasing  environmental  concern  is  discouraging  new  drilling.

Exports  of  coal,  kaolin,  wood  pulp,  and  chemicals  are  reported  to  be  holding

steady or  increasing.  Few  contacts  indicated  that  the  recent  strengthening  of the  dollar

had  affected  their  exports  substantially.  They  pointed  out  that  the  reliability  of  U.S.

suppliers  and  long-term  contracts  are  more  important  in  determining  the  volume  of

exports  than  are  short-term  movements  in  exchange  rates.

Recent  cold  weather  has  delayed  planting  of  some  crops  and  has  damaged  some

of  the  new  peach  and  apple  crops.  Farmers  expect  to  increase  substantially  the  acreage

devoted  to  cotton  while  reducing  soybean  acreage.  On  balance,  southeastern  farmers

plan  to  return  a  large  share  of idle  land  to production  because  of  higher  prices  for cotton

and some  grains.

Credit  Condition:  Except  for  real  estate  credit,  none  of  our  contacts  indicated  a

direct  experience  with  tightening  credit  conditions.  Some  contacts  report  a  reluctance

on  the  part  of  financial  institutions  to  engage  in  further  real  estate  lending  given  the

overbuilding  which  has  occurred 

in  most  markets.  One  indicated  that  a  financial

institution  withdrew  support  for  the  second  and  third  phases  of  an  office  complex  and

others  reported  higher  collateral  requirements  and  interest  rates  on  proposed  projects.

With  regard  to  business  and  consumer  lending,  however,  credit  is  said  to  be  available  as

usual.

VII-1

SEVENTH  DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.  Contacts  in the  Seventh District  continue  to report generally  improving

business conditions,  although  areas of weakness  were  also cited.  Purchasing  agents' surveys

indicate  a rise in production,  but orders are  slowing  in some  areas  of the District.  Contacts in  the

manufacturing  sector report slow  but steady  gains over a  wide range of products.  Construction

activity remains  stronger in  the District than nationwide,  but the housing market is showing  signs

of softening.  Consumer spending  has been holding  up well  in recent months,  but sales  for one

large retailer  were  unexpectedly weak in early  April.

Surveys of purchasing  managers  in the District showed improvements  in production,  but

a mixed pattern  in orders.  Chicago's  survey indicated a  steady increase  in the number of firms

expanding  production  since the  beginning of the  year.  Firms receiving  more new  orders  also

outnumbered  firms receiving  fewer new  orders.  Both Milwaukee's  and Indianapolis'  survey

showed expanding  production  last quarter.  However, in  the March  survey Milwaukee  had the

number of firms  with  lower production  equalling  the  number with  higher production.  Similarly,

after indicating increasing  orders  in January  and February,  Milwaukee's  March  survey  indicated

that the number of firms receiving  fewer new  orders outnumbered  the firms  receiving  more new

orders.  Indianapolis'  and Detroit's survey also  showed declining  orders  in the first  quarter.

Manufacturing.  A number of contacts indicated  that manufacturing  activity  continues  to

make modest  gains.  Improvements  among  consumer  goods producers  are being  led by the auto

industry.  Although  domestic  car  production  in the  second quarter  is expected  to be about  10

percent  below its  year-ago level,  a recent  survey of auto makers  indicated that car production  this

quarter is expected  to be  20 percent above the  first quarter.  One  auto maker extended  the

temporary  shutdown  of an assembly  plant in the  District by one week  in early April  because of

slow  car sales.  However, all auto facilities  are  scheduled to  be operating  by the last week of

April, with  some working overtime.  An  economist for the steel  industry reported that  orders

have  been  "flooding in" from  the auto industry,  although  the orders  have  had longer  lead times.

Steel shipments  in the  second quarter are  expected  to be about equal  to a year ago.

VII-2

Capital  goods  producers  generally reported improving  orders and sales.  A  producer of a

wide range of capital  goods  noted that  sales began  to improve in  February and orders  have been

strengthening  since  the beginning  of the year, led by petroleum  equipment and food machinery.

Other special  industry machinery  orders  were up  slightly, with the exception of automotive

service equipment  which  has been  weak for over six months.  An economist  in the

communications  equipment industry  cited  an increase in orders  across  a  variety of products  and

expects double-digit  growth in the near  future.  An  uptick in orders  for electronic components,

however, may  be due to  fears of shortages,  which  have  led  to double ordering,  according to  an

industry analyst.  Sales of farm  and construction  equipment  continue to  be extremely  good,

according  to a  industry economist.  Farm equipment  sales  are very  strong, particularly  combines

and large tractors.  Construction  equipment sales  have  also  been  holding  up, despite  sluggish

housing and shopping  center construction  nationally.  The economist  noted that  sales in  that

company's  Midwest  market have  been  showing  solid gains.

Construction  and Real Estate.  Construction  activity  in the District continues  to outpace

the  nation, as  unseasonably  warm  weather boosted  residential  and nonresidential building.  A

supplier of building materials  reported  that year-to-date  shipments  to District  states  are up,

compared  to a drop for the nation  as  a whole.  Similarly,  an analyst in  the cement industry  noted

that cement  shipments  to the District have  grown  substantially  faster than  nationally,  with  the

exception  of flatness  in sales  to Michigan,  which was  attributed  to the  weakness  in the  state's

auto  industry.

Several  contacts cited special  factors  that may  be  hampering  construction.  A financial

analyst  stated that builders  are  in need of new sources of loans,  because  savings  and loan

institutions are  "out of the market."  A  steel producer  noted some  slowing in orders  from  the

construction  industry  that may reflect delays  in projects  due to financing problems.  And, an

equipment  supplier also noted  that some plant construction,  particularly  in the  chemical industry,

is  being held back until environmental regulations  are finalized.

VII-3

The housing market  is showing  some signs of weakening.  A  bank economist  cited a

softening  in Chicago's  real estate  loan market,  especially  for mid-to-high  priced  homes.

Mortgage  rates have  moved above  10  percent at most lending  institutions in the  area  and some

banks have  started tightening credit terms.  Available  funds  for new construction  are being

absorbed mostly by single-family  housing  units, with few  funds  going to multi-family  units,

according  to one financial  analyst.  A  supplier to the mobile  home  industry reported  sharp  sales

declines  in most regions of the country,  including the District.  However, one  bank economist

noted  that housing prices  in the District have risen more closely  in line with  personal  income

than in other regions,  which has contributed  to a stronger housing  market here than in the  nation

on average.

Consumer Spending.  Recent  patterns in  general merchandise  sales  are difficult to

interpret  because of atypical  weather  and a late Easter,  but several  contacts  indicated year-over-

year  sales gains  in recent  months.  An  economist for a major department  store  chain reported

steady  improvements  through early April in their seasonally  adjusted weekly  sales figures,  led by

electronic  goods  and appliances.  These sales  gains  occurred  without special  promotions.  Sales

declined, however,  for women's accessories,  men's  clothing,  and lawn  and garden supplies.

Sales  have been  strongest in Wisconsin  and Illinois,  and declined  in Michigan.  An  analyst for a

major discount chain  reported that  sales in February  and March  were  the best for that period

since  1983,  with double-digit  gains  in all  types  of electronics.  However, overall  sales in  the first

full week of April unexpectedly  declined from  a year ago,  even after  adjusting for differences  in

the Easter selling  season  and despite  the fact that  store  traffic remained  relatively  high.

Domestic car and truck  sales in  the early part  of April were  down from a  year ago.  An industry

economist, who  had expected that  first quarter  sales would  be  strong enough  to end the  need for

sales  incentives, now  sees promotional  activity  continuing  through the  second quarter.

Banking.  Isolated reports  of tighter credit  standards  were  obtained from  several  lending

officers  in the District.  With  respect  to commercial  and industrial  loans,  the only report of credit

tightening related  to loan requests  involving borrowing  institutions that are highly  leveraged.

VII-4

Demand from leveraged  borrowers  has fluctuated  widely  in recent weeks.  No lending  officer

stated, however,  that their institution had directly  altered credit standards.  Other business  traffic

was  reported  by a major  Chicago lending institution  to be  "routine."  One respondent  indicated

that,  in response  to his bank's  apparent concern over loan quality,  the borrower was  being  asked

for more loan documentation.  This respondent indicated  that the bank was  now asking the

borrower for what  purpose were  the  funds to be  used.  Another respondent said  that troubled

loans were  not being  carried  as long  by banks.  This respondent  also noted that there was  an

increasing  array of new  sources  of credit  available  to the small  business borrowers.  The general

impression conveyed  by several respondents  was  that funds  were  adequately available  to  good

borrowers.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT  - ST.  LOUIS

Summary

Economic  growth 

in 

the  Eighth  District 

continues  to  be  sluggish, 

a

characterization  similar  to  those  presented  in  our  reports  since  April

1989.  Consumer  spending  appears  to  be 

flat 

or  up  only  slightly. 

The

manufacturing  sector 

is 

still 

weakening,  while  the  construction  and

service  sectors  show  slow  growth.  Export  activity has  been mixed.  No

widespread  tightening of credit appears  to  exist  in  the  District.

Consumer  Spending

Recent  retail 

sales  activity 

is  described  by  most  contacts  as 

flat

or  up  slightly  from  a  year  ago.  Some  of  the  March weakness,  however,  is

thought  to  be  due  to  wet weather  and because  Easter  occurred later  this

year  than last.  Some  contacts  also  mentioned  that  unusually  mild  weather

earlier 

this  year,  which  resulted  in  heavier  spending  for  spring  clothing

and  furniture,  has  borrowed  from  current  and  future  sales.  These  contacts

anticipate  a  slowing  of sales  in  the  next  few months.  Car  sales  have  been

weak recently,  and have  declined  since February  in  most areas.

Manufacturing

A  survey  of  Missouri  purchasing  agents  suggests  generally  weak

conditions.  The  rate  of new orders  received by  manufacturers  in  the  first

quarter  slowed  from  the  previous  quarter  and  from  a  year  earlier.  Most

respondents  reported 

that 

delivery 

lead 

times  had  declined  or  were

unchanged  last  quarter. 

Fewer  respondents  reported  increasing  commodity

prices  in  the  first  quarter  compared with  a year  earlier.

VIII-2

Numerous  plant  closings, 

layoffs  and  production  slowdowns  have  been

reported  in  recent  months.  For  example,  firms  producing  shoes,  women's

apparel,  school  supplies,  fabricated  metal  products  and home  insulation

have  reduced  their  output.  Auto-related  manufacturing  remains  generally

stagnant  with  suppliers  of  auto  components  such  as  seats,  fuel  lines  and

vacuum harnesses  cutting  production.  The  workweek  for  those  assembling

minivans,  however,  continues  to  lengthen  reflecting  the  strong  demand  for

these  vehicles.

Manufacturers  producing  primary  metals,  machinery  and  chemicals

report  flat  to  declining exports  in  1990,  relative  to  1989.  Exports  of

fabricated  metal  products  were  mixed. 

Contacts 

in 

the 

lumber, 

food

products  and  coal  mining  industries  report  higher  exports  in 

the  early

part  of  1990, 

relative 

to  1989,  with  increased  exports 

to  East  Bloc

countries  contributing to  the  increase  in  lumber  and food product  exports.

Construction

Reports 

from  contacts, 

as  well  as  housing  permit  and  building

contract  data,  suggest  there  has been  an  increase  in  both  residential  and

nonresidential  building  activity 

this 

year. 

There 

is 

disagreement,

however,  on how much  of the  increase  is  due  to  the  unusually  mild weather.

Some  contacts  believe  that  the  demand  for  new  and  existing  single-family

homes  will  strengthen  this  year  in Missouri  and  in  the  Louisville  area.

Apartment  building  in 

the  District 

is 

expected 

to  remain  depressed,

however,  as  vacancy  rates  remain high  in  some  areas.  Uncertainty  about

the  possible  closing  of  a  major  military 

base  has  slowed  construction

activity 

in  northeast  Arkansas. 

Much  of  the  District's 

gain  in 

the

nonresidential  sector  is  due  to  growth  in  Arkansas,  where  a  paper  plant

and other factories  are being constructed.

VIII-3

Banking  and Credit

A  widespread 

"credit 

crunch"  does  not  appear 

to  exist 

in 

the

District.  Total  loans  outstanding  at  the  District's  11  largest  banks  are

up  modestly  from their  level  of one  year  ago.  Real  estate  loans,  and home

equity  loans  in  particular, are  up  sharply  from  last  year. 

Commercial

and  industrial  lending  was  also  up  sharply  at  District banks  during  the

first  quarter.  Most  small  businesses  contacted  have  not  experienced  a

significant 

shift 

in 

their 

lenders' 

credit 

terms,  nor  have 

they  had

trouble  obtaining  financing during  the  past  six  months.  Loan  officers  at

District 

banks  indicate  that  their  willingness  to  make  consumer  loans 

is

essentially unchanged  from six  months ago.

Commercial  real  estate  lending  is 

the  notable  exception  to  overall

growth  in  real  estate  lending,  and has  been  sharply  curtailed by  District

banks  in recent months.  Lending 

terms  and  underwriting  standards  have

tightened  considerably, 

reflecting  pressure  from  examiners 

to  strengthen

banks'  real  estate  portfolios  and  the  generally sluggish  economy.

Agriculture

A  late March  freeze  destroyed most  of  the  peach  crop  in  Tennessee

and  Kentucky  and  damaged  the  apple,  strawberry,  alfalfa  and winter  wheat

crops  in  some  areas.  April  rains  have  pushed  topsoil  moisture  conditions

to  levels  ranging  from  adequate  to  surplus  in  most  of  the  District 

and

have  slowed 

fertilizer 

application, 

field 

preparation  and  planting.

Reflecting  increased planting  intentions  for  rice  and cotton,  agricultural

banks 

in  southern  portions  of  the  District 

are  receiving  requests  for

larger  production loans.

IX-1

NINTH DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

Ninth District economic  conditions have been moderately good  lately.

Labor markets have  been fairly tight, but wage  and price  increases have been

moderate.  Retail  sales  have been strong, but new car  sales  have been slow.

Credit conditions  have  tightened moderately.  Resource-related industries have

generally been doing well.  However, farmers  still  fear  that,  without  good

spring rains,  another drought  is  possible.

Employment, Wages,  and Prices

Labor markets have  remained fairly tight  throughout  the  district.  The

unemployment rate  in Minnesota was 4.7  percent  in February, down from 4.9

percent a year  earlier.  February unemployment rates  in  the  rest  of the

district were  also  lower than a year earlier.  In particular, Montana's

unemployment rate,  at  5.9  percent, was  sharply lower  than the  7.6 percent  rate

of February 1989.  In Minnesota's Minneapolis-St. Paul  area, job  cutbacks  in

the  computer  and electronics  industries were  offset by strong growth  at

medical  technology firms.  District-wide, manufacturing  employment in  February

was  slightly ahead  of a year ago.

Wage  and price  increases  have remained moderate  in  the  district,  except

for continued high  growth in  health care  costs.  Recent  and prospective

increases  in  minimum wages  are  not expected  to  have  much of an  impact here

because shortages  of  entry-level workers  and teenagers  have  already forced up

their  wages.

Consumer  Spending

Retailers have  continued to  report  strong sales  throughout  the  district.

Sales  in March ranged from 4 to  8 percent ahead  of last  March.  One  retailer

IX-2

calls  Easter  sales  "spectacular."  Inventories  are  reported to  currently by at

acceptable  levels.  But retailers  in small  towns have continued to  lose

business  to  regional  shopping malls.  Shopping  centers near  the  Canadian

border report  exceptionally strong demand from Canadian shoppers.

New car  sales have  continued to  be  soft, but the  used car market  is

reportedly strong.  Most district dealers report  that,  even with the  softness

in new car  sales,  they  are  doing considerably better than  the nationwide

figures  suggest.

Housing sales  have  showed considerable variation around the  district.  In

the  Minneapolis-St.  Paul  area, housing sales  were  15.4 percent  higher than a

year  ago  in March alone  and 16.2  percent higher than a year ago  in  the  first

quarter.  In  parts of North Dakota, however, housing markets  are  said to  be

very slow and prices  sharply lower.  The number of new housing permits  issued

in Minnesota in  February was  11  percent  lower  than  a year earlier.  Much  of

this  decline  is  concentrated in  the  Minneapolis-St. Paul  area, where  the

number  of new permits  fell  21  percent.

Tourist  activity has also  been varied across  the district.  In  the Upper

Peninsula of Michigan,  the  ski  season was  shortened by a somewhat  earlier-

than-normal melting of  snow.  Most  contacts  report  that  they are  optimistic

about  tourism prospects  for  the  summer.  The legalization of gambling  in

Deadwood, South Dakota, has  caused property values  there  to  increase  several

times  over.

Credit Conditions

While credit appears  to  have  tightened modestly in  the  Ninth District,

there  are  no  signs here  of a "credit crunch."  Real estate  developers report

IX-3

increasing difficulty in obtaining credit from  their  traditional sources  of

funds,  the  savings  and  loans.  Most contacts  report  that  lending  to  their  own

businesses has  not significantly  changed.  However,  these  contacts  also  report

closer  scrutiny of collateral and downpayments by banks.  Bankers  in  farm

areas  report increased competition from the  Farm Credit  System for

agricultural  loans.

Resource-Related Industries

Mining  remains  one  of the  strongest  sectors  in  the Ninth District

economy.  Precious  metal mines  in Montana, in particular, have  continued to

expand.  Technological  developments  in underground mining have created new

interest  in  reopening previously abandoned mines.  The district's  forest

product  industries have  remained strong.  Environmental  concerns have

continued to  affect proposed expansion in both the mining and lumber

industries.

Farmers  in most  of  the  district are  still  concerned about  the  lack  of

soil  moisture.  The one  bright spot  is  Montana, where  recent rains  are

reported  to have  increased  soil moisture  to  the  best level  in  several years.

Winter  wheat  losses have been smaller than feared,  thanks  to  a mild winter.

Cattle prices  are now reported to be high, and ranchers  are  generally

optimistic about  their  prospects  for  the  rest of  the year.  Rental rates  for

pastureland are  said to have  risen  sharply.  Land prices  in  the  district  are

continuing their  steady recovery from the  depressed levels  of a few years  ago.

X-1

TENTH DISTRICT  -KANSAS CITY

Overview.  The  Tenth District economy continues  to  grow modestly.

Retail  sales  are up  from a year earlier,  and auto  sales  are  beginning to  pick

up  a bit  in  some  district  states.  Manufacturing plants  continue  to  operate

below capacity,  though a  few are  experiencing skilled  labor  shortages.  Oil

and gas  exploration and development  remain  stronger  than a  year  ago.  Housing

activity  is  down from  a year ago,  but  starts  have  increased recently  due  to

warmer weather.  Mortgage  demand is  weak at  thrift  institutions,  and  loan

demand  at commercial  banks  is  generally  steady to  down  from a month  ago.

Small  businesses  report only slight  tightening in  the  availability  of credit

to  them  from traditional  sources.  Little  if any  such  tightening is  reported

by  agricultural borrowers.  Rural nonfarm businesses  are benefiting  from the

improved performance of the  agricultural  sector.

Retail  Sales.  Most  district retailers  report higher sales  over  last

year, but mixed  sales  over  the  last three  months.  Some  improvement  in sales

is  expected in  the  next few months.  Retailers are  generally  satisfied with

current  inventories  and will  try  to  keep  them at  current  levels.  Prices have

changed  in  line with  cost  increases  and  are  expected to  change  little  in the

near  future.  New auto  sales  have  improved slightly in  some  district  states

but  remain sluggish  in  others.  Some  dealers  report  tighter  credit  terms  for

potential buyers.  Most  dealers  continue  trimming  inventories  in expectation

of only  slightly higher  sales  in coming months.

Manufacturing.  Most purchasing  agents  report moderate  input price

increases  from a year  ago.  Prices  have  been  fairly steady over  the  last  three

months and are  expected to  remain so  or  to  increase  slightly over  the  next

three  months.  Materials  inputs  are  readily available,  and purchasing agents

X-2

expect  no problems  in  obtaining materials  for  the  rest  of  the year.  Lead

times  on certain inputs  have  increased slightly, however.  Most  firms  continue

trying  to  trim  inventories.  Plants  are operating below capacity,  though a few

are  experiencing skilled labor  shortages.

Energy.  Oil prices were  expected to  soften  in the  second  quarter, but

high OPEC  production and weak world demand  caused prices  to  fall  faster than

anticipated.  Already down $3 from their  mid-winter  peak, prices  declined  an

additional $2 a barrel  during  the  first  two  weeks of April.  Despite  softer

prices,  exploration and development  activity  in  the  district has  increased

from a year ago.  The  district rig count  fell  from 255  in  February to  226  in

March, but was  7 percent above  the  rig  count  in March  1989.

Housing Activity and Finance.  District housing activity  is  down from a

year ago.  However, builders report  stronger housing  starts  over  recent months

because of warmer weather.  Single-family construction continues  to  be

stronger  than multi-family.  New home  sales  are  slow, and prices  remain

generally stable.  Respondents  expect housing activity  to  remain  slow for  the

rest of  the  year.  Most district  savings  and loan  respondents  report  deposit

increases both over  last month and over  last year.  Respondents have mixed

expectations  about  deposits  in the  near  term.  Some expect  outflows  due  to

continuing problems  in  the  industry, while  others  expect  inflows  due  to  a

return of  customer confidence.  Mortgage  demand  is  weak at  most institutions,

and  is  expected  to  improve  only  seasonally.  Mortgage  rates  remain steady  and

are  expected to  be  steady to  down slightly over  the  rest  of  the  year.

Banking.  Commercial bank respondents  report  total loan demand was

constant or  down over  the  last month.  Home mortgages,  commercial  real  estate

loans,  and commercial and  industrial loans  were constant  at  most banks;

X-3

agricultural  loans were  down.  In  contrast, most  banks  report higher demand

for  construction loans,  and higher or constant demand  for  home equity  loans.

Prime  rates  and consumer  lending rates were  unchanged at nearly all  banks,

with no change  expected  in the  near  term.  Nonprice  terms  of  lending have

changed  for  some borrowers, however.  Some  small businesses,  and especially

newer businesses and start-ups,  report  facing slightly more  stringent  lending

terms,  often in  the  form of higher collateral  requirements.

Most banks  report  loan-deposit  ratios  unchanged or up  from  last month.

Deposit  activity was mixed  at district banks.  Levels  of NOWs, MMDAs,  IRAs,

and Keoughs  were constant at  most banks,  while  demand deposits  and large  CDs

were down at many banks.

Agriculture.  The  district's  winter wheat  crop  is  in good  condition due

to  plentiful  rainfall  and mild temperatures  in  recent weeks.  Above  average

wheat yields  are  expected in much of  the  district.  Continued rainfall  and  low

soil  temperatures  threaten to  delay planting of  spring  crops  in  some  states.

Improved  soil moisture  conditions  have bolstered  the  outlook for  the

district's  spring crops,  however.

Credit  standards at  district agricultural banks  are  generally steady.

Credit  is  readily available  to  creditworthy  farm borrowers,  with repayment

capacity  a key lending  condition.  Some  bankers  in areas  affected by the  past

two  years  of  drought, however, report  a modest tightening of credit  standards

on farm  loans.  Where  the  drought was  especially  severe,  some  farm loans

restructured during the  mid-1980s have  required additional  attention.  Across

most of  the  district, however, bankers  report no  undue problems  with

previously  restructured farm loans.

The  performance  of  rural nonfarm businesses  in  the  Tenth District varies

X-4

widely.  Most  are stable, but  some  are growing moderately and others  are

declining slowly.  Those  rural  nonfarm businesses dependent  on agriculture

have benefited from  the  improved performance  of  the  farm economy.

XI-1

ELEVENTH  DISTRICT--DALLAS

The District economy  continues  its  pattern  of slow growth.  Expansion

has  accelerated  slightly  in manufacturing.  Non-auto  retail  sales  softened  in

March.  Auto  sales  are  generally below  a year earlier, but  not  in all  parts  of

the District.  Expansion  in the  service  sector has  resulted  in labor  shortages

in some  professions.  Construction  contract  values  are  showing  renewed  signs

of weakness,  but  employment  in the  industry  is expanding.  Oil  and  gas

drilling  activity  is strong.  Recent  rains  and  rising prices  have  improved  the

outlook  for  agriculture.

District  manufacturing  activity  has  picked  up  somewhat  since  the  last

Beige  Book survey.  Oilfield  equipment manufacturers note  some  seasonal

declines  in sales,  but  they  expect growth  this year as  a result  of rising

drilling  activity.  Orders  to  steel  firms  are  a little below  a year  ago,  but

are  up  from  six  months  ago,  and  selling  prices  are  increasing  slightly.  A

maker of extruded  aluminum products  cites  strong  sales  growth  and  says  that

such  reports  are  common  in his  industry.  Orders  to  construction-related

fabricated metals  firms  are  also  rising,  but  a can  manufacturer notes  that  the

agricultural  damage  due  to  Texas'  December  freeze has  lowered  demand  for  his

products.  In the wood  industry,  sales  by  flooring  and  millwork makers  are

sluggish while  lumber and  plywood  sales  have  increased.  Demand  is essentially

unchanged  for most  respondents  in the  stone,  clay  and  glass  industries.  Among

electronics  producers,  orders  for  telecommunications equipment  are  showing

strong growth,  but demand  for most  other  products  has  not  changed much.  With

a few exceptions,  demand  for  food products  has  held  fairly  steady,  but  prices

XI-2

have  increased on  average.  Paper  producers  note  softening  orders  and say  that

pulp  prices have  fallen,  in part,  because  of  increases  in the  value  of the

dollar.  In the  apparel  industry, demand  has  changed  little  in recent months,

but  is somewhat  below  last year's  levels.  Although  demand  for  chemical

products  has  increased  in recent  months,  it is lower than  a year  ago.  Oil

refineries  report  stable  demand,  after  seasonal  adjustment,  and  several  note

increasing profit margins  due  to  a widening  spread between  gasoline and crude

oil  prices.

Some  District  retailers  said  their  sales  were weak  in March  because

Easter came  late this  year.  Nevertheless,  several  national  chains noted  that

year-over-year growth  was  slower  in the  District  than  in the  nation.  Among

larger District  cities,  growth was  strongest  in Houston,  and  weakest  in San

Antonio.  At  the department  stores,  women's  ready-to-wear sales  were  said  to

be  fairly high,  while sales  of housewares were  low.

Auto  sales  vary widely  across  the  District,  but  they  are generally weak.

Auto  sales  are down  markedly from a year  earlier  in Dallas  and  San Antonio,

but  up  in Houston,  where sales  so  far  in 1990  are  21  percent over  the  same

period  in 1989.  Houston dealers  say  they do  not  expect  such  high growth  rates

to  continue.

The  services  sector  continues  its  pattern of expansion.  Business

services  and health  care  firms  cite  recent  acceleration  in demand  growth.

Health  care  firms  cite  shortages  of personnel  and  relatively  strong  increases

in wages.

After a mild  recovery during  the  second  half  of 1989,  District

construction  contract  values  have weakened in recent months.  Construction

XI-3

employment  is increasing,  however, due to  earlier growth  in contracts.

Nonresidential  contracts  have been  particularly weak  this year, following  a

runup  last  year that was  led  by  increased chemical  plant construction.

Residential  building  has  declined  slightly  after mild  improvement  in the

second half of last year.  Conversely,  after  a weak  second  half, nonbuilding

construction  has  recently  been  increasing.  Multifamily  permits continue  to

suggest growth  in apartment  construction.  In both  Dallas  and  Houston,

apartment  occupancy rates  are above  90  percent  and  rents  are  increasing.

Respondents  in the  Dallas  area note  a strong  increase  in single-family home

sales,  but  prices  remain  sluggish  and  inventories  have not  declined much.

Like  that  of  the nation,  seasonally  adjusted  District  oil  and  gas

drilling  continues  to  grow  at  a healthy pace.  Year-over-year, the  growth  rate

of drilling  in the  District  is more  than 50  percent  higher than  in the  nation

-- partly because  the  new  horizontal  drilling  technology  is particularly

applicable  to  the Austin  chalk formations  in Texas.  Recently,  however,

drilling  activity  has  begun  to  grow faster  in the  United States  than  in the

District.  Despite declines  in oil  prices within  the  last month,  respondents

say that  prices  remain  high  enough  to  motivate further growth  in drilling.

Agricultural  conditions  are  improving,  as  frequent  rain  in February  and

March  provided  necessary moisture across  the  District,  and  prices  received  by

Texas  farmers  and  ranchers  continue  to  rise  to  new record  levels.  The  rain

has  markedly  increased  soil  moisture in drought-damaged  south  Texas.  Rain  in

the Texas  panhandle  has  led  to  more  optimistic  expectations  about  yields  for

the winter wheat crop there.  The March  index  of prices received  by  Texas

farmers  rose  5 percent  above  a year earlier,  to  reach  its  highest  level  ever.

XI-4

A survey  of business  borrowers  finds  that  credit  is tight  in the

District but  that  this  is not  a new development.  Recent  credit

restrictiveness  has  primarily  affected  building  contractors  and  some of their

suppliers.  As  a result  of new restrictions on  loan  size,  tougher  loan

standards,  and  larger  and  more  liquid collateral  requirements,  speculative

home  building  is said  to  be  curtailed  in some portions  of the  District.  Large

businesses,  including large  home builders,  had  few  complaints  about  credit

shortages.  Many smaller  businesses  say  their long-established  relationships

with  their  banks  have allowed  them  to  avoid  funding  problems.

XII-  1

TWELFTH  DISTRICT -- SAN  FRANCISCO

Summary

Economic  conditions  in  the  West  are  little  changed.  Most  reports  indicate  that western

businesses  continue  to  do  relatively well,  although  most respondents  still  expect  slow national

growth.  Wage  and  price  increases  in  the West continue  to cluster  in the 3 to 5  percent  range,

although  larger  price  increases  as well  as  price  declines  also  have  been reported.  Sales  of

nondurable  goods  are  reported  to be  continuing  at a solid  pace.  Most reports on  service

industries  are  relatively  upbeat.  Conditions  in  manufacturing  industries seem  to be  good  overall.

Current  conditions  are satisfactory  in  most resource  industries,  but  signals suggest  that activity

may slow in  the  near  future.  Conditions  in  western  construction  and  real estate  markets  remain

fundamentally  unchanged,  with healthy  activity  reported  in  most parts  of the  West.  Most  bankers

in  the  West report  "good" or "stable" conditions.

Business  Sentiment

Western  business  leaders  continue  to  anticipate  relatively  slow  economic  growth during

the  next  twelve  months,  although  the  proportion  of respondents  anticipating  healthy  growth  has

increased  during  the  last  month.  No  respondents  anticipate  that  economic  growth  will exceed  the

2  1/2  to 3  percent  range, and  only  about  15  percent  expect  improvements  in  business  investment,

housing starts, or  consumer  spending.  44  percent  of the  respondents  do anticipate  some

improvement  in  the trade  balance,  however.

Wages  and  Prices

Wage  and  price  increases  in  the West  continue  to  have  a "central tendency" in  the  3 to 5

percent  range.  Changes  in construction  costs  have  a particularly  wide  range,  with  bids  in  the

XII  - 2

booming Sun  Valley market  up  12  percent  in  the  past  few  months,  and  prospects  of slower

building  activity  in  the  Los  Angeles  area  reducing  bids  there  by as  much  as  15  percent in  the last

eight  months.  Wage  pressures  seem  relatively  intense  in  Hawaii,  where  a  recently  negotiated

hotel workers'  contract  calls  for average  increases  of 10  percent  per year  over  the next  five years,

and  bus  drivers  recently  settled  on  a  new  contract  with wages  up  7 percent.  Grain  prices  have

fallen  substantially, while  health  care  cost  increases  continue  to  flirt  with  the double-digit  range.

Timber  and  paper prices  appear  to  have  stabilized.

Trade  and Services

Sales  of nondurable  goods are  reported  to  be  continuing  at  a  solid  pace.  One  retail  chain

reports  that, while  sales  continue  strong  at most  of its  western  stores,  it  has noted some  softening

in  the  Los  Angeles  market  for  the  first time.  The wholesale  apparel  market  is  still  in  the process

of recovering  from the disarray  associated  with  the  financial  problems  of  a  few  large  retailers.

Most  reports  on service  industries  are  relatively  upbeat.  However,  a  publisher  reports  that

help-wanted  advertising  has fallen  significantly  during  recent weeks,  with  a  recent dropoff  noted

in  advertising  for  health  care  positions.

Manufacturing

Conditions  in manufacturing  industries  seem  to be  good  overall.  Activity  remains robust

in  commercial  aerospace,  with companies  trying  to  increase  production  further  so  that  they  can

make  more  progress on  their  sizeable  order  backlogs.  However,  obtaining  timely delivery  of

materials,  parts,  and  sub-assemblies  is  constraining  production  increases  for  some companies.  In

addition,  there  is  some  evidence  of increased  export  activity  by  manufacturers  of specialized

products  such  as  precision  machine  tools,  scientific  instruments,  and  safety  airbags  for

automobiles.

Agriculture  and  Resource-Related  Industries

XII  - 3

Current conditions  are  satisfactory  in  most  resource  industries,  but signals  suggest  that

activity  may slow  in the near  future.  Farmers  in many  parts  of  the  West face water  shortages

after  the  fourth  straight  year  of substandard  moisture.  In  California,  where  farmers  have  been

relatively  unaffected  by  water shortages  in recent  years,  farm water  allotments  for  this summer  are

being reduced  by  as  much  as  50 percent.  Higher water  costs  and  changes  in  plantings  are  likely

results.  Growing  conditions  are  better  in most of Washington  and  Oregon,  where  water currently

is more  plentiful.  Deliveries  of logs  currently  are  strong,  but  forest  products  companies  face

cutbacks  in logging  allowances  due  to environmental  concerns.  The  effects  of  these cutbacks  are

likely  to  be most  severe  in  Oregon, where  Forest  Service  land  historically  has  supplied  a majority

of logs.

Construction  and  Real  Estate

Conditions  in  western  construction  and  real  estate  markets  remain  fundamentally

unchanged.  Activity  in California  is returning  to  more  "normal" levels  in  the  previous  hot  coastal

markets,  but  prices  and sales  activity  remain  robust  in  the more  affordable  parts  of the state, such

as Sacramento,  Riverside,  and  San  Bernardino.  In  Oregon,  residential  construction  activity

continues  to strengthen.  Seattle housing  market  activity  continues  to be  relatively frenetic,

although  anecdotal  evidence  suggests  that  selling  times  may  have  lengthened  slightly  in recent

weeks.  Observers  in Utah  and Idaho  report  some  improvement  in activity  in  those states.

Construction  activity remains  strong in  Hawaii,  while  problems  persist  in Arizona.

A southern  California  developer  reports  that  major  properties  seem  to  be  selling at  a

slower pace,  probably  due to extra  caution  on  the  part  of buyers.  At  this point,  the dropoff in

buyer  interest  has been  most  noticeable  for  buildings whose  quality does  not  warrant  a  Class A

rating.

Financial  Sector

XII  - 4

Most  bankers  in  the  West  report  "good" or  "stable" conditions.  Loan demand  is  strong  or

growing  in  most parts  of the  District.  Mortgage  demand  continues  strong  in  Washington,  and

more  than  doubled  for some  Utah  banks  during  the  past  year.

There  currently  is  little  evidence  of  a  "credit crunch"  in  the Twelfth  District.  Most

contacts  indicate  that  they  have  neither  experienced  recent changes  in  credit  conditions,  nor are

aware  of others  that  have  experienced  significant  changes.  However,  more stringent  regulatory

limits  on  the amount  that  one  borrower  can receive  from  a  single  lender  are  reported  to  be

restraining  lending  activity  in  some cases.  Moreover,  about  a  fifth  of the contacts  report  that

lenders  they  regularly  deal  with have  increased  collateral  requirements  on  new loans,  increased

required  down  payments,  shortened  loan  terms, or  otherwise  tightened  lending  policies.

