SUMMARY OF  COMMENTARY ON CURRENT  ECONOMIC CONDITIONS

BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICTS

June  1990

TABLE  OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY  ........................................................... 

i

First  District  - Boston  ............................................. 

I-

Second District  - New York  ........................................ 

II-1

Third District  - Philadelphia  .....................................  III-I

Fourth District  - Cleveland  ....................................... 

IV-1

Fifth District  - Richmond  ......................................... 

V-1

Sixth District  - Atlanta  .......................................... 

VI-1

Seventh District  - Chicago  ........................................  VII-1

Eighth District  - St.  Louis  .......................................  VIII-1

Ninth  District  - Minneapolis  ...................................... 

IX-1

Tenth District  - Kansas  City  ..................................... .

X-1

Eleventh District  - Dallas  ........................................ 

XI-1

Twelfth District  - San  Francisco  ..................................  XII-1

SUMMARY*

The  tone  of District  reports  suggests  continued  slow growth  in  the  economy

with  little  change  in the  underlying  inflation rate.  Reports  on  the

behavior  of  consumption  are mixed, and construction  is  indicated to be

softening  further.  Capital  goods  industries  are,  on balance, pointing  toward

growth,  and manufacturing  is  expected  to  strengthen  in  several Districts.

Recent behavior  in  retail  sales  and reports  from retailers  in  several

Districts  indicate  that  sales have been slow  in recent  months,  and are

expected to  remain so  in  the  short  term.  It  is  unclear how much of the  recent

softness  in  retail  sales  represents  temporary factors,  such as  unusual  weather

over  the  last  several months.

Both residential  and nonresidential  construction have  been edging downward

in recent  months  in most  Districts,  and indicators  of future  construction

suggest  further  softening.

Prospects  for  a  good harvest  this  year should be  improved as  a  result of

ample  rainfall  in previously  drought-stricken  regions  of  the  country, but

cool,  wet weather has  delayed planting by  as  much as  several  weeks.

*  Prepared  at  the  Federal Reserve  Bank of Cleveland and based on information
collected before June  8,  1990.  This  document  summarizes  comments  received
from businesses  and other contacts  outside  the  Federal  Reserve  and is  not a
commentary  on the  views  of  Federal Reserve  officials.

The  slow-growth economy  is  accompanied by an easing in  demand for  credit.

Real  estate  loans,  consumer  loans,  and business  loans  are  still  growing, but

at  reduced rates  in  recent months.  Lenders  are  reported to  have  tightened

standards  especially for  real  estate  loans,  but  there  is  still  little

information  that  suggests  credit restraint  is  spreading  into  other  markets.

CONSUMER SPENDING

District  reports  suggest very little  growth,  if not a decline,  in real

consumer  spending for  durable  and nondurable  goods  this  quarter  from last.

Retail sales  have been marked by  sluggish behavior  in several  Districts  that

has  apparently continued into  May and early June  (Boston, New York,

Philadelphia,  Cleveland, Chicago, Richmond and St.  Louis).

Unseasonably cold and wet weather has  reduced demand for  summer goods  and

for  apparel.  Weakness  in home  furnishings  is  attributed to  softened

conditions  in housing.

Retail  sales  in Atlanta, Dallas,  and Minneapolis  apparently  continued to

increase  in May, but  at  a reduced pace  from earlier this  year.  Kansas  City

described retail  sales  as  having increased moderately over  the past  three

months,  and San Francisco  described sales  as  "continuing healthy."

Several  Districts  reported that  retail  inventories  are  either high, or

larger  than desired  (Boston, Philadelphia, Cleveland, St.  Louis,  and Kansas

City).

Retailers  in  several  Districts  are  cautious  about  the short-term outlook

for retail  sales.  In  Boston and Cleveland, respondents  apparently expect

little  improvement  at  least  through the  summer  months, and Philadelphia

reports  that  some  retailers  are  lowering  their sales  forecasts.

MANUFACTURING

Manufacturing production has been relatively flat  over  the  last  few

months,  but several  Districts  expect  strengthening in output despite  softness

in  some  industries.  Defense,  building construction machinery, and apparel

indsutries  are  experiencing  some  softening.  In contrast,  the  aerospace

industry is  a source  of  strength  in  several  regions  of  the  country,  (Boston,

Minneapolis,  and San Francisco),  and the  energy sector  is  expanding  (Dallas

and Kansas  City).

Capital  goods  industries still  point  toward growth, despite mixed

performance.  Construction machinery, excluding building, is  "doing well,"

agricultural machinery  is  strong,  and orders  for  communications  equipment

are  rising, according to  Chicago.  Demand  for heating and air  conditioning

and  industrial pumps  is  strong  in Atlanta, and capital  goods  is  "surprisingly

strong"  in Minneapolis.  Cleveland reports  that capital  spending plans  are

stronger  than reported in  the  latest  Commerce  Department  survey, which should

be  an  important  support to manufacturing output.

Output  in  the  auto  and auto-related industries,  such as  glass  and rubber,

has  been a drag on manufacturing in Atlanta, but Chicago and  Cleveland note

some  strengthening  in  auto  production that  should add  to  total  output this

quarter and perhaps next.  Steel  production has rebounded, and some  analysts

have upgraded their  steel  outlook for  1990  (Chicago).

CONSTRUCTION AND REAL ESTATE

In most Districts,  except San Francisco  and Minneapolis, residential and

nonresidential  construction has been flat  to  declining  in  recent months,  with

prospects  for  further easing.  Housing sales were  either  flat or  fell  in

recent months  in  Philadelphia, Richmond, and Kansas City, but were  generally

stronger  in Minneapolis,  and rebounded in California.  Housing sales  have been

increasing at  double-digit  rates  in Oregon,  Idaho,  and Utah.

Contract awards  for  future  starts  fell  in April  in Chicago and Dallas,  and

permits  in Minnesota were off  20%  in March from a year earlier.  Atlanta notes

that  contracts  for both residential  and commercial  construction continue  to

slow,  in part because of  overbuilt  markets.

An underlying problem in commercial  construction is  an  apparent  excess

supply of new office  space  in many parts  of  the country.  Commercial

construction  in  downtown Manhattan  is  marked by  the highest office vacancy

in  two decades.  Dallas  notes  that  office  occupancy rates  in major

metropolitan centers  in  that  District have been  increasing, but are  still low.

AGRICULTURE

Recent rains  in  the  Southeast, the North Central states,  and California

generally relieved drought  conditions  and appear  to  have  improved farm crop

yields.  Richmond reports  that  grain yields  are  expected to be normal  to  above

normal.  Recent rains  in  the North  Central states  "substantially brightened

prospects for  agriculture,"  especially in Minnesota and North Dakota, and

ranchers  in Montana expect a record year  this  year  (Minneapolis).  Kansas

reports heavy spring  rains  ended the  drought of the past  two  years  and boosted

prospects  for  winter wheat output.  Expected yields  range  from average  to well

above  average,  with record yields  likely in much of that  state.  Recent rains

in  California have relieved some  of the  drought conditions, but  storms have

caused significant  damage  to  some  fruit  crops.

Heavy rainfalls  in  the  Chicago,  St.  Louis, Kansas  City, and Dallas

Districts however, have  damaged crops  and delayed other crop planting by

several weeks.  Below-normal  temperatures  and above-normal rainfall  since

mid-May have delayed planting  of  an  estimated 13%  of corn  acreage and 47%  of

soybean  acreage as  of June  2, according to  Chicago.  St.  Louis  reports  that

poor weather  and disease and insect  problems  suggest  that  1990  crop  yields  may

fall below normal  in  some parts  of that District.  Moreover, an estimated

one-fourth to  one-half of  the  wheat and cotton crop  is  rated as  in poor  to

very poor  condition in  several  states.

CREDIT MARKET CONDITIONS

Loan demand continues  to expand, although  the pace has  eased for most

types  of loans.  Philadelphia reports  easing  in growth  for most  loans,  and

Atlanta comments  that weak loan growth has  led lenders  to  encourage borrowing.

Home  equity loans  continue  to  rise  in New York and Richmond, although growth

in  Philadelphia has  slowed along with other kinds of consumer  loans.

Constraints  on credit seem  to be  primarily in  real estate,  although

limited information suggests  small business  firms  in  some areas  may also be

affected.  New York notes  that home builders  report  a shortage  of  credit for

acquisition  and construction loans  is becoming a major problem, especially  in

downstate  New York and northern New Jersey.  Cleveland points  out  that credit

restraint  is  largely confined to  multi-family construction and commercial

buildings,  but  that  there  appears  to be  ample  funds  for single-family housing.

San Francisco  reports  that  "lending standards have become  more  stringent  in

recent months,"  and both Richmond and St.  Louis  reported about credit

constraints  for the  first  time  this  month.

I-1

FIRST  DISTRICT-BOSTON

Economic  activity in  the First District has  been weak in recent

months.  Although some retailers  reported sales modestly above year-earlier

levels,  in most  cases sales were flat  to  down and  inventories  were high.

Reports  from manufacturers were slightly stronger:  sales  and orders were

generally above year-ago  levels,  and  inventories were in line.  In both

sectors,  input  and selling prices were  fairly stable.  No  employment

increases  are planned, and  staffing  is  down at  a number of  contacts.  A

recently  released  forecast foresees continued employment losses in the

region through the  end of  1990  and no  significant job growth until  1992.

Retail

Retail  sales  in the First  District were uniformly  reported to  be

slow in recent months.  Some  retail contacts  enjoyed modest  sales increases

compared to  a year ago,  but  the majority said  that  sales were flat  or down

and that  inventories were  excessive.  Housing-related goods  and clothing

were especially weak.  Several  firms  reported very poor sales  in May, as

cold, rainy weather limited traffic and depressed demand for  summer items.

Some  contacts believe the  slowdown is  more a matter  of consumer  confidence

than ability  to spend.

Selling prices were widely reported to  be fairly flat  as  a result of

promotions  and stability in supplier prices.  Gross margins were mixed, but

were more  often down than up.

I-2

Most  retail respondents are now hiring only  to  fill vacancies.  Some

sellers of durable items have reduced employment  over  the past year.

All  retail contacts  expressed caution about  the  future.  None

foresees any pickup  soon, although a few hold out hope for  this year's  fall

and  Christmas seasons.  Despite  their concerns,  about half  the  respondents

(mostly department and general merchandise  chains) will  continue with plans

to  open new stores  in the  coming year.

Manufacturing

Most First District manufacturing  contacts  continue  to  experience

slow growth.  Two-thirds  report  that  sales and orders  are above year-ago

levels, with gains  ranging  from marginal to  15  percent.  Elsewhere,

shipments  and orders are down by  as much as 7 percent.  Areas of

comparative strength include telecommunications, defense-related

electronics,  shipping  equipment and the  aerospace overhaul business.

Several  firms say that new products  are performing well.  By contrast,

demand  from the construction, electric utility and auto  industries was

relatively weak.  Two respondents expect  a decline  in auto  company orders

by year-end, because they believe that auto makers are  currently building

inventory for  a possible strike later  this year.  Several  contacts

mentioned that growth in exports, especially to Asia,  is  slowing.

Inventories are generally termed  satisfactory.  In several cases

inventory levels are  lower than at  this  time last year.  Employment is  also

1 to  3 percent below year-ago levels  at most manufacturers  contacted.  No

respondent plans to  increase  employment in 1990,  and further declines are

expected.  Respondents mentioning wages expect  1990  increases  to range  from

3 to 7 percent.

Input  prices  are  said to be  stable, reportedly  rising 1 to  2 percent

at  most.  For a majority of respondents,  selling prices  are unchanged or

down from year-ago  levels.  These  firms have responded  to  increased

domestic  and Japanese competition by  lowering  prices, discounting or

introducing  "stripped down" versions  of some  products.  A few of  the  firms

surveyed have passed on  increases  in materials prices  to  customers  or have

achieved selective price  increases  ranging  from 2 to  5 percent.  Although a

third of  the  contacts suffered losses  or a decline  in profit margins  in

recent  months, several  expect  improved profitability by year end.

Capital spending will remain  at  1989  levels,  according to most

manufacturers  contacted.  However, weak demand is  causing two  firms to

reduce  their  capital spending plans  for  this year.

Most First  District manufacturers  foresee little  change in economic

conditions this year.  In general, they  expect their  firms  to  grow faster

than the national or  regional economies.

Outlook

The New England Economic Project  (NEEP), a nonprofit organization

comprising businesses,  government agencies and educational  institutions,

released its  semi-annual  forecast  at  the end of May.  The  forecast  calls

for nonagricultural  employment  in the  region to decline slightly in 1990.

Regional  employment will stabilize in 1991  and grow moderately in 1992,  as

manufacturing job  losses abate  and nonmanufacturing jobs  expand gradually.

The hard-hit  construction, finance,  and real  estate  industries  are not

expected  to  turn around until 1992.  NEEP forecasts that  the region's

unemployment  rate will stay slightly above  the national average until  the

end  of 1992.

II-I

SECOND  DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Recent  reports  on  District developments  have tended to  be  somewhat  weak.  Retail

sales  were  generally sluggish and  in  some  parts  of  the  District homebuilders  reported

that  a shortage of credit  is  becoming a major problem.  Office  vacancy rates  in

Manhattan  have  reportedly  reached  their highest  level  in  two decades  but  have

stabilized in  some  other parts  of the  District.  Nonetheless,  District  unemployment

rates  remain below the  national average.  Small  and medium-sized banks  stated  that

the  demand for home equity loans  is  unchanged from a year  ago.

Consumer  Spending

District  retail  sales  were  generally sluggish since  the  last  report.  Two  chains

reported strong  over-the-year gains  during April  and  a marked slowdown  in  May, while

others  noted  a slight  improvement  in May but with  results  that  were  well below plan

in both months.

During April  over-the-year changes  in  sales  ranged from  -6.9  percent  to

+14.0  percent  with  several  stores  reporting declines despite  Easter's  falling  in

April  this  year.  Year-to-year  changes  in May covered a narrower range--from

-8.0  percent to +1.0  percent.  Rain and unseasonably cold weather were  cited  as major

factors  behind the  recent  sluggishness, though one  retailer characterized it  as  a

more  generalized  slowdown  in consumer spending which might  or might  not  continue.

Home  furnishings  and women's  apparel  were mentioned as  the weakest  selling  items.

Despite the disappointing sales  results,  for the most  part inventories  remain  in

good shape  due primarily to careful  monitoring.  Indeed, the  reluctance  of some

suppliers  to provide  goods  to stores  in bankruptcy  or with substantial debt has  in

some  instances  reportedly  resulted in  somewhat  lower-than-desired  inventories.

Residential Construction and Real  Estate

In some  parts  of the  District homebuilders  reported that  a shortage of  credit

for acquisition  and construction  loans  is  becoming a major problem.  This  was

II-2

particularly true  in downstate New York  and northern New Jersey, where  many

commercial banks  as  well  as  thrift  institutions were  described  as  reluctant to  lend.

One  respondent  noted  increased buyer interest  in  the  resale market  because  of  more

realistic  pricing, but  expressed concern that potential  "move-up" sellers  may be

stymied  if  homebuilders  are unable  to obtain the  necessary funds  for  construction.

In both midtown and  downtown Manhattan office  vacancy rates  have  reportedly

climbed to their highest  levels  in  two decades  as  new buildings  are  completed in

midtown, and  financial  services  firms  continue to contract  and place  superfluous

space  on  the downtown market.  In  contrast,  office vacancy  rates have  stabilized

recently  in  other parts  of  the District  including Westchester  and Fairfield counties,

northern New Jersey  and  Long Island.  This has  resulted  from a slowdown in  the

delivery  of  new buildings together with  strong leasing activity in  some  areas.

Other Business Activity

District  unemployment  rates  in May remained below the  national average.  New

Jersey's  rate  edged down to 4.8  percent  from 4.9  percent  in April  while New  York's

rate  rose  to  5.1 percent  from  4.9  percent.  The growth in  Second District nonfarm

employment has  lagged the  national pace  since  1986,  however, due to  substantial

declines  in the  manufacturing sector  and slower gains  in  nonmanufacturing industries.

The percentage  of  Buffalo purchasing managers  reporting a decline  in  new orders

rose  sharply  in April  as  did the number of  firms with  lower production.  The

percentage  of  managers reporting higher  input prices  also  increased.

In  response  to an expected decline in  defense  outlays,  G. E. Aerospace announced

plans to  eliminate 4200  jobs  over  the next  two  and a half  years with  50  percent  of

the  job  losses  in  upstate New York.  A partial  offset  will be the  creation of  500  new

jobs  at  a new G.E.  electronic parts manufacturing center  outside Binghamton,  New

York.  In  New York City,  the second phase  of  a conversion of the Brooklyn Army

Terminal  into  an  industrial park  is  scheduled for completion this month.  With

94  percent  of the  first  phase already  rented  (primarily to printers  and

garment/accessories  manufacturers),  the City estimates  that  4400  will be  employed at

the  facility by year-end.

II-3

Expressing concern  over  the  state's  financial  condition,  its  heavy debt  load,

and economic uncertainties  in the  region,  Moody's  Investors  Service  lowered its

rating on New York's  general  obligation debt  as  Standard  & Poor's  did  earlier.  Only

Louisiana  and Massachusetts now  have  a lower  rating.  New York  State  adopted  a budget

calling for a total  of  $1.4  billion  in  revenue  increases.  The  New Jersey  legislature

continues  to  consider  increasing revenues  $1.4  billion to balance  the budget.  A

further  $1  1/4  billion proposed income  tax increase  would be mostly used  to  increase

state  aid to poorer  school districts.  According to press  accounts this  plan is

broadly  consistent  with a recent  New Jersey Supreme  Court  ruling.

Financial  Developments

Based on  a survey  of  small  and medium-sized banks  in the  Second District,  demand

for home  equity  loans  is  generally unchanged from one  year  ago.  While  one banker

noted  that  falling home  values  have  eroded borrowers'  collateral  and driven down  loan

demand,  another stated that  declining home values  had a positive  effect because

borrowers  are  reluctant to  sell their  homes  at  lower  prices  and are  instead opting

for home  improvements.  Most bankers  anticipate  strong demand for home  equity  loans

over the  next year  since  the tax  deductibility of  interest  payments  on other types  of

consumer  loans  is  expiring at  year-end.

Home  equity loans  as  a share  of  consumer  loans generally  range between 15  and

35  percent  at  the  surveyed banks.  At most banks this  share has  increased  over the

last  year.  However,  respondents  also  stated that,  in  general,  their lending policy

has  become more conservative.  Some  noted that they  are staying away  from speculative

loans,  such  as  those collateralized by non-owner occupied real-estate,  and a few

bankers  stated that they  are basing ability to pay more  on  income than on  collateral.

Almost  all bankers  surveyed said that  their loan-to-value ratio  has been  reduced, or

is  expected to be  reduced  soon, and many  noted that  they  are  discounting the

appraisal  value of homes.  All but  one banker  said the  interest charged  is  tied to

the prime  rate with most  charging 2 percentage points  above the  prime.  Bankers

expect to  continue charging this  rate  on home  equity  loans.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT  - PHILADELPHIA

Economic  conditions  in  the  Third  District  in  June  varied  among  major

sectors,  with  most  marked  by  some  signs  of  current  or  developing  softness.

Manufacturing  activity  was  close  to  levelling  off  after  a  year-long  decline

although employment was  still being cut.  Retail sales were barely up  from a year

ago,  in  current  dollars,  with  results  hampered by  slow  sales  of  summer  goods,

and  auto  sales  have declined.  Bank  lending was  fairly healthy year-over-year,

but  there were  indications  that  growth was ebbing.  Real  estate activity, both

residential  and  commercial,  was  sluggish,  and  construction,  especially  of

offices,  was  dropping.

The  outlook  in  the  Third  District  business  community  is  subdued.

Manufacturers  generally  foresee  a  modest  increase  in production  in  the  second

half of the  year, but they do not expect to step up hiring.  Retailers are  being

cautious  in  their  sales  forecasts  for  the  balance  of  the  year,  and  they  said

planning  is  complicated  by  continued  uncertainty  with  respect  to  industry

restructuring.  Bankers  expect  loan growth  to  continue  to  slacken  as  a  result

of  weakening loan  demand and  tightening of credit standards.

MANUFACTURING

Third  District  manufacturers  contacted  in  late  May  and  early  June  gave

indications that the year-long decline  in activity might be levelling off.  Over

half of  the  firms  surveyed  said business was  running at  a  steady pace,  and the

number  of  firms  reporting  improved business  nearly  matched  the  number  noting

declines.  Although  the  overall  picture  is  one  of  little  change,  reports  by

industry sector vary widely.  Improvement was noted among producers of chemicals,

electrical machinery, and  stone,  clay, and  glass  products.  Most of  the  firms

experiencing slower  business where producers of  nondurable goods  such as  apparel,

III-2

food  products,  and  paper  and  paper  goods,  although  primary  metal  producers

indicated some weakness,  also.

Overall,  Third District manufacturers noted a steady  rate  of new orders,

a marginal pickup in  shipments, and a drop  in order backlogs.  Although most of

the  firms  surveyed were maintaining steady employment  levels  and working hours,

on  net,  they  continued  to  make  fractional  cuts  in  personnel  and  hours.

Industrial prices in the region were steady, with three-fourths of the companies

polled  holding  prices  of  their  products  steady  and  nearly  nine-out-of-ten

reporting stable  input costs.

Looking ahead, Third District manufacturers generally foresee improvement

in the  second half of the year.  On balance,  they expect a pickup in orders  and

they plan to boost shipments  accordingly, without a buildup  in  order backlogs.

Although  they expect to  step up the  pace of production, area firms  are planning

to hold the  line on working hours and make  some  further cuts  in payrolls by the

end of  the year.

RETAIL

Reports  from Third District retailers  in June indicated that sales  in the

region were  generally running  only  marginally above  the  pace  set  last  spring,

in dollar  terms,  but with a great  deal  of variation from  store  to  store.  Auto

sales were running below the  year-ago rate.  Merchants said that no particular

product lines were  standout  successes  or  laggards,  although there  were  reports

that  summer  goods  got  off  to  a slow  start.  Retail  executives  attributed  the

greater than usual store-to-store variance to specific situations, and they said

differences  in  stocking levels,  pricing, and product quality accounted for  the

range  of performance.  According to merchants, consumers  are  shopping carefully

for  the  best  price  and  quality  combination  on  goods  for  which  they  feel

relatively urgent need, and are not spending freely.

III-3

Third District merchants were growing more cautious  in  their outlook for

the rest of the year.  Several said they have been trimming sales  forecasts since

early  spring  and  they saw  no  signs  of  a pickup  for  the  summer  or  fall.  Some

noted  that  discounting  appeared  to  be  spreading  even  to  stores  that

traditionally have been able  to avoid recourse to price reductions to  spur sales.

Merchants  said  that  with  excess  capacity  in  retailing and  little  evidence  of

resurgent economic  growth, prospects  for  the  industry will not brighten soon.

FINANCE

Total  loan  volume  at  major  Third  District  banks  in  mid-May  was

approximately  13  percent above  the  May 1989  level.  Loan  growth has  continued

on a steady pace  for the past  three  quarters, but bankers contacted in June  saw

signs  of  a slowdown  developing.  Consumer  lending, although  strong year-over-

year, has  begun  to  slip,  according  to  bankers.  They  reported a drop  in  auto

loans  in line with falling auto  sales,  and easing growth in home equity, credit

card, and other installment outstandings.  Commercial and industrial lending was

described by bankers  as  growing modestly, but they  expect growth to  lag as  loan

demand  eases  and  tighter  credit  standards  are  implemented,  especially  for

construction financing.  Bankers also generally reported a continuing moderation

in  the growth of real  estate financing, both commercial and residential.

REAL ESTATE AND CONSTRUCTION

Real  estate markets remain soft  throughout  the  Third District.  Realtors

and  mortgage  lenders  indicated  that  housing  sales  were  sluggish  and  average

selling prices  were declining  as  sales  of higher-priced homes have  fallen  off

more  than sales  of lower-priced homes.  Realtors believe activity in  the higher

price  ranges  has  slackened because concern about job  security has  risen  among

typical move-up buyers (cutbacks in the financial services and defense industries

were mentioned) while first-time home buyers are still motivated to buy, and are

III-4

able  to  obtain mortgages.

Commercial  and  residential  construction continued  to  decline  in June  as

office vacancies increased and credit available  to  developers  shrunk.  Suburban

office  and  speculative  housing  construction  were  relatively  weakest,  while

industrial  construction,  which  is  not  typically  speculative,  and  pre-sold

residential  building retained some health.

IV  - 1

FOURTH DISTRICT  - CLEVELAND

Summary.  Fourth District  respondents  are  a  little  more  optimistic  about

short-term prospects  for  manufacturing than they were  several weeks  ago.

Higher motor  vehicle  output should add  to  overall  output  this  quarter.

Capital  spending plans  from  the  sample of District  manufacturers  call  for

larger  spending  increases  than indicated in  the  latest  Commerce  Department

survey, and export  growth  is  expected  to  continue  at  least  through the  balance

of  this year.  Respondents, however,  appear more  cautious about  the  short-term

outlook for  consumer  spending.  Lenders  and borrowers  acknowledge  tightening

in credit  availability  and lending  standards  in  real estate,  but  also  note

that  other declines  in  lending  are  due  to  easing in  demand  for  single-family

houses and  for  consumer  credit.

Employment  and Output.  The  5.9  percent unemployment rate  in Ohio  in

April  and May has  been relatively unchanged  since  last  fall,  despite monthly

fluctuations.  Employment  in manufacturing has held steady,  and services

employment has  continued to  grow, albeit  slowly.

Respondents  report that  manufacturing output  rose  in May and  expect that

second  quarter growth  in output, particularly in  autos,  will be  stronger  than

in  the  first quarter.  Higher  auto output  should add between  0.5  and 1.0

percentage point  to  the  real  GNP growth rate  this  quarter.

Capital  Spending.  District manufacturers are more optimistic about

capital  spending  for 1990  than reported in the  latest Commerce  Department

survey.  Respondents plan larger percentage  increases  in nominal outlays  this

year than last,  and all  but  one  report  that  they plan  to  increase  their

capital  spending  this year by a  larger percentage  than  the planned 3.4 percent

IV  - 2

indicated  in  the  latest Commerce  survey.  A few manufacturers plan  to  add

capacity  for products  that were  in  short  supply  during the  peak 1987-88

period. Others mentioned the need for  product quality  improvement and for

further modernization  of facilities.  Some  also  remarked  that  1990 may be  the

peak year  in  their  multiyear capital spending programs.  Most  respondents

mentioned that  they plan to  finance  most of  their  1990  capital spending  from

internally generated funds.  They expect  that profits  from production will

revive  this  quarter.  The  run-up in  interest rates  earlier  this  year was not

judged to be  a deterrent to  spending plans  for  1990 because  real  rates  of

interest did not change  much.

Exports.  Multinational  firms  as  well as  smaller businesses headquartered

in  this District  report  that  overseas  markets remain generally strong,

although some  expect a slowdown in U.S.  export  growth later  this year.

Capital  goods  producers were  optimistic about  export prospects again this

year.  Exchange  rate changes  apparently have not had much effect  on exports  so

far  in  1990.  A capital  goods  producer commented that  costs  of parts  and

sub-assemblies have  risen in recent months, but that changes  in exchange  rates

of even  10 percent  to  15  percent are  "swamped" by rapid  improvement  in

technology.  An auto parts  producer reports  that  effects of  dollar

appreciation relative  to  the yen may be  less  than expected because Japanese

auto producers are  attempting to use American-produced products where  possible

to meet domestic-content goals  for  new cars.  Several export-sensitive firms

are  concerned that  anti-inflation policies  in  Brazil will either  reduce

exports  to  that  country or diminish earnings  from  their plants  located there.

Consumer Spending.  Major retailers  report disappointing May and early

June  sales volumes,  especially for apparel, which  they attribute to

IV  - 3

unseasonable  weather, slower  income  gains,  and more  competition from discount

stores.  Home  furnishing sales  also  weakened.  Another retailer  reports  good

sales  over  the past  several weeks, however, apparently in  response  to  an

upgrading of  its merchandise.  Two  large  retailers  contacted report that

inventories  are  high relative  to  their  objective.  They also expect soft

sales,  at  least  through the  summer months.

Financial Markets.  Most respondents acknowledge that  credit  standards

have  tightened, but  report that  ample  funds  are  available except  for real

estate  and for  highly leveraged transactions.  Some  large  commercial banks

apparently are  not presently  interested in development and construction loans,

while  some  others  are  still making those  loans, but with  terms  that  could

include  a few percentage points  above  prime,  extensive documentation, and

personal guarantees.

The problem  in real  estate appears  to be  in multifamily housing and in

commercial buildings, where developers and builders complain that  it  is  "hard

to  find  lenders."  Lenders,  for their part,  emphasize prudence in their

exposure  to  this  sector  of the  economy.  Small builders, especially of

single-family units,  report funds  are  still  ample, although  FIRREA legislation

has  forced a search  for credit away from traditional lenders,  generally

thrifts.  According to one report,  the major complaint among single-family

builders  is  a sluggish demand for houses  rather than unavailability of credit.

At present,  there is little  to  indicate that credit conditions have

tightened in other parts  of  the regional  economy.  Bankers  report  that

recent  slowing in growth of consumer  credit is  due  to  softening demand rather

IV  - 4

than to  tightened supply of  credit.  A few lenders  noted that consumer

spending could be  dampened if  lines  of  credit based on equity  in homes are

reduced.

FIFTH  FEDERAL  RESERVE  DISTRICT

Overview

District  business  and  financial  conditions were  generally unchanged  in

May.  Manufacturing activity  softened  somewhat,  but manufacturers  remained

optimistic  about  prospects  for the  national  economy and  their own  businesses.

Retail  sales  changed  little  from  April  levels,  and  tourism was mixed.  On

balance, exports  rose  at  District  seaports while  imports  were  unchanged.

Housing  starts  fell,  but  home  sales  remained  stable.  Home mortgage  and  home

equity lending  increased  at  District  financial  institutions,  but  the demand  for

commercial  and  industrial  loans  declined  slightly.  In the  farm  sector,

planting  was  ahead of schedule and  the  harvest  of early grains  had  begun.

Manufacturing

Our  regular mail  survey  showed  that  District manufacturing  activity

apparently  slowed  somewhat in May  from April.  Although  a majority of

respondents  reported  no  change  in shipments,  inventories,  employment,  new

orders  and  unfilled orders, more  respondents  indicated declines  than

increases--a  reversal  of the results  of our previous  survey.  Three-fourths of

those surveyed  reported no change  in new export orders,  and most others

indicated  increases.

Manufacturers remained  optimistic that expansion  in the national  economy

would continue.  More than 80  percent  expect their own  business activity to

stay the  same  or  improve along with  the U.S.  economy  in the coming months.

Consumer  Spending

Responses  to our regular mail  survey of District  retailers  indicated  that

non-auto  retail  sales  remained unchanged  in recent  weeks.  There was  some

additional  inventory  accumulation and  a small  decline  in  shoppers,  however.

V-2

A telephone  survey of  resort  hotels  in the  District  suggested  that

tourist activity has  been  mixed  so  far this  spring.  Half of the  hotels

reported  increases  over  last year  in their  business through May  and  in their

bookings  for  the summer.  The  other  half, located mainly  in Maryland and  South

Carolina,  reported  declines  in tourism this  year compared  to  last  year.

Housing

A survey  of District mortgage  lenders,  realtors  and  home  builders

suggested  that  housing activity remained mixed  in May.  Lenders  reported that

the demand  for mortgage  loans  in May and  early June  increased from the  April

level.  They  attributed  the  additional  activity to  lower mortgage  rates.

Realtors  indicated  that home  sales  in all  price  ranges during  May

remained  at  April  levels.  Housing sales  in the  District,  although sluggish  so

far  this  year, have  been  above  the  pace  of  1989  and  realtors are  optimistic

that  sales  activity will  pick up  in the  months  ahead.  Many  potential  home

buyers,  they  said,  are either waiting  for  their current  homes  to sell  or  for

mortgage  rates  to  decline  further.

Most  home builders  contacted said  they  started fewer  homes  in May than  in

April.  The  new starts  were  targeted largely  for  the middle  and  upper price

tiers of the market.  May  sales  of new homes were depressed,  the builders

noted,  and there  is now a large  inventory of unsold  homes.  Most  builders

complained  about their difficulties  in obtaining  credit.

Port Activity

Exports  rose  in May from April  levels  at  the  seaports  in Baltimore and

Charleston  and  stayed  about the  same  at  Hampton Roads.  Imports  were higher  at

Hampton  Roads,  about  the  same  at  Charleston,  and  lower at  Baltimore.  Compared

to  a year ago,  port  activity was  mixed, with  increases  in both  exports  and

imports  at  Hampton Roads,  no changes at  Charleston,  and  decreases at  Baltimore.

The  Baltimore port  representative  looks  for exports  to  increase  faster  than

imports  over the  next  six months,  while  representatives  from  the  other two

ports  expect  export  and  import  volumes  to  increase  at  the  same  rate.

Finance

Reports  from  District  financial  institutions  indicated that  commercial

and  industrial  loan  demand  decreased  slightly in May  from April.  Respondents

attributed  the  decline  to  borrower uneasiness  about  economic growth,  tax

increases  and  interest  rate  changes.  Some  lenders  felt  that  potential

borrowers may have  perceived credit  to  be  unavailable, and  several  lenders  said

they were  reluctant  to make  loans  because  of  stricter regulatory guidelines  and

the  depressed commercial  real  estate  market.

Consumer demand  for  home  equity  loans  remained strong  in May.  Over  90

percent  of the  bankers  surveyed reported that  the  demand  for  home  equity  loans

either  remained at  or  increased  from  the  April  level.  Lenders  attributed  the

increase  to  marketing, seasonal  factors  and greater  consumer  awareness  of the

tax advantages  associated with  the  loans.  Over 85  percent of the  lenders

reported  no  recent  change  in the  interest  rates  they charge on  home  equity  and

other  consumer loans.

Agriculture

Farmers  reported  that  soil  moisture  in late May  and  early June was

adequate to  surplus  in all  District  states except  South  Carolina.  Recent  rains

in South Carolina,  however, relieved  the dry  crop and  pasture conditions  in

that  state.  In North  Carolina, heavy rains  caused  scattered  flooding  and

damaged  crops  in some  areas.  Our contacts  indicated, however,  that spring

planting progressed  faster than  normal  despite  the spring  rains.  In early

June,  corn and  peanut  planting  in the District was  nearly complete  and  soybean

planting was well  underway.

V-4

The harvest  of small  grains  has  begun  around  the  District.  Most  small

grain  crops--oats, wheat,  rice  and  barley--were  reported to  be  in good

condition  and yields  should  be  normal  or  above.

VI-1

SIXTH  DISTRICT  - ATLANTA

Overview:  Consistent  with  reports  received  since  March,  our  business  contacts

continue  to  indicate  generally  slow  growth  throughout  the  Southeast.  Retailers  around  the

District convey a mixed  picture,  but generally note that sales growth is slower than  last year with

apparel  doing well and durable goods picking  up but still off from last years  pace.  Reports  from

auto  dealers  continue  to  show  sales  at  or  below  last  years  levels.  Manufacturers,  except  for

textile,  auto and auto-related producers,  are seeing  some strengthening of sales,  which is allowing

planned capital  expenditures  to progress.  Because of generally overbuilt  markets,  contacts in the

construction  sector continue  to indicate  weakness  and see  no quick  relief.  Financial  institutions

again  report  weak loan  growth.  Little wage  or price pressure is being  reported  in  the District,

although  reports  of shortages  of skilled  workers  are  increasing.

Retail  Sales:  Retail  activity  in the District  is generally  reported  to be growing but  at

a rate  somewhat  slower than  last  year.  Apparel  continues  to be  mentioned  as  the  backbone  of

sales  growth;  several  merchants  indicated  some  pickup  in  durable  sales.  Department  store

contacts  report  sales  growth  on  a  par  with  or  slightly  above  expectations  earlier  this  year.

Appliance  and  other consumer  durable  sales  have  reportedly  declined  recently  in  line  with the

slowdown  in residential real estate sales in certain areas.  However,  contacts report that furniture

sales  in  the  Southeast  have picked  up in recent  weeks  and  are  now  growing  a percentage  point

or two  faster than last year's levels.  Reports  from do-it-yourself  specialty  stores  indicate  strong

growth  in building  materials  and related  sales.

Reports from auto dealers  indicate that sales weakened further recently and one contact

speculated  that  rumors  of increased  manufacturers  incentives  on  the  forthcoming  1991  models

are  hurting  current  sales.  A  majority  of the  dealers,  however,  expect  some pickup  in activity

in  coming  months,  especially  if those  dealer  and/or  consumer  incentives  are  put  in  place  by

VI-2

manufacturers.

Manufacturing:  Manufactures  in  the District point  to a mixed  picture,  but those  not

associated  with  textile  or auto and  auto-related  production  generally  indicate  that  activity  levels

are  picking  up.  The  slowdown  in new residential  construction,  which  reduces  demand  for new

carpets and  drapery,  and greater competition from foreign apparel  producers are reportedly taking

their  toll  on  southeastern  textile  and  apparel  producers.  Job  losses  continue  to  be  reported  in

these industries although  contacts  generally believe activity will pickup  in the third quarter.  The

weakness  in auto  manufacturing  is reportedly affecting  suppliers;  tire and glass producers are the

most  recent  to  feel  the  strain.  One  glass  producer  has  been  adversely  affected  by  both  the

slowdown  in  auto  production  and  construction,  and  is trying  to  offset  the  impact  by  lowering

prices and emphasizing export markets.  Manufacturers  of heating and air conditioning equipment

report that consumer demand has strengthened over first quarter levels,  especially for replacement

equipment.  Producers  of industrial  pumps  and  metering  equipment  report  record  sales  caused

mostly  by increased  export demand.  Pulp and paper producers also report benefiting  from strong

export  demand.  Producers  of  marine  equipment  are  reporting  a  noticeable  improvement  in

business  activity  and  attribute  this  to  the  improvement  in  the  oil  and  gas  industry.  These

producers  indicate  that capital  spending  to  expand  capacity  is  now  being  actively  considered.

Despite current  weakness  in  demand,  certain  manufacturers  of major  household  appliances  and

fixtures  report  that they  are building  new  manufacturing  facilities  in  the Southeast.

Real  Estate  and  Construction:  Construction contacts  continue to indicate weakness in

residential  and  commercial  construction.  They  attribute  much  of the  weakness  to  overbuilt

markets  but  reports  of  more  stringent  lending  conditions  imposed  by  financial  institutions

continue.  Public  infrastructure  and  industrial  building  are  the  only  sectors  where  strength  is

VI-3

reported.  Reports  from  Florida  indicate  that  the  new  limits  on  loans  to  a  single  borrower

imposed  on  savings  and  loans  and  a  new  state  law  requiring  concurrent  additions  to  public

infrastructure  in conjunction  with  new developments  are also  adversely  affecting  construction  in

that  state,  and  our contacts  around  the District  indicate  no  relief to  this  construction  slowdown

is  in  sight.

Financial Services:  Several bankers noted a continuation of weakness in consumer loan

demand.  These  bankers  report business  loan  growth  is also  slow.  However,  the  majority  of

our  bank  contacts  indicated  no  change  in  credit  policies  and  none  of  our  business  contacts

indicated  problems  obtaining  credit.  Businesses  that  are  doing  well  report  that  financial

institutions  are  encouraging  them  to  borrow.  One  of  our  contacts  also  indicates  that  his

institution  has  tightened  its  lending  standards--requiring  stricter  documentation  and  more

collateral--in  the last few  months,  especially  for real  estate loans  and to a lesser degree  for small

business  lending.

Wages  and Prices:  Reports  from  around  the District  reveal  little  change  in wage  or

price  pressures.  A  few  of our  contacts  noted  that  certain  types  of  skilled  labor  are  in  short

supply,  but these  tight markets  are  localized  and  have  not resulted  in increased  wage pressures.

With  the  resurgence  of the energy  sector,  contacts  noted  that  qualified  welders  and pipe  fitters

are  in  especially  short supply.  No new  price pressures  were mentioned  by  our  contacts.

VII-1

SEVENTH  DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.  Contacts  in the  Seventh District report weakening  in construction  activity  and

retail sales,  while manufacturing  activity remains  mixed but generally  improving  from weakness

early in  the year.  Residential and nonresidential construction  has  slowed  in recent months,

although the  District is  still outperforming  the nation on  average.  General  merchandise  sales  are

weakening in market  segments  linked to housing  activity, particularly  furniture  and appliances.

However,  trends  in most other products  are unchanged,  with  apparel  sales  soft and

entertainment-based  electronics  sales  providing  most of the  growth.  In manufacturing,  auto-

related industries  have improved  from  the first quarter's weak  performance, but  several  capital-

goods  producers report that expanding  segments  are being offset by slowing  segments of their

markets.  Weather  conditions  from late  May to early June  slowed plantings and damaged  crops

in the District.

Construction  and Real  Estate.  Nonresidential  construction  in the District as  a whole

continues  to outperform  the nation, but construction  activity in some District states  has declined

in recent months.  A producer of building materials  reports that nonresidential  construction

awards  (in floor area) in the first four months  of 1990  were  up 7 percent from  a year ago for the

District  states,  compared to a  10 percent decline  nationally.  However,  Michigan  and Wisconsin

both registered declines in April.  Illinois declined in March,  but was positive  in April.  A large

Chicago-area  building materials  supplier noted that  shipments in April were  below year-ago

levels, although year-to-date  shipments were  up.  Some projects in the planning stage are

reportedly  being pushed  back, but so far few have  been cancelled.  Chicago's  office vacancy rate

is below  the  nation's,  according  to one contact,  but vacancy rates in its suburbs  are now  slightly

above  the national  average.  Commercial  sales  of existing office space are  unchanged from  a

year ago, but a commercial  realtor notes  that institutions providing financing are  paying

increasing  attention to "quality."

Residential  construction  in the District  is following a pattern  similar to the nonresidential

sector.  Contracts  for housing  construction were up  10 percent  in the District, compared to an  8

VII-2

percent  decline  nationally  for the first  four months  of 1990.  However, the  District dropped 3

percent  in April from  year-ago levels,  with Illinois  accounting  for the bulk of the  decline.  A

Chicago-area  realtor reports  that local residential  sales  were  up  in April,  May,  and early June

over a year ago,  after being flat for several  months.  Housing  prices  are edging  up,  but have

slowed  sharply from  the year-ago  pace  as  houses  take  longer to  sell.  Some large  banks  in early

June  have  dropped  their mortgage  rates on  average  about  a half a point to slightly  below  10

percent.

Consumer Spending.  General merchandise  sales  in the District  have been  weakening

since  April,  according  to several retail analysts,  reflecting  in part the housing  slowdown  and

special factors.  An analyst  for a major retailing chain reports  that sales of major appliances  fell

sharply  in April  and May,  led by household improvement  goods  and household furnishings.

Overall, sales  growth  in the  District has  been about equal  to overall sales growth for the chain,

after outperforming  the nation earlier in the year.  An analyst for a nationwide discount chain

reports  that the Midwest  was their only  market region to experience  declining  sales  in May.

Store  sales were  hurt in part by the expansion  of new discount chains  into the region and by

liquidation  sales  at stores  in bankruptcy.  An appliance producer reports  that shipments,  down 6

percent  in the year-to-date  through May,  are  weaker  than expected.

Sales  of apparel goods  continued to be weak  in early June.  Apparel  sales, according  to

one analyst, have been hurt by  unseasonably  cold weather  and consumer resistance  to higher

prices.  Higher prices  were attributed  in part to  a slackening  of competitive  pressures  after

several retail chains filed for bankruptcy.  Most of the  sales decline  in apparel  is concentrated  in

women's apparel, with men's  and children's apparel  showing modest  strength.

Manufacturing.  Manufacturing  activity in the District continues  to be mixed, with

strength in  auto-related industries  more than offsetting weakness  in construction-related

industries.  An auto analyst reports  that the expected rebound from last quarter's weak auto

production  includes  some seasonal inventory  building, as auto makers prepare for the

changeover to 1991  model production.  Inventory levels are  viewed as being in good shape,

VII-3

running 20 percent  below a year ago despite  sales  being  down  10 percent.  Steel production  this

quarter  is expected  to nearly  equal last  year's  second quarter high, according  to  a steel  analyst,

who  has revised  estimated  output for 1990  upward  by 5  million tons  to  82 million  tons

(compared  to  84 million tons  in  1989).

Capital-goods  producers  generally report mixed activity,  following  the overall pattern  of

manufacturing.  A producer of heavy  equipment  states  that District plants  that make  highway

construction  and mining equipment  are  doing very well,  but plants  that produce  heavy equipment

tied to  building construction  are slowing down.  A producer  of agricultural  equipment reports

continued  sales  strength  especially  for combines  and four-wheel  drive  tractors.  However,

agricultural  equipment  sales  are expected to  begin slowing by the  end of the  year, as  replacement

demand  softens.  Sales of light industrial  equipment,  which follows  the housing industry  closely,

are  down  10  percent from  a year ago.  A producer  of food processing  and material  handling

equipment  notes  some softening  in orders  from very  high levels.  A  materials  supplier cites

strength  in the demand for pumps  and compressors,  coming in part  from new chemical  plants,

and for plastics-making  equipment,  coming in part from overseas.  An  economist  for a large

electronics  producer reports  that orders for communications  equipment  have returned to double-

digit growth rates  and shipments  are expected  to reach double-digit  rates by the end of the  year.

Orders  for electronic  components  used in computers  are  still relatively weak,  but are  beginning

to show  some improvement.

Agriculture.  Cool temperatures  and frequent rainstorms  from mid-May  through early

June  slowed crop plantings, caused ponding  and plant-emergence problems  in some planted

fields,  disrupted haying operations  in many  areas, and resulted in pollination and frost damage

problems  for some fruit growers  in Michigan  and Wisconsin.  Some  13 percent  of the corn

acreage  and 47 percent of the  soybean acreage in District states  had not yet been planted  as of

June  2, a date  when plantings  are  normally winding down.  The planting delays were  most

apparent  in Southern Illinois  and Indiana.  Faced with a June  8  to 15  planting deadline,  some of

this  year's intended corn acreage  will likely be shifted to  soybeans.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT  - ST.  LOUIS

Summary

Contacts  generally  report  slow  economic  growth  throughout  the

District,  with  few  expecting  any  substantial  decline  in  activity  in 

the

near  future.  Manufacturing  activity  is  flat.  Many  of  the  District's

largest  commercial  banks  have  tightened  credit  standards  for  loans  to

small  and mid-sized businesses.  Excessive  rainfall  has  damaged crops  and

delayed planting.

Consumer  Spending

Non-auto  retail  sales  growth  is  described as  weak-to-moderate  by

contacts  in  most  parts  of  the  District. 

Survey  responses  indicate  that

the  number  of  retailers  with  larger-than-desired 

inventories, 

though

still  a minority,  rose  substantially  from  a year  earlier.  Most District

contacts  describe car  sales  as  flat or below year-earlier  levels,  despite

the continued availability of  sales  incentives.  Moderate growth of  truck

and used car  sales has been reported for  some areas.

Labor Markets  and General Business Activity

District  manufacturing  employment  has  been 

flat 

in 

recent

months;  at  the  same  time,  nonmanufacturing  employment  has  grown  at  a

moderate  pace,  with  the  most  growth  occurring  in  wholesale  and  retail

trades,  government  and  services.  Medical  services, 

in  particular,  have

shown  moderate-to-strong job  growth  in  most metropolitan  areas.  Only

slight  increases 

in  construction  employment  have  been  reported,  with

slight  declines  occurring 

in 

the  financial  and  the  transportation,

communication  and utilities  sectors.  Regional  unemployment  rates have

fallen  slightly  in  recent  months, 

in  part  because  workers  were  recalled

VIII-2

to  factories  producing  home  appliances  and  autos. 

A  recent  survey

indicated  that  approximately  one 

in 

five  small  businesses  were  having

difficulty  filling some job  openings,  about the  same  proportion as  a year

ago.

Military  restructuring  and  defense  spending  cutbacks  are

affecting  some  parts  of  the  District. 

One  contact  reports  that  the

pending  reduction of  a military base  in  Kentucky has  caused  retail  sales

to  decline  locally and the  inventory of  unsold homes  to  rise.  A military

installation 

that  develops  and 

tests 

equipment  will  eliminate

approximately  260  jobs  in  St.  Louis. 

A  cut  in  military  orders  caused  a

sharp decline  in production at  a shoe  factory in  southern Illinois.

Manufacturing

Overall,  manufacturing  activity  has  been  stable,  with  plant

shutdowns  and  layoffs  roughly  equaling  expansions  and  new  operations.

Makers  of  building  materials  are  benefiting  from  the  improvement 

in 

the

Texas  economy.  One  tire  factory  laid off  many of  its  workers  as  orders

diminished; 

in  Arkansas, 

on  the  other  hand, 

three  plants  that  will

produce  steel  cord for  tires  are  under  construction.  Overall,  growth  in

the  construction  of new plants  producing motor vehicle parts  is  slowing,

but  some  existing  suppliers  are  expanding. 

Much  of  the  District's

manufacturing  growth  is  in  the  production of nondurables.  Some  paper and

food processing operations,  for  example,  are  expanding.  New or  expanding

poultry  processing  factories  were  reported  in  Arkansas,  Mississippi  and

Kentucky.

Banking and  Credit

Senior  loan  officers  at  the  District's  five  largest banks report

non-merger-related commercial  and industrial  (C & I)  lending  fell  from

1988  to  1989,  but  that  no  further  slowing  occurred  in 

the  first 

four

VIII-3

months  of  1990.  Most  of  these  officers  indicated credit  standards  had

tightened  somewhat  for  small  and  medium-sized  businesses; 

a 

less

favorable  economic  outlook, 

industry-specific  factors  and  deteriorating

loan portfolios  were  mentioned  as  reasons  for  the  tightening.  Credit

terms  for  C  &  I  loans  to  medium-sized  firms  (annual  sales  of  $50  to  $250

million) have  tightened more  than for  smaller businesses.  Both  small and

medium-sized  firms  are  facing 

tighter 

loan  covenants  and

collateralization  requirements  for  C  &  I 

loans,  with  medium-sized  firms

also  encountering  lower  maximum  credit  lines  and  increased  loan  rates

over  base  rates.  The  officers  also  confirmed  that  credit  standards  for

commercial  real  estate  projects, 

especially  office  buildings  and

industrial  structures, had  tightened since  late  1989.

Agriculture

Excessive  rainfall  over  the  District  has  delayed  crop  planting,

damaged  crops  and caused  flooding.  Crop planting has  been delayed  the

longest  in  northern  portions  of  the  District,  where  corn  and  soybean

plantings  are  three-to-five  weeks  behind  normal. 

Diseases  stimulated by

the  cool,  wet  weather  and  insects  have  damaged  the  wheat  and  cotton

crops. 

One-quarter 

to  one-half  of  these  crops  are  rated 

in

poor-to-very-poor condition in  several District states.  District logging

activity  also  has  been  limited  by  the  wet weather.  Areas  adjacent  to

rivers  sustained crop and  livestock losses  due  to  flooding  throughout the

District,  with  Arkansas  being  hit  the  hardest. 

Disaster  assistance has

been approved for  almost half of  Arkansas'  counties.  The  combination of

poor  weather  conditions  and  disease  and  insect  problems  indicate  that

1990  District crop yields may fall below normal in some areas.

IX-1

NINTH  DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

Ninth District  economic  conditions  have been  moderately good  lately,

though  there  have  been  some  signs  of  softening.  Employment  growth  has  been

low,  retail  sales  growth  has  fallen  off,  and  new  cars  have  been  selling  very

slowly.  However,  some  types  of  manufacturing  have  shown  some  strength,  and

conditions  in  resource-related  industries  have been  excellent.

Employment,  Wages, and  Prices

Labor  markets  in  the district, particularly  in  Minnesota, have shown

some  signs  of softening  recently.  In  April,  Minnesota's unemployment rate  hit

5.4  percent,  its  highest  level  in  over  a year.  There has  been essentially no

growth  in  total  employment  since  January  in  Minnesota. 

Elsewhere  in  the

district,  unemployment  rates  were  generally  lower  this  April  than  last,  but

the growth rate of  employment has been  low.

Wage  and  price  increases  have  remained  moderate  in  the  district.

Employers  continue  to  report  that  health  care  costs  have  been  rising

rapidly. 

Some  employers  in  Minnesota  report  that  high  worker  compensation

insurance  premiums  have  induced  them  to  self-insure.  A Bank  director reports

that,  in  Minnesota's  manufacturing  industry,  raw material  costs  have  remained

level  while  finished  good  prices  have  stabilized after  rising  fairly rapidly

earlier  in  the year.

Consumer  Spending

Retailers in  the  district report  some slowing  of sales  growth  in  May

after  strong  growth  earlier  in  the  year. 

One  large  retailer  reports  that

sales  from January  through May were about 5 percent higher  than in  the compar-

able  period  last  year,  but  that  May  sales  were only  1 percent  higher  than  in

May  1989.  Another  retailer  reports  that  sales  in  May  were  15  percent higher

IX-2

than  a year  ago  while  year-to-date  sales  were  25  percent  higher.  The  rela-

tively  slow  growth  in  May  is  largely  attributed  to  cool,  wet  weather,  and

retailers  remain  optimistic. 

Inventories  are  reported  to  be  at  acceptable

levels.

New  car  sales  have  continued  to  be  very  soft  in  the  district,  par-

ticularly  compared  to  last  year.  However,  some  dealers  point  out  that  sales

last  May  were  unusually  high  because  manufacturers  offered  rebates  on  their

cars.  Used  car  sales,  which  were  strong  earlier  in  the  year,  also show  signs

of slowing.

Housing  sales  have  generally  been  strong  in  the  district,  but  new

housing construction has  been  low.  In  the  Minneapolis-St. Paul  area of Minne-

sota,  housing  sales  were  higher  in  April  than  in  any  month  in  the  last  two

years  and  May  sales  were  9 percent  higher  than  in  May  1989.  In  all  of  Minne-

sota,  the number of new housing  permits  issued was 20  percent  lower this  March

than  last.  Much  of  this  decline  is  concentrated  in  the  Minneapolis-St.  Paul

area, where the  number of new  permits declined 34  percent.

Cool  weather  and  rain  haven't  dampened  the  spirits  of  travelers  in

the district.  Michigan's Upper  Peninsula and  Wisconsin's Arrowhead region are

expecting  a  good  summer.  The  number  of  people  crossing  the  Mackinac  Bridge

into  the  Upper  Peninsula  is  at  a  record  high.  Retailers  in  the  area  report

strong  sales  to  Canadian  tourists.  In  Minnesota,  the fishing  season  got  off

to  a good  start,  and throughout  the  district,  campgrounds are  filled on  week-

ends.  North Dakota,  South  Dakota,  and Montana  expect  some  decline  in  tourist

spending  from  last  year  because  1989  was  their  centennial  year. 

Montana

forests  are  green  again,  with  few marks  left  of  the  fire  at  Yellowstone  two

years  ago.  Tourist  activity in Montana  is  expected  to be  strong this  summer.

IX-3

Manufacturing and  Construction

Conditions  in  the  district's  manufacturing  industries  have  been

mixed.  Suppliers  to  the  aircraft  industry  report  strong  sales  and  a  large

backlog  of  orders,  and  a  director  reports  that  conditions  in  capital  goods

industries  have  been  "surprisingly  good."  Strong  growth  is  also  reported  in

the  printing  industry  and  among  manufacturers  of  scientific  and  medical

instruments. 

However,  the  electronics  industry  in  the  Minneapolis-St.  Paul

area  continues  to  experience  problems,  and  suppliers  to  the  defense  industry

report drops  in  production and  in  new  orders.

Nonresidential  construction  in  the  Twin  Cities  area  has  been  rela-

tively  weak.  The  dollar  volume  of  contracts  for  future  nonresidential  con-

struction  in  April  was  unchanged  from  a year  ago.  Vacancy  rates  for  office

space  in  this  area are  expected  to  rise  sharply with the  completion of several

major projects.

Resource-Related  Industries

The  district's  resource-related  industries  appear  to  be  healthy.

The forest  product  industries  remain  strong, and  so  does mining--especially  in

Montana.  Recent  rains  in  the district have  substantially  brightened prospects

for  agriculture.  Minnesota's  farm  fields  are  the  wettest  they've  been  since

1987,  and  only  12  percent  of  the  fields  are  short  of  moisture.  Meanwhile,

North Dakota farmers  are reported  to  be  more optimistic  than  they have been  in

several years,  and Montana ranchers  expect  a record year.

X-1

TENTH  DISTRICT  - KANSAS  CITY

Overview.  Modest  growth  still  characterizes  the  Tenth  District economy.

Retail  sales  continue  to  increase  moderately,  although new  car  sales  have  been

mixed.  Both retailers  and manufacturers  are  attempting to  trim  inventories.

Oil  and  gas  drilling stabilized  in May  and remains  stronger  than a year

earlier.  Residential  construction  activity has  generally been flat  over

recent months,  as  new home  sales remain  slow.  Mortgage  demand at  thrift

institutions  remains  weak, while  loan demand  at  commercial banks  is  generally

steady to  up  moderately  from a  month ago.  Plentiful  spring  rains  have

apparently  ended the  region's  two-year drought.  The  winter wheat harvest now

getting under way is  expected  to  produce  above-average yields.

Retail  Sales.  Most district retailers  report moderate  increases  in

sales  over  the  past year  and over  the  past  three months.  Sales  are  expected

to  improve  slightly  in the  months ahead.  Prices  have  changed  in  line with

cost  increases  and are  expected to edge  up  further  in  coming months.  Most

respondents are  attempting to  trim  inventories.  New auto  sales  have  slowed  in

some  district  states but have  improved slightly in others.  Some  dealers

report tightening  credit terms  for potential buyers.  Most  dealers  continue to

trim  inventories because  they expect only modest  sales  in coming months.

Manufacturing.  Most  purchasing agents  report relatively  stable prices

for  inputs over  the past  three  months.  Prices  are  expected to  remain steady

or  increase  slightly during the  next  three months.  Agents  report no problems

in  obtaining materials  or workers  and expect none  for  the  remainder  of the

year.  Most  firms  are trimming  inventory levels by continuing to  operate

plants below capacity.

Energy.  Oil prices  remain about  $4 below their  level  at  the beginning

of the  year.  Despite  softer oil  prices, exploration and development activity

X-2

in  the  district  remained stable  in May  and improved  compared with one  year

earlier.  The  district  rig  count  increased  slightly  from 263  in April  to  266

in May, up  14  percent  from May 1989.

Housing Activity and  Finance.  District housing activity  is  slightly

down  from a year  ago  and has  generally been flat  over recent months.  New home

sales  are  slow, and prices  remain generally stable.  Lumber prices  are  up

because  of  reduced cutting  in  the  Northwest in  recent  months, but builders

expect  lumber prices  to  stabilize.  For  the  rest of the  year, housing starts

and new home  sales  are  expected  to be  similar to  last year.

Most  district savings  and  loans  report  deposit outflows  over both the

last  month and the  last  year.  Deposits  are  expected to  stabilize  soon.

Demand for mortgage funds  remains  weak, and most  respondents expect  little

improvement  in upcoming months.  Mortgage  rates have been constant  or up

slightly at  most institutions.  There was no  consensus  on  the  future  direction

of  mortgage  rates--some respondents  expect rates  to  rise  while  others expect

rates  to  fall.

Banking.  Most commercial bank respondents report  that loan demand  is  up

moderately over  the  last month.  Increased demand is  reported  in all

categories of  loans:  commercial  and industrial,  consumer,  residential real

estate,  commercial real estate,  and agricultural.  None of the  respondents

report  a change  in their prime  rate,  and none expect  a change  in  the near

term.  Nor  do most report a change  in  consumer lending  rates,  although a few

report  lower rates.  Virtually none  of the  respondents  expect a change  in

consumer rates  in  the near term.

Changes  in loan-deposit ratios  and  in deposit  activity were mixed at

district banks.  IRA and Keough accounts  were  generally up, while MMDAs were

generally down.

Agriculture.  Large  amounts  of  spring  rain across much of  the  district

marked  the  end of  the drought  that  gripped large parts  of  the region  during

the  past  two  years.  The plentiful  rainfall has  improved pasture  conditions

and generally boosted prospects  for  the  winter wheat crop,  but has  delayed

planting of spring crops  in  some  areas.  Planting  is  about seven  to  ten days

behind normal  in  Oklahoma and  three  to  four weeks behind normal  in Missouri.

Warmer weather will be  needed to  promote  crop  development.

The  district's  winter wheat crop  is  generally in good condition,

although  continued wet weather has  contributed  to  disease problems  in some

areas  and  could delay  the wheat harvest.  The wheat harvest has begun  in

Oklahoma and will  progress north across  the  district  through mid-July.

Expected yields  range  from average to well  above  average, with record yields

likely  in much of Kansas.

Improved pasture conditions,  due  to  the plentiful rains,  ensure an

adequate  feed supply  for cattle herds.  Although plentiful forage  supplies

encourage  herd expansion, feeder cattle prices  remain exceptionally strong.

As  a result, herd expansion  is  occurring at  a slow pace.

ELEVENTH  DISTRICT--DALLAS

The  District economy is  growing slowly, but  respondents  remain

optimistic.  Manufacturing has  shown  little  change  recently.  Growth  in retail

sales  has  softened.  District  auto  sales  are  up  slightly.  Services  activity

is  expanding somewhat.  Construction contract  values  continue  to  fall.  Oil

and gas  drilling  firms  remain optimistic  about  further growth.  Agricultural

prices  lately have  slipped a little,  but remain well  above  a year  earlier.

Manufacturing  firms  cite  little  overall change  in  orders, but  survey

responses  vary widely among  industries.  Oil-field equipment  sales  growth  is

accelerating.  Respondents expect further  increases  in  sales  in  1990.  Steel

firms  note  rising orders  after a soft  period in  late  1989.  They also  say  that

selling prices have  increased during  the  last  two months.  Reports by

respondents  in  the  fabricated metals  industry vary widely but,  on average,

show  little  change.  In the  lumber  and wood products  industry, reports  are

mixed.  Firms  that  serve  national  markets are  seeing  slowing homebuilding-

related  sales.  Firms  that  chiefly serve  District markets have  seen  growth

lately.  As  a result of heavy spring rains,  some  lumber  firms  are having

difficulty removing logs  for  cutting.  Among stone,  clay and  glass  producers,

brick  firms  cite expanding orders.  Cement  firms  express concern about

sluggishness  in state highway construction contracting while  noting that

demand has  not changed.  Electronics and  computer-related firms  say their

commercial  sales  are  generally increasing after a slump  in  late  1989,  but  that

declines  in  defense  sales  and  in  sales  to  defense contractors have been more

rapid  than the  firms  had expected.  Some  of these  respondents  said  that

XI-2

reductions  in  orders  from defense  firms  had resulted  in overall  dropoffs  in

orders.  Among nondurable  goods  industries,  apparel  producers note  slowing

sales,  and food-processing  firms  also  note  some  decreases.  Paper  producers

say  that  overcapacity  in  their  industry,  together with  declines  in demand, has

motivated price  reductions  and that  the  high  dollar has  discouraged exports.

Most  chemical  firms  say  that  demand and prices  for  their  products  range  from

unchanged  to  slightly down, but  that  orders  remain high  and plants  are  mostly

running  at  or  near capacity.  Refinery  production has  remained unchanged, but

gasoline  prices  and profit margins  are  up.

Retail  sales  expansion  shows  signs  of  slowing,  after strong  growth early

in  the  first quarter.  But  some  chains  say  their District  sales  are  still

outperforming  their national  sales.  After  a  very weak Memorial  Day  sales

period,  expansion  rebounded somewhat, but  the  recent pattern of softness

continues  to  concern  some  respondents.

District  auto  sales  are  up  slightly over  last year.  In April, year-

over-year  growth was  strong in Dallas,  moderate  in  San Antonio  and negative  in

Houston although Houston's January-April  sales were  7  percent  above last  year.

Sales  of U.S.-built  foreign brands  have posted particularly high  rates  of

expansion.

Service  firms  generally report  some  growth in  demand, but responses are

more mixed than  in  recent previous  surveys.  Labor contracting and temporary

employment firms  note  some  recent  increases  in  overall demand, but they  say

that  reductions  in defense-related work in Las  Cruces and White  Sands,  New

Mexico have  led to  decreasing demand there.  Most business  service  firms

report that  their sales  are now fairly strong, and  that they are cautiously

XI-3

optimistic  about expansion  during  the  next  two  quarters,  but  that  recent

demand has  not been  great enough to  allow most of  them to  raise prices. 

The

exception within  this  industry  group  has been data processing firms,  for  which

both  demand and  selling prices  are  up.

District construction remains  weak.  Nonresidential contract values  have

risen  somewhat  in recent months, but remain well below levels  of  late  last

year, while  nonbuilding contract values have  fallen sharply.  Residential

values have  declined, but considerably less  than nationally.  They have

actually increased  in Houston and Dallas/Ft. Worth.  These gains  have been led

by multifamily construction, which has grown  in  response to  rising  apartment

rents  and occupancy rates.  Occupancy rates  in major  office markets  are  also

increasing, but remain low.

Although oil  prices have  fallen  in recent months,  the District  energy

sector continues  to  expand.  In  May, the District  rotary rig count was up  44

percent  from a year earlier.  During  the past  several months,  employment  in

oil  and  gas  extraction has  rebounded.  Most respondents offer  favorable

outlooks  for long-term oil  prices, but one noted that oil prices  may be set

for another big drop  in  the  near  term.  Natural  gas  prices  are generally

expected to  rise.

In District  agriculture, water has been a concern lately.  Heavy spring

rains  impeded normal planting patterns, but recent warm temperatures have

dried topsoil sufficiently  to permit seeding.  Receding flood waters along the

Trinity River are  leaving behind heavy losses.  Prices  received by farmers  and

ranchers  in May were  1 percent below April  levels, but remained 8 percent

above a year earlier.

XII  - 1

TWELFTH  DISTRICT  -- SAN  FRANCISCO

Summary

Economic  activity  in  the  West  continues  at a  healthy  level.  Western  business  leaders

continue  to  anticipate  relatively  slow  growth  during  the  next  twelve  months, although  they  are

slightly  more  optimistic  than  they were  six  weeks  ago.  Overall  wage  and  price  trends  have

changed  little during  recent  weeks,  with  increases  averaging  around 4  or 5  percent.  Conditions  in

the trade  and  service  sectors  continue  healthy,  with little  change  reported.  The  pace  of

manufacturing  activity  varies  widely  within  the  District, with  strength  in aluminum,  food  products

and  commercial  aircraft  offset  by weakness  in  defense  industries  and  in  some  technology  firms.

Agricultural  conditions  in  the  West  are  satisfactory  overall.  The  forest products  industries  face

thinner  margins.  Most western  real  estate  markets  continue  healthy.  Recent  reports  confirm  that

lending  standards  have  become  more  stringent  in  recent  months,  although  the effect  on  credit-

worthy borrowers  is  not clear.

Business  Sentiment

Western  business  leaders  continue  to  anticipate  relatively  slow  growth  during  the next

twelve  months,  although  they  have  become  slightly  more  optimistic  during  the  last six weeks.

Three-quarters  of respondents  continue  to expect  that  GNP  growth will  be  positive  but slower

than  2  1/2  percent, while  the  proportion  anticipating  growth  in  excess  of 3  percent  rose  from  zero

to  four  percent.  Expectations  regarding  business  investment,  consumer spending,  and  the  trade

balance  improved  somewhat,  while  deterioration  was  noted  in  expectations  regarding  housing

starts.

Wages  and Prices

Overall  wage  and  price  trends  have  changed  little  during  recent  weeks,  with increases  in

the  4 to  5  percent  range  remaining  the "central tendency."  Health  care  costs  continue  to rise  at

XII  - 2

double-digit  rates.  One  respondent  who  runs  a  machinery  repair  shop  reports  that,  although  his

wage  rates  have  not  changed,  he  recently  raised  his  shop  rates  by  more  than  5  percent  to  cover

increased  medical  costs.  Substantial  upward  price  pressure  also  is  reported  for some  drought-

affected  agricultural  products,  including  alfalfa  and  cattle.  A recent  labor  settlement  in  Hawaii

calls  for wage  hikes  averaging  7  percent  per year  for  the  next  5  years.

In contrast,  some  other  products  are  seeing  flat  or  lower  prices.  Prices  for lumber  and

wood  chips  have  fallen sharply  in  recent  months,  squeezing  profits  as  log  prices  remain  high.  A

car  dealer  reports  that  there  is  downward  pressure  on  the  prices  of  new cars.  Many  clothing

retailers  reportedly  believe  that  the  recent  CPI  increase  in women's  apparel  prices  is  spurious,

since  competition  in  the  industry makes  it  unlikely  that  higher  prices  can  be  maintained.

Trade  and  Services

Conditions  in  the  trade  and service  sectors  are  generally  unchanged.  Retail  sales continue

healthy  overall.  Department  stores,  as well  as  food  and drug  retailers,  report  good conditions.

The  number  of visitors  to  Hawaii  has  recovered  following  a hotel  strike  earlier  in the  spring.

However,  District  auto  sales  continue weak,  with  no sign  yet  of the usual  spring  sales pickup.

Manufacturing

The  pace  of manufacturing  activity  varies  widely within  the  District.  Aluminum  smelters

are  operating  at capacity,  while  production of food  products  and plastics  is reported  to  be strong

in  the Northwest.  Commercial  aircraft  production  is  limited by capacity  constraints,  although

production  and delivery  rates  continue  to  rise  as labor  productivity  improves  further.  Reports

from  the  Northwest  indicate  that  products  associated  with high-end  construction  such  as wood-

frame  windows  and specialty  finishes  are  in strong demand.

Reports  of flattening  or  declining  activity  continue  to be  concentrated  in  the defense  and

technology  sectors.  Several  defense firms  in  the  West  have  announced  layoffs  in recent  weeks,

XII  - 3

and one  large  firm  also has  announced  plans  to move  some  of its  operations  from  southern

California  to  Georgia.  The strength  of commercial  aviation,  as  well  as  possible  increases  in

NASA  funding,  are  the  main  bright  spots  for these  firms.  Overall  conditions in  technology-related

sectors  are  relatively  flat  at  present,  but with  wide variations  by company  and product  line.  One

company  supplying  the computer  industry  reports very  slow  sales,  but some  firms  in various

segments  of the  electronics,  computer,  and software  industries  are  doing  very well.

Agriculture  and  Resource-Related  Industries

Agricultural  conditions  in  the  West  are  satisfactory  overall.  Most  farmers  and  ranchers

have  generated  healthy  profits  in  recent years,  so  their  financial  positions  are relatively  strong.

Oregon  vegetables  are in  strong  demand by  food  processors,  so  plantings  are  up this year.  Recent

unseasonal  rain  storms  in  California  provided  enough  water  to  increase  allotments  from their low

drought  levels.  However,  the  storms  also  caused  significant  damage  to some  farmers'  tree  fruit

crops.

Conditions  in  the  forest products  industries  continue  to deteriorate.  More  stringent

restrictions  on  logging  federal  land  have  reduced  the supply  of logs  and increased  their  price.  At

the same  time,  reduced  home-building  activity  nationwide  has  weakened  the  price  for finished

lumber.  The  resulting  profit  squeeze  has  led  several  mills  to lay off workers  or close  down

entirely.

Construction  and Real  Estate

Conditions  remain  healthy  in  most western  real estate  markets.  In  California,  the pace  of

home sales  and  the average  amount  of  time on  the  market  have  returned  to more  "normal" levels.

Average  time  on  the market  has  risen  in  recent  weeks  in Washington.  In  both California  and

Washington,  sales  activity  is stronger  in  the  lower  price  ranges.  Construction  activity  and the

number  of homes  sold have  risen  by double-digit  rates  in  Oregon,  Idaho, and  Utah.  The  average

XII  - 4

amount  of  time  on  the market  has  fallen  significantly  in  these  three  states.  Despite  the  widely

publicized  problems  in Arizona's  real  estate  markets,  home  prices  have  remained  relatively stable,

with  small  declines  in some  categories  offset  by  small  increases  in  others.

Financial  Sector

Reports  from  inside  and  outside  the  financial  industries  confirm  that  lending  standards

have  become  more  stringent  in recent  months.  However,  the  effect  on  credit-worthy  borrowers  is

not  clear.  Some lenders  report  that they  are  no  longer  financing  "marginal" deals, suggesting  that

credit-worthy  borrowers  are  still able  to obtain  funds.  In  Arizona,  however,  it  is  reported  that

only builders  with  excellent  records  and significant  equity  can borrow.  Car  dealers  express

growing  concern  about  tightened lending  criteria  and withdrawals  by some  lenders  from the

"dealer indirect" business.  A developer  notes  that  the impact  of more  stringent  lending  criteria

will  likely  be  seen  in a year  or  two,  when  less  new  space  comes on  the  market.

