FEDERAL  RESERVE  press  release

For  Use at  4:30 p.m. 

February  8, 1991

The  Federal  Reserve Board and the  Federal  Open Market

Committee  today released the  attached record of policy actions

taken by the  Federal Open Market  Committee  at  its meeting on

December 18,  1990.

The  record  for each meeting of the  Committee  is  made

available  a few days  after  the  next  regularly scheduled meeting

and subsequently  is  published in the Federal  Reserve Bulletin

and the  Board's Annual Report.  The  summary description of

economic and financial  conditions  contained  in  each record is

based  solely on the  information that  was  available to the

Committee at  the  time of the meeting.

Attachment

RECORD  OF POLICY ACTIONS  OF THE
FEDERAL OPEN MARKET  COMMITTEE

Meeting Held on December  18,  1990

1.  Domestic policy directive

The  information reviewed at  this meeting suggested that

economic activity had fallen appreciably in  recent months.  A depressed

level of  consumer confidence  and a decline  in real  disposable  income had

contributed to sluggish consumer spending.  In  response  to apparent

weakness in final  demands, businesses  had reduced production and

employment;  these cutbacks  were most  evident  in the motor vehicle and

construction sectors, but  a broad  range  of  other industries  had been

affected to some  degree.  Consumer inflation had moderated recently,

largely as  a result  of some  softening  in oil  prices.  Despite the

substantial  increases  in living costs  this  year, wage  gains  appeared to

have  slowed  somewhat  in recent months.

After a progressive weakening during the  first three  quarters

of the year, total nonfarm payroll employment  fell  sharply  further in

October  and November.  Job  losses were  widespread across  industries  in

November but  were  especially pronounced in manufacturing and

construction.  In the  service-producing sector, which had generated most

of the  employment  gains  earlier in the year, the  health industry was one

of the  few to post  significant  increases  in  jobs.  The  civilian

unemployment  rate  rose  to 5.9  percent in November.

Industrial  output  declined markedly for  a second  straight  month

in November.  Production cutbacks were  broadly distributed across

industries  but  were especially pronounced in motor vehicles  and parts,

non-auto consumer goods,  and construction  supplies.  Reflecting the

sizable decline  in manufacturing production, the rate  of capacity

utilization in manufacturing dropped  further below the mid-year high.

In October  and November,  retail  sales  in real terms were below

the  downward revised September  level.  Real  disposable  incomes had been

reduced by a decrease in total  hours worked  and by the  effects of  higher

energy prices,  and major  surveys of  consumer attitudes  in November

indicated that consumer confidence  remained at  depressed levels.  In

October, total private housing starts  declined substantially further;

almost  all  of the drop reflected  additional  weakness in  starts of

multifamily units.  Sales  of both new and existing houses  fell  in

September  and October.

Shipments  of  nondefense  capital goods edged lower in October

after  changing little, on balance, in previous months.  A sizable  drop

in shipments  of aircraft  and parts more  than offset  further  increases  in

the  office  and computing equipment  category.  New orders  for  nondefense

capital goods pointed to a considerable  softening in business equipment

spending in  coming months.  Nonresidential construction activity fell

for a third straight  month, and permits and contracts  for  new

construction remained in a downtrend.  Manufacturing inventories posted

a small  increase in October,  and the ratio  of stocks  to sales  continued

to  edge down.  At  the  retail  level,  non-auto inventories rose moderately

after two months of little  change;  the  inventory-to-sales  ratio  remained

within the  range  that  had prevailed for an extended period.

Reflecting a sharper rise  in the  value of  imports  than  in that

of exports,  the  nominal U.S. merchandise  trade deficit  widened in

October  from its average  rate  in the  third quarter.  After moderating

somewhat  in  September, non-oil  imports  surged in October;  the  value of

oil  imports  also rose  as  a sharp  increase  in  prices  offset  a small

decline in volume.  Nonagricultural exports  registered a sizable

increase that  more than offset  a further drop  in  exports of  agricultural

products.  Economic  growth in the major  foreign industrial countries  was

mixed in  the third quarter.  Growth remained  strong in Western Germany

and appeared to  have  rebounded in France.  Some  slowing  from the  rapid

rise  early  in the year  had occurred  in  Japan, while  declines in  economic

activity  were  recorded in  the United Kingdom and Canada.  Some

moderation in  consumer price  inflation  appeared to  be  in  progress  for

the major  foreign economies, reflecting the  nearly  completed passthrough

to  the  retail  level  of  the earlier  rise  in  oil  prices.

In  November,  increases  in producer prices  of  finished goods

moderated from the  rapid pace of  previous months;  the  prices of  finished

foods  again advanced  sharply,  but  declines  in the  prices  of  refined

petroleum products damped  the overall  rise  in producer  prices.  Over

October  and November, producer prices  of  non-energy, nonfood  finished

goods  increased at  about the third-quarter rate,  which in turn was

somewhat  below that  in the  first  half  of the year.  The  pace of  consumer

inflation also slowed in  November, mostly as  a result  of  a smaller  rise

in  energy prices.  Excluding food and energy  items,  consumer prices  rose

in  November at  the more moderate  pace  seen in  the  previous  two months.

Average  hourly earnings  of  production or  nonsupervisory workers were

unchanged on  balance over October and November;  this  represented  a

considerable slowing from the  increases recorded in earlier months of

the year.

At  its meeting on November 13, the  Committee  adopted a

directive that  called for a slight  immediate  reduction in the degree  of

pressure on  reserve positions  and that  also  called  for giving weight  to

potential  developments that  might require  some  slight  further  easing

during the intermeeting period.  The  reserve  conditions  contemplated by

the Committee  were  expected to be consistent  with growth  of both M2 and

M3  at  annual  rates  of about  1 to 2 percent  over  the period from

September through December.

Following the meeting, open market  operations  were  directed

toward  implementing the  slight  easing of reserve market  conditions

sought by the  Committee.  Subsequently,  in early December, in light  of

further  indications of  a softening economy and continuing  weakness in

the monetary aggregates,  another slight easing  in reserve  pressures was

carried out.  In addition,  a number  of technical  adjustments  were made

to assumed levels  of  adjustment plus  seasonal  borrowing to reflect  the

declines in seasonal borrowing activity that  typically occur late  in the

year.  Adjustment  plus  seasonal borrowing fell  from about  $260  million

for the  reserve maintenance period that  ended the day after the  November

meeting to  a little  over  $100  million  for the period completed  prior to

this meeting.  In  the  early part  of  the  intermeeting period, in the

context  of  continued cautious  reserve management by banks and the

settlement  of  the mid-quarter Treasury refunding, the  federal  funds  rate

averaged near  7-3/4 percent.  Late  in  the period, after the  slight

additional  easing  of policy and as  concerns  about a year-end  squeeze  on

-5-

the availability of  short-term funds abated  somewhat,  the  federal  funds

rate averaged  around 7-1/4  percent.  Other market  interest  rates  also

declined on balance  over the intermeeting  period, in some  cases

substantially,  as markets  responded to mounting evidence that  the

economy  was  slowing significantly  and to  the easing  of monetary policy.

Lower interest  rates  and optimism over a possible  peaceful  resolution of

the  Persian Gulf  situation contributed to  a rise  in broad  stock market

indexes.

The easing  of concerns about  year-end pressures  appeared  to

have  been helped by the  announcement by the  Board of Governors  on

December  4, 1990,  of  the elimination  of reserve  requirements  on

nonpersonal  time  deposits  and net Eurocurrency  liabilities.  These

reserve  requirements were  phased down  in two  steps,  with the  second

occurring in the  reserve maintenance period  spanning year-end.  This

action was  not  expected to affect underlying  pressures  on reserves  or

federal  funds  rates but  was  intended to  help  counter the  tightening by

depository institutions  of  credit  terms  for  many types of  borrowers by

providing those institutions with added incentive to  lend  to

creditworthy  borrowers.

In the  foreign exchange markets,  the  dollar fluctuated  in value

over  the  intermeeting period  in response to  changing perceptions

regarding the  Persian Gulf  situation, the  release  of  U.S.  employment

data  for  November,  and the  further  easing of U.S. monetary policy.  On

balance over the  period, the trade-weighted value  of the  dollar rose

slightly in terms  of the  other G-10  currencies.  The  dollar  appreciated

more  against  the yen and sterling;  the recent  decreases  in oil  prices

along with expectations  of  slowing or  negative  economic  growth  had

sparked  large  rallies  in  bond markets  in  Japan  and the United Kingdom.

The  dollar  increased less against  the mark, which was  generally  firm on

the  basis  of  continuing strong economic  growth  in Western Germany and

heightened market  expectations  of further  tightening of  German monetary

policy.

M2  was  about  unchanged over  October and November after growing

at  a relatively limited pace  on balance  in earlier months  of the  year,

while M3  declined slightly in both months.  The  weakness  in M2,  which

persisted  despite an earlier decline in  opportunity  costs,  perhaps

reflected very weak expansion of nominal  income  in  recent months  as  well

as  damped  credit  growth at  depository institutions.  From the  fourth

quarter of  1989 through November, expansion of M2 was  estimated to be  in

the  lower half of  the  Committee's range  for the  year and M3  near the

lower end of  its  range.  Expansion of  total domestic  nonfinancial  debt

appeared to  have been near the midpoint of  its monitoring range.

The  staff projection prepared for  this meeting pointed to a

mild  further decline in  economic  activity  over the  near term and  an

upturn before mid-1991.  The projection was  prepared against  the

background of  persisting uncertainties regarding  the prospects  for  a

peaceful resolution of  the  situation in  the Persian Gulf region.  The

staff  assumed that there  would be no major  further  disruption to  world

oil  supplies  and that oil  prices would drop appreciably  further  in the

first  half of  next year.  The  projection took  into  account  the

constraints on the  supply  of  credit and  an  expectation that  such

constraints would persist to  some  degree through the year  ahead.

Consumer outlays were  expected to continue to be  damped in the  near term

by the erosion of  real disposable income  associated with a reduction in

hours worked and the  effects of  higher energy prices;  in  light  of weak

consumer demands,  business  equipment  spending was  projected to be

sluggish  and commercial construction to decline  further,  given the  over-

supply of  currently available space.  Economic  growth was  expected to

resume during the  first  half  of 1991  in  association with the effects  of

the  assumed reduction in oil prices  on consumer  spending  and the  support

provided by  further gains  in exports.  Subsequently, as  business  sales

and  orders  improved, production  and business  investment outlays  were

expected to pick  up.  The outlook  for  inflation remained  clouded by the

uncertainties  regarding oil prices but,  based on  the assumption of a

substantial decline  in  oil prices  and some  added  slack in  resource

utilization, the  staff projected a slower  rise  in prices  and  labor

costs.

In the  Committee's discussion of the economic situation and

outlook,  members commented that  a relatively mild and  short  recession

remained a reasonable  expectation, but they emphasized the risks  of a

more  severe and prolonged  contraction in  economic activity.  Generally

lean business  inventories,  favorable  conditions  for the  further growth

of  exports,  and appreciable declines in oil  prices  from their recent

peaks  all promised to  buoy  spending and activity  over  coming  quarters.

However,  the key to  a near-term rebound in the  economy was  a pickup in

consumer  spending.  Even under the  assumption that  the Persian  Gulf

situation would be more settled  and oil  prices  lower,  restoration of the

degree  of confidence  needed to  induce  a substantial  upturn  in spending

was not  assured.  The financial  difficulties of many borrowers and

financial intermediaries,  especially banks,  could continue to damage

confidence as  well as  to constrain further the  availability of  credit  to

many borrowers  and contribute to additional  declines of asset values in

commercial and real  estate markets.  In  general, the economy and

financial markets were  undergoing a process  of  adjustment to earlier

excesses in leveraging by borrowers and speculative increases  in asset

prices;  while the  course  and effects of that  adjustment were difficult

to predict, there clearly had been an increase  in  the  downside risks to

the economy as  a result.  With regard to  the  outlook  for  inflation,

members saw  growing indications  that a disinflationary process might be

getting underway, and some  viewed recent price  and wage  developments as

consistent with an  outlook for  faster progress  in  reducing inflation

than they had anticipated some months  ago.

Regional business developments  continued to indicate  uneven

conditions ranging from modest further growth in  some  parts of  the

country, including  areas that  were  benefiting  from a relatively  strong

agricultural  sector, to  declining activity in an increasing number of

regions.  Indications  of  softening economic conditions were widespread,

however, even in regions  where  overall business activity  still  appeared

to be  expanding.  Business  sentiment  was  negative  in much of the  nation,

and business  contacts  suggested that  it was  worsening  in many  areas.

Many  state and local  governments,  notably in relatively depressed areas,

were  facing  severe  budgetary problems  and were  curbing expenditures  in

response  to lagging tax  receipts  and impaired access to  financial

markets.  Consumer caution was  widespread  and was  evidenced  by reports

of  generally soft  retail  sales thus  far  in the  holiday season.  Some

members commented, however, that  while  its  timing  remained uncertain, an

improvement in  consumer sentiment associated possibly with more  settled

conditions  in the Middle East and an upturn  in real disposable  income

would be  likely to  generate considerable  strengthening in deferred

consumer  spending, particularly  for motor vehicles,  and to  foster  a

rebound in  overall economic activity.  Other comments  focused on the

possibility  that  consumer sentiment might well  remain bearish and

consumer spending  restrained for an  extended period, perhaps  even in the

context  of  favorable developments  in the  Middle East,  as consumers

continued to adjust  to  the  adverse wealth  effects  of weak housing

markets, heavy debt  loads,  concerns about  the  well  publicized

difficulties  of many financial institutions,  and  fears about  their

employment prospects.  Weak housing prices  affected household  spending

especially by reducing perceived wealth, but  also by eroding the margin

of unborrowed equity available to be liquified  for  spending on other

goods  and services.

Many of the members  stressed that  business  investment spending

was  likely to  remain relatively weak, particularly the  construction  of

office  and  other  commercial  facilities that  were  overbuilt in many

metropolitan areas.  To date,  the manufacture  of  capital  goods  appeared

to  have held up relatively  well  in key capital-producing sections  of the

country, though the output  of some  types  of  capital  equipment had  turned

down.  Statistical and anecdotal  reports suggested  that  inventories

generally remained under tight  control,  even  in relatively  depressed

-10-

industries  and regions, and a pickup in overall demand was  therefore

likely to  lead fairly  promptly to stronger production  activity.

Members commented that,  apart  from the key role  of consumer

spending, current  forecasts  of a rebound  in overall economic activity

relied to an important extent  on expectations  of appreciable  further

growth in  net  exports  over the next  several  quarters.  The  substantial

depreciation of the  dollar  in terms  of  other key currencies  over the

past  year, especially since mid-1990,  would encourage  exports  and curb

imports.  Some members noted, however, that economic  activity  in a

number of major trading  nations might be  somewhat  weaker  than was

anticipated earlier, thereby tending to limit  the  growth in  U.S.

exports.  That view  was  reinforced by comments  from  some domestic

exporters who now saw more limited  export opportunities in  the year

ahead,  at  least  to  some  countries.

Turning to  financial developments, members commented that

economic  recovery would depend to an important  degree on the

availability  of  credit.  While  credit  terms  and conditions were  not

projected to tighten appreciably  further,  the possibility of  such  a

development  represented  a risk to the  economy that  could not  be ruled

out.  A major  source of  financial pressures  was the  decline  in real

estate values  in many areas and the  inability of many  heavily indebted

borrowers to service their  real  estate debts.  The  difficulties  in  the

real  estate  sector  and the  related vulnerability of  many  lending

institutions obviously would be  aggravated by a prolonged  recession.

Many business  borrowers  with less  than prime  credit ratings  continued to

report problems  in  securing  financing, even  from their  usual  lenders,

-11-

and  those problems  seemed to  be  increasing in  at  least  some parts  of  the

country  in  conjunction with bank efforts to  rebuild their  capital

positions and limit  their lending risks  in  a weak  economy.  At  the  same

time,  there were  indications of greater  efforts  by banks  in  some  areas

to  increase  their  loans  in  order to  improve their profits;  moreover,

many large banks  appeared to  have  made significant progress  in  adjusting

the pricing  of their loans  to take better account  of  lending risks;

those  efforts  also  could lead to  improved profits  and  to  a better

availability  of  credit  to many potential borrowers.

The  softness  in real  estate prices  was  having a pronounced

effect  on inflationary  sentiment,  and  against the  background of  reduced

pressures on production resources and an  extended period of  limited

monetary growth most of  the members believed that  substantial progress

toward lower  inflation was  a likely prospect over the  next  several

quarters.  Rising unemployment  in  some  areas of  the  country was  clearly

reflected  in downward  adjustments to the  wages of  some  categories of

workers.  More  generally, the  rise in  broad wage measures  appeared to

have peaked  in an atmosphere of  concern about  reduced employment

opportunities;  it was  noted in this  connection that  current  unemployment

rates  probably underestimated actual  unemployment, as  discouraged

potential workers  abandoned efforts  to  secure  employment.  Members also

commented that  competitive pressures, including competition  from foreign

producers,  remained strong  in  retail markets  around the  country  and also

in markets  for many producer  goods.

-12-

In  the  Committee's  discussion of policy  for the intermeeting

period ahead, all  of the members indicated that  they favored  or could

accept a directive  calling for  some  slight easing in reserve  conditions.

Members noted that monetary policy had been eased in  several  steps  over

the  course of  recent  weeks;  while  substantial  additional easing might

not be needed under prevailing  conditions,  a limited further move  would

provide  some added insurance  in  cushioning the economy against  the

possibility of  a deepening  recession and an  inadequate  rebound in the

economy without  imposing an unwarranted  risk of  stimulating  inflation

later.  The  members favored a cautious  approach to  further policy moves

in light  of the  appreciable  easing  in  reserve conditions that  already

had been implemented  and the  considerable  decline  that had occurred in

market  interest  rates.  The  stimulus provided by the  recent  easing

actions had not  yet  been felt  in the  economy, and  given the  lags that

were  involved, there was  some  risk of overdoing the easing of policy at

some point,  with potential  inflationary  consequences  once the  economic

recovery got  underway.  Most of the members  viewed  such a risk  as

relatively remote  and one  that  could be  dealt  with, should the need

arise, by a future  tightening  of policy, although it was  recognized that

moves toward restraint  could be  difficult.  Persisting  weakness  in the

monetary aggregates tended to reinforce the  view that policy was  not

moving in a way that  would promote a resurgence in  inflation.  In

evaluating the behavior of  the monetary aggregates, members  stressed the

need for  policy to provide  adequate  liquidity in  a period of declining

economic  activity in order to encourage  economic recovery.

-13-

Growth of M2 had displayed an uneven pattern but  had tended to

weaken over the course of the year,  especially in recent months.  The

behavior of M2  was not  fully understood, but  it  appeared to be

associated, at  least  in the past year, with the  constrained availability

of  credit  from depository institutions  and with  lagging income  growth.

In addition, other  factors,  such as perceptions  of increased risks  in

holding deposit balances  in current  financial  circumstances,  seemed to

be affecting monetary expansion.  A staff projection prepared for this

meeting pointed to a pickup  in M2 growth over the months immediately

ahead, reflecting in part  a projected upturn in the  expansion of nominal

GNP  and the lagged effects of the  recent  declines in market  rates  on

demands  for money balances.  Members noted that  for the year  1990  as  a

whole, M2  would increase at  a rate within the  Committee's  range,  albeit

in the  lower half of that range  and that M2  growth had now been within

the  Committee's ranges  consistently in  recent  years.  While monetary

policy might  still  be viewed as  somewhat  restrictive  from the  standpoint

of monetary growth, members cited other indicators  such as  the  decline

in interest rates,  the  shape  of the yield curve,  and conditions  in the

commodity and foreign exchange markets  as  indicative  of an adequate

provision of  liquidity and a basically satisfactory policy in current

circumstances.  Nonetheless, members  stressed the  need to maintain an

appropriate  rate of  monetary expansion, and they  generally concluded

that  the behavior of the monetary aggregates  would  need to  be monitored

with  special  care  in the  period ahead  for  any indication that  their

growth might be  falling significantly short  of  current  expectations.

-14-

During this  discussion, members noted the potential

interactions between open market  policy and a possible,  near-term

reduction in the  discount rate.  Most  of the  Federal Reserve Banks  had

proposed  a reduction of one-half percentage point  in  the discount  rate,

and in light  of their concerns about  the  narrowing spread between the

discount  rate  and  short-term market  rates,  the members  generally favored

Board approval of that  reduction to  implement  an easing  of  conditions  in

money markets.  Ordinarily, a reduction in  the  discount  rate  would show

through fully in lower short-term market  rates.  However,  because of

their desire to  ease  reserve  conditions  only  slightly in the near term,

the members  generally supported  a proposal to gear  open market

operations  toward allowing only about one-half  of the proposed  cut  in

the discount  rate  to be  reflected immediately  in the money market.  If

the  discount rate  were  not  reduced, the Manager  for Domestic Operations

would execute the  slight  easing of  policy through  open market operations

alone.  With regard to any  further  adjustment  in  the  degree  of  reserve

pressure  later in the intermeeting period, nearly all  the members

expressed a preference  for  retaining  a bias  in the directive toward

potential easing, especially given the  recessionary tendencies in the

economy,  current  fragilities  in the  financial  system, and the  weakness

in  the monetary  aggregates.

At the  conclusion  of the  Committee's discussion,  all  of the

members  indicated that  they  could support  a directive that  called  for

some  slight  further  easing in the  degree  of  pressure on  reserve

positions and that  also provided for  giving emphasis to potential

developments  that  might  require  some  additional  easing  during the

-15-

intermeeting period.  It  was  recognized that  open market operations

initially might need to take  account of a possible  reduction in the

discount  rate.  Subsequent to the  initial easing,  slightly greater

reserve  restraint might be acceptable  during the  intermeeting period or

somewhat  lesser reserve  restraint  would be acceptable  depending on

progress toward price stability, the strength  of the business expansion,

the behavior of the monetary aggregates, and developments in  foreign

exchange and domestic financial markets.  The  reserve  conditions

contemplated by the Committee were  expected to  be  consistent with some

pickup in monetary growth, including expansion of M2  and M3  at annual

rates of about  4 and 1 percent  respectively over  the  four-month period

from November to March.

At the  conclusion of the meeting, the  following domestic policy

directive was  issued to the  Federal  Reserve Bank of  New York:

The information  reviewed at  this meeting suggests

appreciable weakening  in economic activity.  Total
nonfarm payroll  employment fell  sharply further  in
November,  reflecting widespread job  losses that  were
especially pronounced in manufacturing  and construc-
tion;  the  civilian unemployment  rate  rose  to 5.9
percent.  Industrial output  declined markedly in
October and November,  in part because  of  sizable
cutbacks  in the production of motor vehicles.  Retail
sales were  weak in real terms in October  and November;
real  disposable  income has  been reduced not  only by a
decrease  in total hours  worked but  also by the  effects
of higher  energy prices.  Advance  indicators of
business  capital  spending point to  considerable
softening  in  investment  in coming months.  Residential
construction has declined substantially further  in
recent months.  The nominal  U.S. merchandise  trade
deficit widened in October from  its average  rate  in
the third quarter  as non-oil  imports  rose more  sharply
than exports.  Increases  in consumer prices moderated
in November largely as  a result  of  a softening in  oil
prices.  The  latest  data  on labor costs  suggest  some
improvement  from earlier trends.

-16-

Most  interest  rates  have  fallen appreciably  since

the  Committee meeting on November 13.  In  foreign
exchange markets, the trade-weighted value  of the
dollar in terms of  the other  G-10 currencies  rose
slightly  on balance  over the  intermeeting period.

M2 was about  unchanged on balance  over October

and November after several months  of relatively
limited expansion, while M3  declined slightly  in both
months.  From the  fourth quarter of  1989 through
November,  expansion of M2 was  estimated to  be  in the
lower  half  of the  Committee's  range  for the  year  and
growth of M3  near the  lower  end of  its  range.
Expansion of  total domestic  nonfinancial debt  appears
to have  been near the midpoint  of  its monitoring
range.

The  Federal  Open Market  Committee  seeks monetary

and financial  conditions that will  foster price
stability, promote growth in  output on a sustainable
basis,  and contribute to an  improved pattern of
international transactions.  In  furtherance of  these
objectives,  the Committee  at  its  meeting in July
reaffirmed the  range  it had established  in February
for M2 growth  of 3 to 7 percent, measured from the
fourth quarter of  1989  to the  fourth quarter of  1990.
The  Committee in  July also  retained the monitoring
range  of 5 to  9 percent  for the year  that  it had  set
for growth of  total  domestic  nonfinancial  debt.  With
regard to M3,  the Committee  recognized that the  on-
going restructuring of thrift  depository institutions
had depressed its  growth  relative to  spending and
total credit more than anticipated 
the unexpectedly  strong M3  velocity, the  Committee
decided in July to  reduce the  1990  range to  1 to 5
percent.  For  1991,  the Committee  agreed on pro-
visional ranges  for monetary growth, measured from the
fourth quarter  of 1990  to the  fourth quarter of 1991,
of  2-1/2 to  6-1/2 percent  for M2  and  1 to 5 percent
for M3.  The  Committee  tentatively  set  the  associated
monitoring  range  for  growth  of  total domestic  non-
financial  debt  at  4-1/2  to  8-1/2 percent  for  1991.
The  behavior of  the monetary aggregates  will  continue
to be  evaluated in the  light  of  progress  toward price
level  stability, movements  in  their velocities,  and
developments  in  the economy and  financial markets.

Taking account  of

In  the  implementation of  policy  for  the  immediate

future, the  Committee  seeks  to  decrease  slightly  the
existing degree  of pressure  on reserve  positions,
taking account  of a possible  change  in  the  discount
rate.  Depending upon  progress  toward price  stability,
trends  in economic  activity, the behavior  of the

-17-

monetary aggregates, and developments in  foreign
exchange and domestic financial markets,  slightly
greater reserve  restraint might  or somewhat  lesser
reserve restraint  would be  acceptable in the  inter-
meeting period.  The contemplated reserve  conditions
are expected to be  consistent with growth of M2  and M3
over the period from November through March  at  annual
rates of about  4 and 1 percent,  respectively.

Votes for this action:  Messrs. Greenspan

Corrigan, Angell, Boehne,  Boykin, Hoskins,
Kelley, LaWare, Mullins, Ms.  Seger, and
Mr. Stern.  Votes against this  action:  None.

2. Authorization  for Domestic Open Market  Operations

The Committee approved a temporary increase  of $6 billion, to a

level of $14  billion, in the  limit  on changes between Committee meetings

in System Account  holdings  of U.S. government  and  federal agency

securities.  The increase  amended paragraph 1(a)  of the Authorization

for Domestic Open Market Operations and was  effective  for the  inter-

meeting period ending with the close of  business  on February  6, 1991.

Votes  for this  action:  Messrs.  Greenspan

Corrigan, Angell,  Boehne, Boykin,  Hoskins,
Kelley, LaWare, Mullins, Ms.  Seger,  and
Mr. Stern.  Votes against this  action:  None.

The Manager  for Domestic Operations  advised the Committee that

the  current  leeway of $8 billion for  changes  in System Account holdings

was  not likely to  be sufficient  to accommodate the potentially very

large need to drain  reserves over the  intermeeting period ahead.  That

need would reflect  a bulge  in available  reserves  stemming  from the

elimination of  reserve requirements on  nonpersonal time  deposits and  net

Eurocurrency liabilities  combined with the  effects of  seasonal

reductions in  currency in circulation and  in  required  reserves over  the

intermeeting period.

