SUMMARY  OF COMMENTARY  ON  CURRENT  ECONOMIC  CONDITIONS
BY  FEDERAL  RESERVE DISTRICTS

August  1990

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS

SUM M ARY 

.............................................. 

First District  - Boston  ....................................... 

Second  District  - New  York  .................................. 

Third  District  - Philadelphia 

.................................. 

Fourth  District  - Cleveland  ................................... 

Fifth  District  - Richmond 

................................... 

Sixth  District  - Atlanta 

..................................... 

Seventh  District  - Chicago 

.................................. 

Eighth  District  - St.  Louis 

.................................. 

Ninth  District  - Minneapolis  .................................. 

Tenth  District  - Kansas  City  .................................. 

Eleventh  District  - Dallas  .................................... 

i

I-1

II-1

III-1

IV-1

V-1

VI-1

VII-1

VIII-1

IX-1

X-1

XI-1

Twelfth  District  - San Francisco

. . . . . .

. . . . .

. . . . .

. . . .

. . . . .

. . . . X II-1

i

SUMMARY*

Business  and  banking  contacts  in  the  Reserve  Districts

generally report continued economic growth, though most noted that

the pace was slow or had slackened recently.  Among those Districts

whose respondents commented on costs or prices, wages were reported

as  rising  in  a range  of  3 to  5 percent,  in  most  cases  excluding

benefits.  Reports  on  prices  did  not  display  as  much  consensus,

with  some  reporting  widespread  increases  and  others  noting

difficulty in passing on cost increases and attendant pressures on

margins.  Retail sales were generally described as a little better

than  a year ago  or  soft,  with weaker-than-expected demand for big

ticket  items  cited  most  often. 

In  some  Districts  retailers

indicated they had become less optimistic about the outlook for the

rest of the year, though in others they were anticipating a slight

pickup  in  sales.

Manufacturing activity is  said to be flat, on balance, though

healthy  growth in  tradeable goods  is  seen in a number of  regions.

Reports on real estate construction and sales suggest, for the most

part, that activity is remaining below levels seen in 1989,  largely

because of continuing high inventories.  Credit is said to be tight

in  some  areas.  However,  little  uniformity  of  opinion  about  the

reasons  for  this  was  evident  in  the  reports. 

Contacts  in  the

*Prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and based on
This  document
information  collected  before  July  27,  1990. 
summarizes  comments  received  from  businesses  and  other  contacts
outside the Federal Reserve and is not a commentary on the views of
Federal  Reserve officials.

ii

agriculture  and  natural  resource  sectors  indicate  a  pretty  good

outlook  at  this  point,  reflecting  better  weather  conditions  in

major  crop  and  livestock  producing  areas  and  an  improved  energy

sector.

CONSUMER SPENDING

Retail  sales activity is described as soft to a little higher

than  a  year  ago,  though  contacts  in  Cleveland,  Minneapolis,  and

Dallas  noted strength  in  some  areas.  Retailers  in New York  City

are less optimistic about the outlook given the continuing layoffs

at  banks  and  brokerage  firms,  while those  in  St.  Louis  expressed

similar views  in  light  of  anticipated defense  cutbacks.

Several Districts reported that demand for women's apparel in

recent months  was  described  as  strong,  while  that  for  men's  was

weak.  A  few  noted  that  sales  activity  in  July  had  fallen  off,

though retailers  in  the Philadelphia District  indicated that this

was  seasonal.  Those  in New York  and Minneapolis remarked that an

influx of Canadian shoppers was adding to sales in their Districts,

while  Dallas  reported  that  retail  activity  in  Houston  and  areas

near the Mexican border was  doing well.  Reports on  sales  of  home

furnishings and appliances more  frequently cited weakness, though

there were exceptions to this.  Vehicular sales were generally said

to be flat or below year-ago levels, though contacts in Atlanta and

San Francisco reported strong demand  for used models.

Of  Districts  that  inquired  about  inventories,  five  cited

indications that they were higher than retail respondents desired,

iii

while  four  noted  that  they  were  at  levels  acceptable  to  them.

Kansas City added that  financing for  inventories  is  adequate.

MANUFACTURING

Contacts at manufacturing  firms suggest that overall activity

is  flat,  though  responses  varied  considerably  from  industry  to

industry.  Strength  was  reported  in  demand  for  products  that  are

exported,  and Richmond  added  that  producers  are  looking to  these

markets  for sales  gains.  Demand for  domestic steel  was also  said

to  be stronger, and respondents  in Dallas  and Cleveland  said that

this  reflected  the reduced  availability  of  imports given healthy

demand  in  Europe.  Current  levels  of  auto  production  were  also

cited as  a reason for  the better demand  for  steel.  Chicago noted

that  orders  for  liner  board  were  stronger  than  contacts  had

expected.

With the exception of steel and commercial aircraft, backlogs

and  lead  times  were  said  to  be  working  down. 

St.  Louis,

Minneapolis, and San Francisco noted that weakness was described as

pronounced  in  defense-related  activities.  Dallas,  Richmond,  and

Atlanta contacts saw weakness in textiles and furniture production.

Of  Districts  reporting on  employment  and price  trends,  most

respondents  indicated  that  labor  utilization  was  either  flat  or

likely  to  weaken  based  on  announced  layoffs. 

Wage  increases

appeared  clustered  in  a  3-5  percent  range,  though  two  Districts

noted that the benefit costs were rising  faster, and two mentioned

shortages of entry-level workers.  Reports on materials prices were

mixed, with  stability to  slight  increases  noted  by  some  contacts

iv

and  flat  to  slight  declines  mentioned  by  others. 

Cleveland,

Richmond,  and  St.  Louis  said  costs  and  prices  were  generally

rising,  and  contacts  in  the  latter  put  the  cost  increases  in

a 3-5 percent  range.

CONSTRUCTION AND REAL ESTATE

Reports  on  residential  real  estate  construction  and  sales

generally suggest  that activity was  below the pace of  a year  ago.

High  inventories  of  housing  were  said  to  be  causing  weakness  in

construction and in many cases causing downward pressure on prices.

Cleveland, however,  noted a mixed  picture  for  sales,  adding  that

prices  were  up  in  some  cities  by  6-8  percent  over  the  last  six

months.  St.  Louis  reported  good demand  for  starter  homes  in  the

Memphis  area.  New York and  Chicago realtors suggested that high-

priced homes were  the most  difficult to  sell.  Respondents  in  San

Francisco  noted that  a cooling  of  activity  in  coastal  California

dominated statistics for that District.  Those in Boston indicated

that  the  widespread  media  attention  given  to  weakness  in  the

District may be  hurting real  estate  sales.

Five  Districts 

reported  asking  about 

nonresidential

construction, and most respondents saw weak or slackening activity

in  their regions  due  to  large  inventories  of  space.  Some  in  New

York  added  that,  while  rent  concessions  had  increased  leasing

activity  in  Manhattan, corporate relocations had led to  a rise  in

vacancy  rates  anyway,  in  contrast  to  stable  or  declining  ones

elsewhere  in the District.  Firms polled by Dallas  indicated that

V

construction of petrochemical plants remains  at  a high level,  and

Atlanta respondents viewed public infrastructure as a bright spot.

FINANCE AND CREDIT

Several  Districts  report  that  the  pace  of  commercial  loan

growth has recently slowed,  and some  indicate that  its  levels  are

below those  of  a year  ago.  Lending to  consumers appears  to have

decelerated by a smaller margin in most Districts that reported on

this, with current  growth attributable  largely to credit  card and

home  equity  lending.  Respondents  in  several  Districts  indicate

that  new  credit  is  more  difficult  to  obtain  for  construction

projects,  though their remarks  suggest  some divergence of  view as

to  the causes  of this..  In New York, the glut of homes for sale  is

said  to  be  the  major  deterrent  to  building,  even  though  the

shortage of finance for acquisition and construction loans appears

to  be  spreading.  Regulatory  restrictions on  S&Ls  are  said to  be

affecting  small  builders  in  Chicago,  though Cleveland  notes  that

a shift  from  thrifts  has  caused  real  estate  lending  to  rise  at

banks.  They  also  add  that  while  increased  borrower  scrutiny  is

reported, there  are few known outright  cancellations.

About half  the respondents  in  Boston saw the availability of

bank  credit  as  problematical  for  their  own  or  other  businesses.

San  Francisco  notes  similar  views  by  a  few  respondents,  though

businesses and bankers in the District disagree about the extent of

tighter  standards and  its  impact  on  lending activity.  Businesses

in  the  Atlanta  and  Philadelphia  Districts  note  problems  with

collecting on receivables.

AGRICULTURE AND NATURAL RESOURCES

vi

District  reports  suggest  that  the  outlook  for  agricultural

production  generally  appears  good  at  this  point,  though  poor

weather conditions  are  hurting  crops  in  some  areas.  Kansas  City

indicates  that wheat  production  in  Kansas,  the  largest  producing

state,  is  the  highest  on  record  and  more than  twice  last  year's

output.  Prices  are  down  sharply.  St.  Louis  reports  that  wheat

yields are  lower by 12  to  26 percent due to disease.  Chicago said

that heavy rains earlier  in the year had delayed planting.  While

Richmond  said  that  rain  brought  relief  to  earlier  drought

conditions, Atlanta  reported that hot  and dry weather is  reducing

corn,  soybean,  and  forage  production  by  as  much  as  25  percent.

Dallas  also  said that  District  crops,  including cotton,  corn  and

grains, were adversely affected by the heat and that prices in June

averaged  6 percent above those  a year earlier.  Minneapolis noted

that  production  costs  for  corn  and  soybeans  were  up  6-10  percent

from last  year.

The  Districts  reporting  on  meat  production  said  output  and

prices  were both  strong,  and  Atlanta  described robust  conditions

for  poultry  with  export  sales  especially  healthy.  Minneapolis

indicated that  forest products were doing well.  San Francisco, in

contrast, said that a widely expected deterioration in logging and

lumber  had  emerged  due  to  weaker  housing  construction  and

environmental  concerns.  Kansas  City  and  Dallas  noted  that  oil

production was up from a year  ago.

I-1

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

On balance,  second-quarter growth at  First  District  firms was  slow

and slowing.  Retailers and wholesalers  reported soft  sales  and  intense

price  competition.  They emphasized recent  efforts  to  prune  costs by

reducing  inventories.  A majority of manufacturers  continued  to  achieve

year-to-year growth in sales,  but  the  gains were often  entirely

attributable to  exports.  At many firms  domestic sales were flat  to  down

from year-ago  levels,  and  incoming  orders were slowing.  Realtors

interpreted a recent  pickup  in  residential sales  as very largely seasonal.

Most businesses  expect weak conditions to  continue through 1991.

Retail

Retailers and wholesalers  in  the First  District  continued to  report

soft  sales.  About half the  sample  (primarily firms selling  clothing,

sporting goods,  and drug-store items)  achieved modest  sales  growth.  They

usually attributed these  gains  to  increased  promotional activities or  to

obtaining a larger market  share because  of weaker competitors'

difficulties.  For  the  remainder, sales were generally down several percent

compared to year-ago  levels  for  clothing and home items  and were sharply

lower  for some specialty goods.  This group of merchants also  stressed  that

competitive pressures were leading to  lower margins.

Most  contacts have attempted to  prune  costs,  especially by  reducing

inventories.  They reported supply prices rising  by 0 to 4 percent  and

modest wage  increases.  Some  other costs,  including  fringe benefits,  are

rising more  rapidly.

Half the  respondents mentioned reduced  availability of bank credit

as  a problem either  for their  own business  or  for  other area businesses.

The remainder  indicated  that  they had had no problems obtaining  required

inventory financing.

A couple  of  large retailers  are planning  for  a stronger fall

season.  The majority did not  see  any good news  on  the horizon, however,

and expect  continued weak sales  for  the  foreseeable future.

Manufacturing

Domestic  shipments were  flat  to down from year-ago  levels  at just

over half of First  District manufacturers  contacted.  Declines  ranged  from

1 to  10  percent.  Exports  performed considerably better  than domestic  sales

at most  respondents.  Accordingly,  total  sales  including  exports were  above

mid-1989  levels  at more  than half of the  firms  surveyed.

Reported gains  varied from 3 to  20  percent.  New orders were generally

described as  flat, down, or slowing.  Along with  exports, niche and new

products performed reasonably well.  By  contrast, domestic demand  for  office

products,  construction- and  computer-related  items,  machine  tools,

instruments  and consumer  goods was  relatively weak.  Reports  on incoming

orders  from the aerospace  and auto  companies were mixed.  Manufacturers

continue to watch  inventories  carefully, but  few report  any excessive

buildups.

Materials  prices were  generally stable  or  down slightly  from

year-ago  levels.  Selling prices are  flat  to down at  two-thirds  of  the

firms  contacted, with two  offering discounts  of 8 to  20  percent.  At  the

remainder, recent or  planned price  increases  average 2 to  5 percent, but

one  firm plans  a price rise  of 9 percent.

I-3

Employment remains at  mid-1989  levels  at  over half of  the

manufacturers contacted.  The  remainder have  reduced  employment by  as much

as  10  to  15  percent through  layoffs,  attrition and shorter hours.  Wages

are  above year-ago  levels by 3 1/2  to  7 percent.

Two-thirds of First District manufacturing  contacts  are  increasing

capital spending  from 1989  levels, with  increases  ranging  from 7 to  50

percent.  For  the  rest,  capital expenditures  are  as much as  40 percent

below 1989  levels.  Spending plans  focus on equipment, primarily computer

systems,  expected to  improve  productivity or needed for new products.

Sixty percent  of First District manufacturers describe  their  outlook

as  very cautious.  They generally foresee  "tough" conditions  lasting  into

1991,  but  they are counting on  exports, new products, or  price  increases  to

support their  firms  over the  next  12  months.  The  remaining  respondents  are

modestly optimistic.  They too  are looking  for exports  and new products  to

buoy sales.  Nevertheless, an anticipated pickup  in demand from  the auto

and  computer  industries  is  crucial  to  their  expectations.  Most  contacts

express more confidence  about  the  prospects  for  their  own  firms  than for

the  economy  as  a whole.

Residential Real Estate

First  District realtors  report  a recent  seasonal upturn.  Sales  are

said  to be roughly the  same as  this  time  last year  in a market

characterized as  soft.  Prices  are  falling,  and  inventories are  large.

Several realtors  noted a slight pickup  in condominium sales.  Realtors  link

the  industry outlook to  the  state of  the  regional  economy and  the  coverage

it  receives  in  the press.  They report  that  consumer confidence  is  now low

because  of uncertainty about  interest  rates  and slow economic growth.

II-I

Second District--New York

Developments  have  been mixed to somewhat  soft  in  the Second District

economy  since  the  last  report.  On the positive  side, District unemployment

rates have  remained below the  national average.  Retailers  have had  varied sales

results. 

Despite  a decided pickup in office  leasing  activity, vacancy  rates  in

Manhattan  have moved  somewhat higher  and homebuilding activity has  weakened  in

much  of the  District.  Based  on  a survey  of  small  and medium-sized banks,  demand

for both  residential  and commercial  real  estate  loans  is  weaker  than  a year ago.

Consumer  Spending

The pattern  of District department  store  sales was mixed in  recent  weeks.

Some  contacts  reported that  sales  were  well below plan but  results  at  other

chains met  expectations.  Moreover, sales  in Buffalo  and some  other upstate

areas  are  reportedly being bolstered by  an  influx of  Canadian buyers.

During June,  over-the-year changes  in  sales  ranged from  -7.3  percent  to

+7.4  percent.  Some New York  City  retailers with  disappointing results  expressed

concern that  the  local  economy may be  in  a downturn  and were  not  optimistic

about  any near-term improvement.  One  cited the  continuing layoffs  at  banks  and

brokerage  firms, the  disarray  in  the  retail  industry,  and the  weak  real  estate

market as  major factors  in the  slowdown.

Sales  of  home  furnishings  and men's  apparel  were most  frequently  cited as

weak,  while over-the-year gains  in  some types  of  women's  apparel  were

widespread.  Inventories  remain satisfactory due  primarily to  careful

monitoring.  Some  stores  in  bankruptcy  or with  substantial  debt noted  an

improvement  in  their  level of  stocks  due  to  less  reluctance  on the part  of

manufacturers  to supply  them. 

In Manhattan the  space  vacated on  Fifth Avenue

by a recently  failed  chain has  just been  leased by  the  largest  department  store

company  in  France.

II-2

Residential  Construction and Real  Estate

Homebuilding  activity in the  Second District weakened somewhat  further  in

recent  weeks.  Upstate New York  areas where  the pace  of  construction had

previously  remained strong are  now  reporting a slowdown and the New York

metropolitan  area and northern New Jersey showed no  improvement.  While the

shortage  of  credit  for acquisition  and construction  loans  appears  to be

spreading,  several  respondents  stated that  the  continuing glut  of  homes  for

resale  is  also  a major deterrent  to new construction.  Prices  on  resale  homes

have  declined but  apparently  are  still unacceptably  high  in many  cases.  Demand

for lower priced,  "affordable"  housing remains  strong however, though the

available  supply  is  limited.

Despite  a decided pickup  in  office  leasing  activity during recent  weeks,

in part because of  declining rents  and other  concessions,  vacancy  rates  in both

midtown and downtown Manhattan moved somewhat higher primarily  as  a result  of  a

continuing contraction by  financial  service  firms  and the  relocation of  some

companies  to  other  areas.  Elsewhere  in the District,  vacancy  rates  have

recently  declined in Fairfield County  and have  stabilized  in Westchester  County

and northern  New Jersey as  a result  of  strong  leasing activity  and  a slowdown  in

new office  completions.  Since  few new  office  projects  are being proposed given

the more  than  ample  supply of  space in  the District,  a shortage  of  credit  seems

to be  less  of  a problem in  this market than among homebuilders.

Other Business  Activity

District  unemployment  rates  in  June were  unchanged from May and  remained

somewhat below the national  average.  New Jersey's  rate  was  4.8  percent  and New

York  State's  5.1  percent.  The  employment  situation is  even  stronger  in western

New York  where  the unemployment  rate  declined in May  to  4.6  percent  in Buffalo

and 3.6  percent  in Rochester.  However, two  recent announcements  cast  a cloud on

the employment  outlook.  Fisher-Price Toys  plans  to close  a Buffalo area  plant

by the beginning of November, eliminating more  than  700  jobs.  In  addition,

II-3

Maxwell House  plans  to  close  its  coffee-processing plant  in  Hoboken, New Jersey,

that  city's  largest  industrial  employer with  600  workers.

The June  Rochester purchasing managers'  survey described local conditions

as  stable.  With regard to the  outlook,  47  percent of  respondents  expect

conditions to  improve  over the next  three months  compared with  only  9 percent  in

June  1989.  In Buffalo the percentage  of purchasing managers  reporting a rise  in

output  increased while  the percentage  of  firms  with higher new orders  showed

little  change  from May.

Financial  Developments

Based  on  a survey of  small  and medium-sized banks  in  the  Second District,

demand for both residential  and  commercial  real  estate  loans  is  weaker than  a

year  ago.  Two bankers  stated that  local  real  estate prices  are  inflated and

that  the market  is  currently undergoing an adjustment.  With  regard  to supply,  a

majority  of bankers characterized their  real  estate  lending practices  as  tighter

than three months  ago.  Although  only two  had changed their qualifications  for

accepting  loans,  many are  placing more scrutiny on existing qualification

requirements.  In particular, several  banks  are evaluating property appraisals

more carefully  and one  banker reported placing  an  increased emphasis  on  the  cash

flow and net  worth of borrowers. 

Only  two bankers have  lowered their maximum

loan-to-value  ratio,  and none  of  those  surveyed had changed the  spread between

the  interest  rate they  charge  on  real  estate  loans  and their benchmark  rate.

Three  bankers  reported declines  in  real estate  loans  as  a share  of  all  loans  at

their  institutions.  One  mentioned that  his bank had  increased its  advertising

for consumer  installment  lending, hoping that  it  will be  a safer  market  in which

to make  loans.  Several bankers  noted that  an  oversupply  of  commercial  and

residential  development  has  led to  an  increase  in both  commercial  and

residential vacancy  rates  over the past  year  and that  real estate  prices  have

fallen as  well.  Two bankers  stated that  the drop  in  prices  may  result  in  a

leveling off  or perhaps  a slight  increase  in  real  estate  loan demand over  the

next  year.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT  - PHILADELPHIA

The pace of  economic  activity in the Third District appeared to  be easing

somewhat  in  July,  according  to  reports  from business  contacts.  Manufacturers

reported a  slowdown for  the  month.  Retailers  generally indicated that  sales  in

July  were  running  below the  rate  that  had prevailed  in  the  first  half of  the

year, although they thought the decline was largely seasonal, and auto sales were

off from last year's pace.  Bankers reported slowing overall  loan growth for the

month,  with some  gains  in  consumer  lending  while  other credit  categories  were

nearly  flat.

Looking ahead,  the  consensus  of expectations  is  that  economic  conditions

will remain level.  Overall, manufacturers anticipate just steady activity over

the  next six months.  Retailers expect  slow sales  during the  rest of  the  summer

but  they look for  a slight  pickup in  the  fall.  Bankers expect consumer lending

to  continue  growing modestly,  but  they  anticipate  no  significant  expansion of

business  lending  unless  overall  economic  activity  accelerates,  and  they  plan

continued  restraint  in real  estate  lending.

MANUFACTURING

Third District manufacturing  activity slipped overall  in July,  according

to  firms  contacted  for  this  report.  While  just  over  half  reported  steady

business, companies reporting declining activity outnumbered those posting gains

by nearly two-to-one.  Slower business characterized nearly all the manufacturing

industries  in  the  district.

Overall,  although  area  firms  were  stepping  up  shipments  in  July,  other

measures  of  activity  indicated  that  they  were  operating  at  less  than  full

capacity.  Local companies were working down order backlogs even though they were

III-2

receiving new orders at a virtually steady pace;  and, although most of the  firms

contacted were maintaining employment levels, one-quarter were reducing payrolls

and nearly one-third were  cutting working hours.  Decreases  in  delivery  times

were generally reported, another sign of slackness in the manufacturing sector.

Looking  to  the  future,  forecasts  are  varied but  the  balance  of  opinion

among Third District manufacturers is  that business will stabilize at the current

level  over  the  next  six months.  Managers  at  area  plants  are  nearly  equally

divided among those predicting improvement, those anticipating continued decline,

and  those who  expect steady  activity between now and January of  next year.  On

balance,  area  manufacturers  forecast  a constant  rate  of  orders  and  shipments

through the beginning of next year, and they expect a further decline  in backlogs

and shorter delivery times.  Consistent with this  scenario of slack demand, area

firms plan further  reductions  in payrolls and working hours  this  year.

RETAIL

Third  District  retailers  generally  indicated  that  sales  for  the  year

through June  ran around even with the year-ago period in real  terms,  which was

in  line with their  expectations.  Most of  the merchants  contacted in  late  July

said sales  for the month had softened somewhat, but they considered the  falloff

to  be  largely seasonal.  Store executives  generally indicated  that  inventories

were appropriate for the current sales pace.  In discussing the overall inventory

situation, some store  executives noted that factors were continuing to  exercise

caution in extending credit to suppliers of stores  that were not showing clearly

healthy sales  and profit  trends.

In  their  outlook  for  the  rest  of the  year,  Third District  retailers  see

slow  sales  through  the  rest  of  the  summer  and  a pickup  in  the  fall. 

Some

mentioned that they are  formulating fairly aggressive  advertising and promotion

campaigns  for  the  second half.  While most of the  merchants contacted for  this

III-3

report  expressed guarded  optimism for  their  own  stores,  several  said they  did

not  expect  overall  retail  performance  to  improve  much for  the  balance  of  1990

or  1991.

Third District auto dealers indicate that their results recently have been

running in line with the sales rate nationwide, but with a good deal of variation

week-to-week.  Unit sales  are off from last year's pace so  far, and dealers say

unit  sales  for  the entire  year  could be  as  much as  10 percent below 1989's  but

they expect an  improvement in dollar  sales  and profits.

FINANCE

Third District bankers  described total  lending as  growing very slowly  in

recent weeks. Most Third District banks are refraining from new commitments  for

commercial  real  estate  lending while permitting drawdowns for borrowers who had

made  credit  arrangements  earlier.  Bank  lending  officers  report  little  or  no

growth  in other business  loans  outstanding, and they  attribute  the weakness  in

this  category  of lending  about  equally  to  declining  loan demand and  tightened

credit  standards.  Consumer  lending  is  growing  modestly  at  area  banks,  with

increases  in  credit  card  balances  and  home  equity  credit  outstanding.  Auto

loans,  however, are  described as  flat.

Bankers in  the  Third District generally expect  loan growth to  remain weak

in  the  months  ahead. 

Several  noted  that  commercial  real  estate  credit

outstanding  will  probably  flatten  out  or  decline  because  virtually  no  new

commitments  are  being made  and existing  credit  lines  are  close  to  being  fully

utilized.  Bankers do not expect more than minor gains in other business lending,

despite the recent easing in short-term interest rates, unless  overall economic

growth accelerates.  Consumer  lending is  expected to  continue  growing slowly.

IV  - 1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary.  Consumer  spending appears  to have  emerged from  its  slump

earlier  this  year, and District retailers  are cautiously optimistic about

sales  prospects  for  the  fall  season.  Fourth District business  activity  is

supported by a revival  in manufacturing output, and respondents  expect  that

activity  in  the  second half will  match or  exceed  the  first half.  There

appears  to be no  abatement  in price pressures  this half from the  first half.

Housing construction in Ohio has eased  somewhat  less  than  in  the nation, but

housing prices  continued to  rise  through mid-year.  Ample  funds  are  available

for single-family units, but  lenders are  extremely cautious  about  loans  for

multifamily and commercial construction.

Consumer  Spending.  The consumer  spending slump  appears  to have bottomed

in May, according to  District retailers.  They  report moderate  sales  growth  in

June  that  continued into July.  Spending on household durables,  particularly

furniture,  was  reported to be  soft, with the possible  exception of  small

appliances.  Apparel  sales,  a sluggish performer during the  spring, seem  to

have  improved so  far this  summer.  Retail  inventories  remain high, but are

generally reported to be  falling, with most of the  excess  inventory expected

to be  gone by late August or  September.  The  consumer spending outlook  is

guardedly optimistic for  the  fall,  although major retailers  report  that orders

for  fall  delivery were  less  than typical  for  the  season.  Consumer prices  are

reported to be  stable,  with little beyond seasonal  discounting expected.

IV  - 2

Manufacturing.  District activity has been supported by a somewhat

better-than-expected revival in manufacturing output  in recent months.

Strengthening in  output has  come  from continued growth  in  exports,  a mild

comeback in auto  output, and some buildup  of  inventories.

Steel output has held up better than expected.  Operating rates  of some

flat-rolled steel producers have been hovering at  about  90%  of  capacity, and

order books  at one  mill  are  reported to be  full,  although  lead times  are not

as  extended as  last year.  Orders  and shipments  in July are  reported to  be

stronger  than usual.  Orders  for construction steel,  however, have been

weakening.  Some  of  the unexpected strength in  overall  steel  output has

occurred because the  volume of  imported steel has  fallen  in response  to weak

domestic  steel  prices and  strong demand abroad.

Auto output  this  quarter  is  expected to  be  sustained at  last  quarter's

rate,  barring a work stoppage  in  the  industry because  of labor  contract

negotiations.  The  cautious optimism  for  the  third-quarter production outlook

apparently is  based on strong dealer  demand  for  light trucks  during much of

the  1990  model year.  Auto  dealers  in  the District  report a significant

slowdown  in new car sales  in July from June.  Dealers  are  not  as  optimistic

about near-term sales  prospects as  they were  in  our previous  survey.  They

note  less  showroom traffic,  a perception that  consumers  are  concerned about a

slow-growth economy, and  the price  increases  announced by the  Big Three  auto

producers.

A capital  goods producer  is  slightly more  sanguine about over business

spending  for producers' equipment  this half than they were  a few months ago,

because manufacturing output  is better  than he expected.

IV  - 3

District surveys  and respondents suggest cautious  optimism  that

second-half production will be as  good as  or better than the  first half.  The

latest  survey of CPAs  in Ohio  shows  that  87%  of the  600  respondents  expect

that business  in Ohio will equal  or exceed the  first  half, which is  slightly

higher than in  the  previous  survey.  The  latest survey of purchasing managers

in  Cleveland shows  that  73%  of  the  respondents expect a similar  scenario.

Prices.  There are  no  signs  that  inflation pressures  are  abating.  The

latest purchasing agents'  survey  in Cleveland shows  that  their  "inflation

forecast has  increased slightly,"  and that  76%  of  respondents  expect an

inflation rate  in  a 4% to  5% range by year-end 1990.  Economists  in  the

District  also expect  inflation within that  range at  least well  into  1991.

Near-term prices may be jarred upward by higher crude oil  and  gasoline prices

if OPEC cuts  back production, or  if  state  and federal governments  increase

taxes  on gasoline.  Some  metal producers will  attempt to  raise prices  this

half in  response to higher  labor compensation costs,  and  some  capital

equipment producers and  their  suppliers will  attempt small  price  increases

over  the next several months,  following a period of virtually no  change.

Construction.  The  tone of  comments  from District respondents  suggests  a

continued slackening pace of  construction, especially for  commercial

buildings. New housing  starts  in Ohio  during the  first half of  1990 were

slightly below the  pace of  a year  earlier.  New home sales  in  Pittsburgh and

Cincinnati  rose during  the  first half, but fell  slightly  in Cleveland.  Home

prices  in  those  cities  rose  between 6% and 8% in  the  first half.  Lenders

report that ample funds  are  available  for  single-family housing.  Funds  for

multifamily construction are  more  difficult to  obtain, according to builders.

IV  - 4

Since  spring, contract awards  for  nonresidential construction in Ohio

have been  lagging slightly from a year  earlier, but  the  decline in awards

through June has  been relatively less  than for  the  nation.  Construction of

office buildings and shopping centers has been under downward pressure because

of high and rising vacancy rates,  especially in suburban areas  of the

District's  major metropolitan centers.

Financial Developments.  Bankers  generally report  continued soft  demand

for  loans  in response  to  a slow-growth economy.  Ample  funds  are  available for

qualified borrowers,  and one  lender  states  that his  bank is  actively

soliciting loans.  Real  estate  loans have  strengthened as  borrowers shift  from

thrifts  to  banks.

Banks  and borrowers report that  real  estate  loans are  increasingly

scrutinized.  Builders  of multifamily units  complain of  extensive  requirements

for  loans,  but acknowledge  that  alternative methods  of  financing are  available

so  that  there are  few known outright cancellations of  construction projects.

A builder of shopping malls  obtained financing from a bank in  Canada, and a

builder of condominiums reports  that breaking up large  planned units  into

smaller units  that  are  largely leased is  an alternative way  to  qualify for

financing.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview

District  business  conditions  generally weakened  in recent weeks.  Tourism

during  the  first month  of summer was  not  as  strong  as  in past  summers.  Retail

sales  fell,  but  retail  inventories  were essentially unchanged.  Manufacturing

activity softened,  and  manufacturers' optimism about  future  prospects waned

somewhat.  Price  increases  were widespread--for producer  inputs  and  for

wholesale  and  retail  merchandise.  Activity  at  District  ports was mostly

unchanged.  Bankers  reported  lower  interest  rates  and  steady  loan  demand  but  a

decline  in the  quality of loan  applications.  In agriculture, crop  conditions

improved  and  District lenders  said  they  were seeking  new  agricultural  loans.

Tourism

A telephone  survey  of hotels,  motels,  and  resorts  throughout  the  District

indicated  that  summer  tourist activity has  been  lower this  year than  in the

last  several  years.  About  two-thirds  of the  respondents  reported a decline  in

tourism while  about  one-fourth  noted  little  change.  Respondents  attributed the

decreases  in activity to  the  mid-week July 4th  holiday  and  the  sluggish

economy.  About  half of those  contacted  said  that  their August  bookings  were

even  with  last year's while  40  percent  reported declines.  One-third  of the

respondents  expect  tourist  activity to  decline  in coming  months;  one-fourth

look  for  an  improvement.

Retail

Responses  to  our regular mail  survey  of District retailers  indicated  that

sales  in the  first  two weeks  of July were  slightly lower than  in the  last  half

of June.  About  40  percent  of the  retailers  reported that  their  sales  were down

while  about  one-third said  they were  higher.  Big  ticket  sales  as  a share of

total  sales  slipped  in early July from  June  levels;  40  percent  of the  retailers

reported declines while  four  percent  reported  increases.

Prices of merchandise  rose while  inventory levels  were mostly  unchanged

over the  period.  Almost  half  of the  respondents  reported that  they  had  raised

their prices  in the  past month,  and  nearly  60  percent  indicated that  they  had

paid  higher  prices  for goods  at wholesale.

Manufacturing

Our regular mail  survey  showed  that  District manufacturing  activity slowed

in early July  from early June.  More  respondents  indicated  decreases  than

increases  in shipments,  new orders,  order backlogs,  the  length of workweek, and

the number of  employees.  In our last  survey,  these  categories  had  been mostly

unchanged.  Inventories  of materials  fell  while  inventories  of finished goods

rose  slightly.  On  a more  positive note,  new orders  for  exports  rose  somewhat.

When  asked  to  indicate  the most  important  problem  facing  their firms,  more

than  half of the  respondents  identified poor sales.  Poor  sales  seem  to  be

particularly pronounced  in the  textile  and  furniture  industries.  One  textile

firm  said  weak sales  had  pushed  profits  down,  and  another noted  that  several

textile plants  had  closed  this year.

District manufacturers'  views  of current  conditions  in the  national

economy mirrored  their own  business  activity.  Almost  two-fifths  of the

respondents  said  they believed economic activity  in the  nation  had declined

compared to  a month  ago.  Looking  forward,  respondents  remained optimistic  but

were  somewhat less  so  than  earlier this year.  A majority  still  expect

increases over  the  next  six months  in their shipments,  new orders,  the

workweek, and new  orders  for  exports.  They look for  backlogs  of orders  to  be

unchanged,  but  expect  inventories  of materials  and  of finished goods  to  shrink.

V-3

Over one-third  expect  national  economic  activity to  increase  in the  next  six

months while  27  percent  look  for  a decline.  In our June  survey,  however, 80

percent  expected  the  nation's economy to  turn  up  in coming months.

Ports

There was  little  change  in port  activity overall  in the District.  Reports

received  from the  three major  District ports--Hampton Roads  (Norfolk),

Charleston,  and  Baltimore--showed exports were  higher  in June than  in May  at

Charleston,  lower  at  Hampton  Roads  and  about  the same  at  Baltimore.  June

export  activity was  also mixed  compared to  a year ago  with  shipments higher  at

Hampton Roads  and  unchanged  at  Baltimore  and  Charleston.  Imports  rose  in June

from May levels  at  Hampton  Roads  and  Charleston  but  fell  at  Baltimore.  June

import  activity was  about  the  same  as  a year  ago  at  both  Baltimore  and

Charleston,  but  lower at  Hampton  Roads.  Port  representatives  expect  the  ratio

of  exports  to  imports to  rise  during  the  next  six months  at  Hampton Roads,  fall

at  Charleston  and  remain  unchanged  at  Baltimore.

Financial

District  financial  institutions  contacted  by  phone reported that  loan

activity had  been  steady  since mid-July.  Slightly more  institutions reported

increases  than  decreases  in loan  applications  since mid-July,  and  respondents

expect  their lending  to  pick  up  in the  weeks to  come.  Almost  40  percent  of

those contacted, however,  said that  the  quality of  loan  applications had  fallen

over  the  past month,  and  only one  respondent  reported  better  quality

applications.

Reductions  in interest  rates  were reported  by many  respondents and  most

expect  further reductions  in the  weeks ahead.  Lower  interest  rates  on  loans

were  reported by  46  percent  of the  respondents  and none  reported higher  rates.

About  three-fourths of those  surveyed  expect  the  rates  they  charge  on  loans  to

decline  in the  near  future  and  none  look  for  rate  increases.

Agriculture

Widespread  rainfall  in July brought  relief to  District crops  that  had  been

severely  stressed by June's  heat  and  drought.  In most  areas  crops  were

recently rated  in generally good  condition,  although  in some  parts  of South

Carolina they were  still  short  of moisture.

Preliminary results  from  a July  1 survey  of District agricultural  lenders

show that  over  three-fourths  of the  respondents were  actively  seeking new  farm

loans.  Four-fifths  of the  respondents  said  that  the  availability of funds  was

greater than  usual  at  their institutions,  but  28  percent characterized loan

demand  as  less  than  usual  compared to  eight  percent who  reported  it to  be

greater than  usual.

VI-1

SIXTH  DISTRICT  - ATLANTA

Overview:  Contacts throughout the Southeast generally  see a continuation of the  slow

growth  they have  been reporting  for the past several  months.  Consumer  spending  on big ticket

items,  such  as  autos  and  houses,  is  turning  out  well  below  earlier  expectations  of moderate

growth.  Businesses  also  report  increased  efforts  to  conserve  cash  by  not  paying  suppliers

promptly.  These  factors  are  said  to  be  causing  increased  pessimism  over  future  activity

compared  to  our  earlier  surveys.  Reports  on  retail  sales  indicate  at  most  modest  growth  as

compared  to  the  same  period  last  year.  Auto  dealers  continue  to indicate  their  sales  are  even

with or below the  same period  in  1989.  According  to bankers  consumer  lending remains  below

last  year's  levels,  while  real  estate  and business  lending  continue  to grow  at  a  moderate  pace.

Construction  contacts  indicate 

that  the  overall  weakness  in  commercial  and  residential

construction  continues.  Except in the textile and auto related industries,  Southeast manufacturing

is  reportedly  continuing to post modest growth.  Farm contacts estimate  that the drought  in June

and  early  July  has  destroyed  approximately  a quarter  of the  region's  corn,  soybean  and  forage

crops.  Shortages  of entry  level  workers  are  increasing  but  no additional  pressure  on  wages  or

prices  are  evident.

Retail:  With a few exceptions,  retail activity is reported  to be growing  but at a slower

pace than at this time last year.  Almost uniformly,  contacts indicate  that women's and  children's

apparel  is  selling  well,  while  men's  apparel  sales  have  slowed  noticeably  in  the  last  month.

Reports  on  durable  goods  sales  are  mixed  geographically,  but  most areas indicate  some pickup

recently  in  home  appliances  and  items  associated  with  home  improvements.  Consumers  are

reluctant  to purchase  houses,  but a  desire to  fix  up  their current  housing  is most  often  given  as

the reason  for  the  improvement  in  durables  sales.

VI-2

In light of slow  sales and a more pessimistic outlook among retailers,  they report plans

to reduce inventories.  Retailers  are  also expressing  concern  over reports  of credit  tightening  by

commercial  banks  and  are  reportedly  slowing  down  payments  to  suppliers  in  an  attempt  to

conserve  cash.  Some  manufacturers  and  business  services  suppliers  noted  problems  collecting

on  growing  receivables.

Auto dealers  continue  to report  slow  sales and  do not expect  a pickup in the next few

months.  Import  dealers  are  reporting  stronger  sales  growth  than  are domestic  dealers.  Import

sales are  equal to  or slightly better  than  last year's.  Dealers  report that domestic  manufacturers

have not  come forward  with  new incentive plans  as  expected,  while  some import  manufacturers

have  extended  their incentive programs.  Almost all dealers  stated that  used  car  sales are strong

and  report  difficulty  finding  quality  used  cars.

Manufacturing:  Reports from  textile producers,  auto,  and auto related  manufacturers,

and  furniture  manufacturers  continue  to  indicate weakness;  however,  most other  manufacturers

are  reporting  good  year-over-year  growth.  Producers  of heating  and  air conditioning  equipment

as  well  as  marine  equipment,  continue  to  note  increasing  sales  relative  to  last  year.  Paper

producers  saw  a  slowdown  in  domestic  sales  in  recent  weeks;  nevertheless,  a  recent pickup  in

export  sales  has  allowed  most  to  run  at  capacity.  Pulp  and  wood  products  production  has

rebounded  in recent weeks amid growing  export demand.  An aluminum producer reports healthy

growth  in  sales  year-over-year  and  has  announced  plans  for  a  new  plant  to  expand  capacity.

Sales  by  producers  of  farm  equipment  are  also  increasing  over  last  year  as  a  result  of  the

improvement  in the  agricultural  sector  nationwide.

Real  Estate  and  Construction:  Construction  contacts  indicate  that  residential  and

commercial  construction  remain  weak,  and  are  significantly  below last  year's levels.  They also

indicate that the overhang of both  residential and  commercial properties is being  absorbed slowly.

VI-3

More  stringent  lending  standards  continue  to  be  mentioned  as  retarding  factors  for  new

commercial  and  residential  projects.  The only bright  spot in the construction  sector is in public

infrastructure.

Financial  Services:  While  most  bank  contacts  indicate  that  business  loan  growth

remains  slow,  some noted a pickup in demand  for loans by petrochemical  and medical  businesses

and  nursing  homes.  Reports  indicate  real  estate  loans  continue  to  grow  slowly.  Demand  for

consumer  loans,  especially  auto  loans,  has  slowed  significantly  in  the  last  few  months.  A

number  of our  banking  contacts  reported  concern  over  a  rise  in  credit  card  delinquencies  and

noted  increasing  consumer  and  small  business  bankruptcy  filings.

Agriculture:  District  farmers  report  that  the June  and  early  July  drought  resulted  in

the  loss  of approximately  25  percent  of the  region's  production  of corn,  soybean  and  forage

crops.  Losses  are  reportedly  heaviest  in  Georgia  and  Tennessee,  where  two-thirds  of  the

District's  total  production  of these  crops  occurs.  Poultry  producers  indicate  a  continuing  high

level  of sales,  especially  for export  with  some reporting  that export  demand  for poultry  is up 40

percent  from  a  year  ago.  District  poultry  producers  indicate  that  recent  sales  to  the  Soviet

Union,  several Eastern European  countries and Japan have brightened their outlook considerably.

Wages  and  Prices:  As  has  been  the  case  for  the  last  several  months,  reports  from

around  the  District  revealed  little  new  wage  or  price  pressures.  Scattered  reports  that  certain

types  of  skilled  labor  are  in  short  supply  continue  to  be  received,  but  these  are  localized.

Reports  of shortages  of entry  level  workers  are increasing.

VII-1

SEVENTH  DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.  Economic conditions  in the  Seventh District  are mixed, with manufacturing

contributing  the most consistent  but slow improvement.  District employment  rebounded  in May,

after two months  of modest  decline,  and general  economic  indicators  for metropolitan  areas  in

the District expanded  in June.  Respondents  report that manufacturing  continues  to post modest

gains  in  sales and orders,  except  among defense-related  markets.  Retail spending  in the  District

is  mixed, with sales  growth linked to price cutting,  and the  housing market  in the  Chicago  area is

softening.  Several banks  report a slowdown  in lending  activity related  to regulatory changes  and

a slower economy, but overall credit  standards  are  little changed from  the beginning  of the  year.

Crop prices  have been volatile  in recent  weeks,  but weather conditions  have  been near ideal.

Labor  Markets  and  Economic  Indicators. Labor market conditions  in  the

District improved  slightly in May,  but unemployment rates  were  noticeably higher than  a year

ago.  Total  payroll  employment in most District  states rose in May,  but remained below  the high

for this year reached in February.  Virtually all the  employment  gains in recent  months  have

come from the nonmanufacturing  sector, including  increases  in the  Chicago  area  despite  sizable

layoffs among  several  major retailers  and financial  institutions.  The  average  unemployment  rate

for the District  dropped a tenth of a percentage  point to 5.6 percent  in May from the  previous

month.  Michigan's  unemployment  rate was  highest in May  at 7.7 percent,  but dropped  to 7.3

percent in June.  However,  the unemployment  rate for the District  a year ago averaged  5.0

percent, with  Michigan's rate  near 6.0 percent.

Purchasing managers'  surveys in the  District generally  showed activity expanding  in

June.  The Detroit  survey  in June  rose 2 points  from  the previous month  to 50.9, marking the  first

time in  fifteen months  that the index registered  an expansion  in activity.  Much of the

improvement was  centered in  auto-related  production  and orders.  The Chicago  purchasing

managers' survey  for June  continued to  show expanding  activity,  but at  a slower pace than  in

May.  According  to the survey, production  edged down  from the  previous month,  which was its

highest  level this year.  Although orders  slowed markedly  in June  and backlogs  declined,  the

VII-2

Chicago  survey indicated  that most purchasing  agents expect  business activity  to improve  over

the  rest of the year.

Manufacturing.  Several respondents  in the  District reported that orders  and

production were continuing  to make  modest  improvements.  Orders for truck engines  had an

uptick in May,  according  to an industry  source,  after being weak  since late  1989.  Orders  and

backlogs  of nondefense  machinery were up in  May,  according  to a capital-goods  producer, but

defense-related  orders were  down  significantly.  An electronic  equipment producer reported

good order's  growth in recent months, despite  some  softness  in key markets,  including  autos.

While  shipments are  not expected  to "boom" this year, sales  of electronic  components  are

expected to continue to improve.  A producer of liner board  reported that an expected  weakness

in shipments  this  summer has  not materialized.  After two months  of flat sales,  June  and early

July  sales  turned  around and were running  slightly  above trend.  A major  supplier of construction

materials stated  that plants  in the District were  operating  on average  at about  95 percent  of

capacity, compared to 80 percent in the eastern  part of the nation.

Steel  shipments  for the  second quarter were  about  the same  as  in the  second quarter of

1989,  according  to a major steel  producer in the District.  Summer bookings  have  been  strong, in

part because  of increases  in auto production.  Appliances appear to be booking normally  for  the

summer.  Total  steel  shipments in the third quarter  are expected to be ahead of seasonal  gains.

Consumer  Spending  and  Real  Estate. Retail  sales  activity in the District was

mixed in June.  An economist for a  major department  store  chain reported  an overall lackluster

sales performance  in June, despite good  sales in auto parts  and appliances.  Home improvement

sales were  particularly poor, as  were lawn and garden  sales.  Sales growth  in Iowa and

Wisconsin  was  about average for the  nation, but growth  in Michigan  and Indiana was  below

average.  While inventories  were down  in June,  weak sales pushed  the retailer's  inventory-to-

sales ratio  up.  A major discount chain  in the District reported  above average  gains, led by

strength  in apparel  sales.  Sales  growth,  however, was  aided by increased  price cutting.

Housing  sales  in the Chicago  area dropped in June from year-ago  levels,  according  to an

VII-3

area  realtor.  Some of the decline  was  attributed to exceptionally  high sales  last year.  However,

June sales  were  also  slightly below  the  six year average  for that month,  indicating  some  softness

in the market.  High priced homes  are having  the most difficulty selling, according  to an industry

analyst.  The rate  of pricing  increases in the Chicago area has  slowed significantly  since  last fall.

Price increases since October were reportedly running  slightly below  the inflation  rate, compared

to double-digit  rates  earlier.

Banking.  Several financial  institutions in  the District reported a slowdown  in the

growth of lending  activity  in recent months.  Commercial  and industrial  loans were  expanding

below expectations  at some banks,  which  was attributed  to  softness in the  economy.  However,

other banks  noted  that loan growth  was continuing  at the  trend rate.  Mortgage  lending continued

to be  relatively strong  in June,  according  to several  bank officials,  although  lending volume  was

below  a year ago.  As a result of higher lending restrictions  on S&Ls that limit the share of total

equity capital devoted to a  single loan  customer, construction  lending  has been  hard hit.  Small

builders  are particularly  being affected,  according  to a financial analyst.

Credit standards  have  changed  little since early in  the year,  according  to several

respondents,  but bank examiners have  become  increasingly  thorough  in evaluating  loan risk.

Highly leveraged  borrowing  is down  sharply  and, in many cases,  banks  have  shortened the

maturity  of loans to  limit risk exposure.  However,  most bankers  stated that  "quality" loans are

having  no problems  with funding.  One District bank reported picking up business  from other

banks  that had backed out of projects  in recent months.

Agriculture.  Crop prices  have been quite volatile  in recent  weeks,  with much of the

volatility  tied to weather conditions  and the  implications  for potential  yields.  Near ideal weather

conditions  over the  last couple  of weeks  have offset some of the  earlier concerns  about rain-

delayed  planting  and the heat wave in  early July.  Corn  and soybean  crop conditions  throughout

much of the District are rated  "good," despite  smaller-than-normal  plant growth  for this time of

year.  However,  yield prospects  still hinge  to a  large extent  on weather patterns  through mid-

August and  the timing of the first killing  frost this fall.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT  - ST.  LOUIS

Summary

Sluggish economic  growth  is  reported by most  contacts  throughout  the

District.  Retail  sales  and employment levels  are  flat  or  expanding slowly.

Manufacturers plan  to  eliminate  several  thousand jobs  in  the  near  future.

Loan  growth has  slowed at  the  District's  largest banks.

Consumer  Spending

Retail  sales  in recent months  are  described by most  contacts  as  flat

to  slightly higher than a  year  earlier.  Memphis has  shown moderate  sales

growth, however, partially because  of  increased sales  at  restaurants  and

apparel  stores.  Some  retailers  expect a  slowing  in sales  because  of  the

anticipated contraction  of military bases  and layoffs  at  auto  and military

aircraft plants.  In most parts  of  the  District, sales  of  durable  goods,

particularly  home  appliances,  televisions,  and other consumer  electronics,

are  flat  or  below year-earlier  levels.  Most  contacts  report recent vehicle

sales  as  flat  to  down slightly from  a year  earlier.  Some  contacts  in

Arkansas  and Kentucky, however,  report moderate  gains  in vehicle  sales,

particularly  of vans,  light  trucks  and small  to midsize  cars.

Labor Markets

District  employment growth  in recent months has  ranged from  small

gains  in Arkansas  to  slight  declines  in Kentucky, Missouri  and Tennessee.

Contacts  expect no substantial  job  growth in  St.  Louis  for  the remainder  of

1990 because  of  the  planned  layoffs  of approximately 7,000  auto  and defense

industry workers.  One  labor  analyst predicts  that  the  layoffs will  cause

VIII-2

the  area's unemployment rate  to  be approximately  one percentage point

higher by year's  end than  it otherwise  would have been.  A slowdown  in  the

trucking industry led to  layoffs  of  St. Louis  drivers and an easing of a

driver  shortage in Memphis.

Manufacturing

Manufacturing activity has weakened recently.  Employment declined in

plants making nonelectrical machinery and  some nondurable products,  such as

chemicals,  textiles  and apparel.  One  tire plant will cut production soon

in  response to  slow car  sales.  Many defense contractors,  including  those

making shoes  and electronic components,  are  curtailing their  operations  due

to  declining government contracts.  To  cut costs,  one  large  defense

contractor will  lay off  approximately 5,000 workers before year's  end.

An increasing number of  small manufacturers,  including those making

electronic components  and valves,  is  opening plants or  distribution centers

in  Europe to  provide better service to  European customers.  One producer of

computer-related equipment will  soon export  to  Poland and  receive shoes  as

partial  payment.

Input costs  and product prices  generally are  expected to  be  3 to  5

percent higher next year, but some  contacts  note slight  declines  in some

input prices and widespread resistance  to  product price  increases.  Several

contacts  note  that  they have been unable  to  raise  their prices  for  two  or

three  years due  to  competitive pressures.

Construction and Real  Estate

In response  to  generally flat  rents  and high vacancy rates,  the

construction of multifamily dwellings has  almost  stopped in many parts of

the District.  Single-family homebuilding is  weaker than a year earlier in

most  areas.  In Louisville, however,  the  construction of both single-family

VIII-3

and multifamily dwellings has  expanded and  is  well above year-earlier

levels.  The building of  starter homes  in Memphis  is  strong.  There  is

widespread uncertainty regarding the near  future, but contacts  in most

areas  expect homebuilding to weaken slightly  in  the year's  second half.

Contacts  report that  residential  construction contractors  in St.  Louis,

with little  available  work, have  lowered their bids  to  the  point where  some

weaker firms may soon  fail.

Agriculture

Most  District crops  are  in  fair  to  good condition.  Soil moisture

conditions  are  reported  as  adequate  in Missouri  and Tennessee, but  the

remaining District  states  report that  soil moisture  is  short.  The  dry soil

conditions,  in  conjunction with a recent heat wave,  stressed the

late-planted corn crop  and may have  lowered potential yields  in  some  areas.

District states'  wheat yields were  reduced by  12  percent to  26  percent from

a year ago  because  of diseases  that  developed during  the wet spring.

Banking and  Credit

Loan data for  the  period from mid-May to mid-July point  to  a slowdown

in  credit growth.  Total  loans at  the District's  11  largest banks  increased

0.7  percent  over this  interval  compared with a 2.3 percent  expansion over

the  same  period last  year.  Commercial  loans,  which represent about

one-third of total  loans  at  these banks, declined 0.1 percent over  the

two-month period compared with a 2.1 percent  increase  one  year ago.  Real

estate  loans  increased 4.1 percent  over the  two-month period last year

compared with a 3.3 percent  rise  this year;  the  increase  in consumer  loans

was  down  from 0.9  percent  to  0.2 percent  this  year.  As  of mid-July,

commercial  loans  on these banks' books were  4 percent below their  year-ago

level.

IX-1

NINTH  DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

Ninth  District  economic  conditions  have  been  moderately  good

lately.  Labor  markets have  been  strengthening,  retail  sales have  been  growing

fairly  well,  and  tourist  spending  has  been  strong.  However,  new  cars  have

been  selling  very  slowly,  housing  activity  has  been  lackluster,  and  nonresi-

dential  construction has been weak.  Conditions  have been mixed  in  manufactur-

ing,  but resource-related  industries have  been doing very  well.

Employment, Wages, and  Prices

Labor market  conditions  have  improved after  showing signs  of  soften-

ing  in  the  first  four  months  of  the  year.  Minnesota's unemployment rate  was

4.3  percent  in  May  and  4.2  percent  in  June.  These  rates  are  sharply  lower

than  April's  5.4  percent  rate  and  also  lower  than  the  4.5 and  5 percent  rates

in  May  and  June  1989.  However,  there  have been  reports  that  many  applicants

for  jobs  in  Minnesota are  overqualified.  This  phenomenon  has  been attributed

to  the  continuing difficulties of high  technology  industries  in  the  state.  In

the  rest of the  district,  unemployment rates  have been  stable.

Wage and  price  increases  have  remained at  a moderate  3 to  5 percent

rate  in  the  district.  A manufacturer of  wood  products  in  the Minneapolis-St.

Paul  metropolitan  area  reports  that  wage  and  benefit  packages  have  been  in-

creasing  at  a  rate  of  around  4 percent.  A contractor  in  the  Upper  Peninsula

of  Michigan  reports  that,  in  spite  of  strong  demand  for  workers,  wage  and

benefit  packages  have  been  increasing  at  only  a  3.5  percent  rate.  However,

costs  in  agriculture  are  reported  to  be  increasing  at  a more  rapid  rate.  The

costs  of producing corn  and  soybeans  are reported  to  be  6 to  10  percent  higher

than  last  year,  with  most  of  the  increase  reflecting  higher  rental  rates  on

land.

IX-2

Consumer Spending

Retailers  of  general  merchandise  in  the  district  report  fairly  good

sales  growth.  One  retailer  reports that,  compared  to a year  earlier,  sales  in

June  were  up  4.1  percent  and  sales  in  the  first  half of  the  year  were  up  5

percent.  Another  retailer  reports  that  sales  in  June  were  8 percent  higher

than  a  year  ago.  In  North  Dakota  and  Montana,  retailers  report  that  their

sales  have  continued  to  grow  strongly,  due  mainly  to  Canadian  shoppers.

Inventories are  reported  to  be at  acceptable levels.

Tourism  remains  the  brightest  spot  in  the  district's  economy.  In

the Upper  Peninsula of Michigan,  tourist  spending  is  said  to  have doubled over

the  last  two  years.  In  Montana,  it  has  remained  strong.

New  car  sales,  however,  have  continued  to  be  soft  in  the  district.

One  dealer  reports  that  sales  in  the  first  half of  1990 were  25  percent below

a  year  earlier.  Still,  many  dealers  report  signs  of  improving  sales  in  late

June  and  early  July  and  are  optimistic  about  sales  prospects  in  the  rest  of

the  year.  Inventories  of  cars  and  trucks  are  reported  to  be  at  satisfactory

levels.

Housing  activity  has  shown  signs  of  slowing  in  the  district.  The

number of new housing permits  issued  in  Minnesota was 7.8  percent  lower  in  May

than  a year  earlier.  At  the  same  time,  the  number  issued  in  the Minneapolis-

St.  Paul  metropolitan  area  was  9  percent  below  a year  ago.  There  have  also

been  reports of a decline  in  the  prices of high-priced  homes.

Nonresidential Construction  and Manufacturing

Conditions  in  the  nonresidential  construction  industry  have  been

weak,  particularly  in  the  Minneapolis-St.  Paul  metropolitan  area.  There  an

overhang  of  commercial  and  office  space  is  reported  to  be  depressing  new

construction.  The  construction sector  in  this  area  is  expected  to  shrink over

the  next few  years until  the  overhang  is  absorbed.

IX-3

Conditions  in  the  district's  manufacturing  industries  have  been

mixed.  Suppliers  to  the  aircraft  industry  and  manufacturers  of  capital goods

report  fairly  good  business.  But  the  electronics  industry  and  defense  sup-

pliers have  continued  to struggle.  A supplier  to  the  residential construction

industry  says  its  firm  is  "in  a recession."

Resource-Related  Industries

The  district's  resource-related  industries  appear  to  be  very

healthy.  Generous  rainfall  throughout  the  district  has  improved  the  outlook

of  farmers.  However,  in  some  areas  too  much  rain  has  damaged  corn  and  soy-

beans. 

In  northern  Minnesota,  for  example,  about  5 percent  of  the  soybean

acreage  was  not  planted  because  the  fields  were  too  wet.  Still,  farmers  and

ranchers  have  had  record  volumes  of  meat  production  as  well  as  record

prices. 

Reservoirs  in  Montana  are  reported  to  be  filling  up  for  the  first

time  in  many  years.  Meanwhile,  the  forest  product  industries  remain  strong

despite  concerns  that  logging  activity would  be  hurt  by  environmental  regula-

tions.  The mining industry  continues  to  do well.

X-1

TENTH DISTRICT  - KANSAS  CITY

Overview.  The  Tenth  District economy  continues  to  grow moderately.  In

the  energy sector,  drilling activity has picked up  recently and remains  well

above  the  level  of a  year  ago.  Retail  sales  are unchanged  or  slightly higher

than a  year ago,  but  sales  are mixed.  While many  retailers  and manufacturers

are  trimming  inventories,  automobile  dealers  are keeping new car  inventories

at  current  levels.  In  the  agricultural  sector, winter wheat yields  are

average  or  better across  most  of  the  district.  Yet  the  surge  in  production  is

driving wheat  prices  down sharply,  limiting  income  gains  for  district wheat

farmers.  Housing  starts  in  the  district  have  fallen from a year  ago, but

prices  for new homes  remain stable.  Although mortgage  rates  are  edging down,

mortgage  demand stays mixed.  Commercial  bankers  report slightly higher  total

loan demand, primarily  for  consumer  and home equity  loans.  Demand  for

commercial,  industrial,  and real  estate  loans  remains  stable.

Retail  Sales.  District retailers  report  sales  are unchanged  or  slightly

increased from a year  earlier, but  mixed over  the  last  three months.  Sales

are  expected  to  increase  slightly  during the  rest  of  the  year.  Demand  is

especially  strong for women's  apparel, while  sales  for junior wear  is weak.

Prices  are  changing  in line with  cost  increases, but  are  expected to  remain

steady  in coming months.  Retailers  are  trimming  inventories.  Over  the  last

month, new auto  sales have  improved  slightly  in some  district  states but have

slowed in  others.  Adequate  financing  is  available both  for  inventories  and

for potential buyers.  Most  dealers  are maintaining  current  inventory levels

as  sales  are  expected  to  continue  at  their  current  pace.

Manufacturing.  Most purchasing  agents  report only  slightly higher  input

prices  over a  year  ago.  Prices have been mostly  stable  over  the  past  three

months  and are  expected  to  remain so  over  the next  three  months.  Most agents

X-2

report no  difficulty obtaining materials and expect  no problems  for  the  rest

of  the year.  Lead times  for  steel  are  increasing but  are  expected to  decrease

over  the  remainder of  the  year.  Many firms  are  trimming inventories,  and

plants are  operating below capacity.

Energy.  After  plunging to  near  $15  a barrel  in  late June,  domestic oil

prices  have  increased in  recent weeks  on speculation  that OPEC will  reduce  oil

production.  Nonetheless,  the  price of West Texas  Intermediate crude  oil

remains  $5 below its  level  at  the beginning of the  year.  Exploration and

development  activity  in the  district  picked up  in June  and remains well above

the year-earlier level.  The district  rig count  increased from 266  in May to

290  in June, up  almost 30  percent from June  1989.

Housing Activity and Finance.  Housing starts  are  down  from a year ago

in most areas  of  the  district but have  stabilized over  the  last  month.  New

home sales  are  improving slightly,  and prices  remain  generally stable.

Builders  report no  problems with delivery  times  or  availability of materials.

New homes sales  are  expected to  be  steady to  slightly  lower  the  rest of  1990.

Most district  savings  and loan respondents  report net  inflows  of

deposits  over  the  last month.  Net deposit flows  generally are  running higher

than they were  a year  ago  and  in the  previous  month.  Respondents expect

deposit  growth to  continue  in the  near term.  Mortgage demand has been mixed.

Mortgage  rates  remain stable  to  slightly  lower  and are  expected  to  fall

further in  the near  future.

Banking.  Commercial bankers  report  that  total  loan demand increased

slightly over  the  last month.  Demand strengthened primarily for consumer

loans and home  equity loans.  There has been little  change  in  the  demand for

commercial and  industrial  loans  or  for  residential real estate  loans.

X-3

Commercial  real  estate  loans  have been steady overall,  although  a few banks

are  reducing lending for  commercial  real  estate  and  land development because

of concerns  about credit quality.  None of  the respondents  report  a change  in

their prime  rate  over  the  last  month, and few expect  the prime  rate  to  change

in  the near  future.  Most bankers  also  report no change  in  consumer loan

rates.  The  level  of investments  have  increased at  Tenth District banks  over

the  last month.  Total  deposits  are  rising because  of  increases  in  demand

deposits  and small  time  deposits.  Large certificates  of  deposit,  NOW

accounts,  and money market  deposit accounts  remain generally unchanged.

Agriculture.  Harvest  of  the  district's winter wheat crop  is  nearly

complete.  Wheat yields  and quality are  average  to  well  above  average across

most of the  district.  The wheat  crop  in Kansas,  the  nation's  leading wheat

producing state,  is  estimated to  be  the  largest crop  on  record and more  than

double  the  size  of  last year's  drought-reduced crop.  The  surge  in wheat

production, however, is  driving wheat  prices down sharply,  limiting  income

gains  for  district wheat producers.

The district's  corn, soybean, milo,  and cotton crops  are  generally in

good condition.  Crop  development in Missouri  and eastern Kansas  is  well

behind normal, however, due  to planting delays  caused by excessive  spring

rains.  Dry weather since  late June has  left  crops  in western Kansas  and

Nebraska in need of additional moisture.

The  limited availability and high cost of  feeder  cattle has  resulted in

a modest reduction in  district cattle  feeding activity.  Strong cattle  prices

continue  to  support incomes  of district cattle  ranchers, but  the high cost  of

feeder cattle  is  limiting profit margins  for  cattle  feeders.

XI-1

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

The  District  economy  is  growing  slowly.  Manufacturing has  shown  little

recent change.  Retail  sales  growth  is  outpacing  the nation's, while  auto

sales  are  down from a  year earlier.  Expansion  in services  is  slow to

moderate.  Residential building  is  generating a  small upturn  in construction.

Oil  and gas  drilling has  reached a  plateau.  In agriculture,  low soil moisture

is  becoming an  increasingly serious  problem.

Even  though manufacturing  firms  cite  little  overall  change  in  orders,

they  are  generally more  optimistic  than during  the  last  survey.  Most

recently, oilfield  equipment  firms  note very little  growth  in  sales, but year-

over-year expansion has been moderate  to  strong.  Steel  firms  say  their  orders

are  rising,  in part, because  increasing  foreign demand has  reduced  the

domestic availability  of  imported steel.  Orders  for  fabricated metals

products vary greatly;  a  can manufacturer  reports  large  sales  increases,  but

construction-related  fabricated metals  firms  say  their  orders  are  flat  to

down.  Demand for  lumber  and wood products  varies  greatly by product  and

region.  A  raw lumber  producer notes  rising sales  and,  until  the  last month,

rising prices.  The upswing  in  lumber partly  reflects  an  industry shakeout

that has  left  larger  market  shares  for  the  survivors.  Among  stone,  clay  and

glass producers,  cement  firms  say product prices  are  up but  sales  are  flat  or

declining;  brick makers cite  rising sales  due  to  recent growth  in  residential

construction.  Reports  by electronic  equipment producers  vary greatly.

Considerable weakness  was  seen in  some  semiconductor markets, but

telecommunications  firms mention that  sales  are  growing.  Apparel producers

XI-2

have seen  little  year-over-year expansion, but  they say demand has picked up

from earlier  in  the  year.  Paper producers  cite  slowing  sales  and declining

prices.  Food products  firms  note  little  recent change  in orders  beyond normal

seasonal movements.  Chemical  firms  report slight  reductions  in  demand, but

most respondents  say sales  remain very high nevertheless.  District  refineries

say demand is high and  rising.

District retail  sales  continue to  outperform the nation's.  Respondents

cite  particularly strong  growth in  the  Houston area and  along the Mexican

border.  Some  say  their Dallas  sales have  grown  little  from a year earlier.

In apparel sales,  women's  clothing and shoes  are  said to be  in  particularly

high demand, while  sales  of men's  suits have  been slow.  In general,  discount

stores  are showing  stronger  sales  growth  than traditional  department stores.

District auto  sales were  down  in June, despite  dealer  incentives.  Both

Dallas  and Houston  area new car  sales  were down  from a year  earlier.  On

average,  for  the  first  six months  of  1990,  Dallas/Ft. Worth sales  are  slightly

below a year earlier while  Houston sales  are up  by about 5 percent.

District  service  industries  generally note  slow to moderate  recent

growth,  although some  Houston area  firms  say demand has  increased markedly

there.  Most business  service  firms  say they  face  strong demand, but  reports

vary  greatly by geographic  area.  Houston and Dallas  business  service  firms

cite  growing sales  and easing price  competition.  These changes  are partially

a result  of mergers  and  shakeouts.  In  contrast,  a San Antonio  respondent

cites  soft  demand and expects  little  if  any growth over  the  next year.

Although airlines  say ridership  is  steady,  some  firms  express  concern over  the

possibility of  widespread fare  discounting later  in  the year.

XI-3

District construction activity has  grown slightly in  recent months,  due

to  an upturn in both single  and multifamily residential building  in Texas.

District nonbuilding and nonresidential construction remain weak.  Respondents

note  that while  occupancy rates  and rents  in  the  commercial  and industrial

markets  continue  show improvement, any significant  increase  in construction is

a long way off.  Construction of petrochemical plants, however, continues  at

high rates.

The  District  energy  sector has  recently slowed  somewhat.  Although oil

production has  continued to  increase,  the  number of  rigs  operating has

slipped.  Even so,  the  drilling rig count  is  31  percent higher  than a year

earlier.  Horizontal drilling in  south Texas  continues  to boost production.

In recent weeks,  oil prices have  increased, due to  increased tensions  in  the

Middle East and expectations  that  OPEC will  reduce  production.  Nevertheless,

respondents  expect continued cheating by OPEC members  to  limit  any price

gains.

Dry weather continues  to  frustrate  District  farmers  and ranchers.  Corn,

grain sorghum and cotton have  been damaged and some  farmers have  abandoned

their cotton  crops.  The  index of prices  received by Texas  farmers  and

ranchers  this year  reached  its  highest June  level ever,  and was  6 percent

above  a year  earlier,  although  it  was down  1 percent  from May.  Higher prices

for  cotton, grain sorghum and potatoes  pushed the June  all-crops  index up  4

percent  over last  year, while  the  livestock and livestock products price  index

was up  7 percent.

XII-  1

TWELFTH  DISTRICT -- SAN  FRANCISCO

Summary

Economic  conditions  remain  satisfactory  in  most  parts  of the  West,  although  western

business  leaders'  expectations  about  national  growth  continue  to  be  subdued.  Wage  and  price

trends  have  not  changed  appreciably  during  the  past  two  months, with  few  sectors  reporting

increases  beyond  5  percent.  Several  service  sectors  are  experiencing  strong growth,  while  retailers

report  generally  satisfactory  conditions.  Information  about  manufacturing  industries  suggests  that

overall  activity  is  flat, with  strength  in  some  sectors  offset  by weakness  in  others.  Conditions  in

resource  industries  are  little changed.  Despite  worrisome  trends  in  aggregate  real  estate  and

construction  data  for the  West,  markets  in  most  areas,  particularly  those  away  from  the  coast,

exhibit  robust  activity.  The  pace  of  activity  at  financial  institutions  varies within  the District.

Business  Sentiment

Western  business  leaders'  expectations  continue  to  reflect caution  about  national

economic  growth.  Two-thirds  expect  slow  real  GNP  growth  during  the next  twelve  months, while

4  percent  now  expect  a  national  recession.  Respondents  are  relatively  upbeat  about  the  prospects

for  improvement  in  the  trade balance,  but  expectations  regarding  consumer  spending  and  business

investment  have  deteriorated  somewhat  during  the  last  two months.

Wages  and  Prices

Wage  and  price  trends have  not  changed  appreciably  during  the  past two  months.  Current

increases  cluster  in  the 4  to  5  percent  range,  with  few  larger  rises  reported.  However,  some

service-sector  firms  continue  to  face  a  shortage  of entry-level  workers, which  is  putting  significant

upward  pressure  on  their pay  scales.  Some  employers  note  that,  while wages  are  rising by  less

than  5  percent,  the  cost  of benefits  rose  8  to  15  percent  during  the  last  year.  An  electronic

XII  - 2

equipment  maker  reports  stable  prices  despite  heavy  pressure  on  profit  margins.  Prices  of several

resource  products,  including  wheat,  corn,  and  some  forest  products,  have  fallen  in recent  months.

Retail  Trade  and  Services

The  trade  and  service  sectors  continue  to be  major  contributors  to economic  growth  in the

West.  Strength  is reported  across  a broad  range  of service  sectors,  with  particularly  robust  activity

in health  care,  business  services,  and  software.  For  example,  one large  software  company  plans  to

add  1,000  workers  during the  next  year.  The  economies  of Phoenix  and  Tucson  are  benefiting

from  recent  or planned  support  facilities for  national  communications,  credit  card,  and airline

firms.

Most retailers  report satisfactory  conditions,  although  for many growth  is somewhat  slower

than in recent  years.  However,  one  major retailer  notes  that sales  have  slowed  significantly  during

the last  two  weeks.  Auto  dealers  report that  new vehicle  sales  are  soft, while  used  cars  and trucks

continue  to sell well.

Newspaper  advertising  volume  is  mixed.  Reports  from  southern  California  indicate  that

help-wanted  advertising  is running  below  last year's  levels,  while  a  Seattle-area  paper  reports  that

employment  advertising  rose  by more  than  10  percent  during  the  past  year.

Manufacturing

Reports  about  manufacturing  industries  suggest that  overall  activity  is flat, with  strength  in

some  sectors  offset  by weakness  in  others.  Growth  is  reported  in the  Puget  Sound  ship-building

industry,  and  sales  of heavy  equipment  have  risen  sharply  during the  past  year  in  most  parts  of the

West.  Some  respondents  report  that  delivery  times  for  their  supplies  have  fallen  significantly,

which  they  attribute  to a combination  of increased  production  and  weak  demand  in  other parts  of

the country.  Several  defense  contractors  with  operations  in  the West  have  announced  layoffs  or

plant  closures  in  recent  weeks.  Order  backlogs  for  commercial  aircraft  continue  to grow,  but  the

XII  - 3

region's  largest  manufacturers  are  cutting  their work  forces  to  cut  costs  or enhance  productivity.

Agriculture  and  Resource-Related  Industries

Conditions  in resource  industries  are  little  changed.  Farm  conditions  are  good overall,

although  low  water supplies  continue  to  cause  concern  in  many  parts of  the region.  The  salmon

run  in  Bristol  Bay  (Alaska)  was  twice  as  large  as  was  expected.  The  long-anticipated  deterioration

in logging  and  lumber  is  becoming  more  apparent  in  the Northwest,  as  reduced  home-building

activity  at  the national  level  reduces  demand  and  environmental  concerns  restrict  supply.

Construction  and Real  Estate

Information  about  overall  conditions  in western  construction  and  real  estate  markets

suggests  significant  deterioration  during  the  past year.  However,  such  aggregate  statistics  are

dominated  by cooling  in  coastal  California  from  the  boom  levels  seen  a  year  ago,  and  by changes

in  the geographical  composition  of real  estate  activity.  In  most  other parts  of the  West,  home

sales  are  robust  and  prices  are  rising,  in  some  cases  significantly.  Las  Vegas  and  Sacramento  are

particularly  vigorous  at  present,  with parts  of  Oregon,  eastern  Washington,  Idaho,  and  Utah  close

behind.  Arizona  markets  continue  to  be  troubled,  as  absorption  of current  inventories  proceeds

slowly.  Some  respondents  from  California,  Washington,  and  Arizona  complain  that  tighter  credit

is  restricting  construction  activity  in  those  markets.

Financial  Sector

Activity  at  financial  institutions  varies within  the  District.  For example,  some  lenders

report  slack  loan  demand,  others  report  slower growth  in  loan  demand,  and  still  others  report

accelerating  growth.  Most  bankers  report  that  delinquencies  are  down  or  low.  A few  small

businesses  complain  that  tighter  credit  conditions  are  hurting  their  ability  to  do  business.

However,  bankers  themselves  disagree  about  the  extent  of the  tightening  and  its  impact  on

lending  activity.

