FEDERAL  RESERVE  press  release 

For  Use  at  4:30  p.m. 

December  20,  1991 

The  Federal Reserve  Board  and the  Federal  Open Market 

Committee today released  the  attached  record  of  policy  actions 

taken by the  Federal Open  Market  Committee  at  its meeting  on 

November  5, 1991.  

The  record  for  each  meeting of  the  Committee  is  made 

available a few days  after  the next  regularly scheduled meeting 

and  subsequently is  published  in  the  Federal  Reserve Bulletin 

and the  Board's  Annual Report.  The  summary description of 

economic  and  financial  conditions  contained  in  each  record  is 

based  solely  on  the  information that  was  available to  the 

Committee at  the time  of  the meeting.

Attachment

RECORD  OF  POLICY  ACTIONS  OF  THE 
FEDERAL OPEN  MARKET  COMMITTEE 

Meeting  Held  on  November  5,  1991 

1.  Domestic  Policy Directive 

The  information  reviewed at  this meeting  suggested  that 

economic  activity had  turned  sluggish  after  registering  considerable 

gains  around midyear.  Consumer  spending  for  goods  had  been  lackluster 

recently, and businesses  remained  cautious  about  investing  in 

increased  production  capacity  or  inventories.  Industrial  production 

had  flattened  out,  nonresidential  construction had  moved sharply 

lower,  and  housing  construction had  lost  much  of  its  forward  momentum.  

Price  inflation  evidently  remained on  a  gradual  downtrend.  

After  falling  sharply in  the  first  half  of  the  year,  total 

nonfarm payroll  employment  rose  slightly  in  the  third  quarter  and  was 

unchanged  in  October.  Sizable  job  gains  in  the  services  sector, 

notably  in  health  and  business  services,  were offset  by  losses 

elsewhere.  Manufacturing  employment  declined  further;  durable  goods 

industries  bore  all  of  the  loss.  Job  cutbacks  in  construction  and 

retail  trade were  larger  in  October  than  they had  been  in  recent 

months.  Also,  the  small  September  increase  in  average  weekly hours 

worked  by  production  or  nonsupervisory workers was  reversed  in 

October.  The civilian  unemployment  rate  edged  back  up  to  6.8  percent.  

Industrial  production was  little  changed  over  August  and 

September  after  sizable  gains  in  earlier  months;  available  data 

indicated  that  production  would  remain flat  in  October.  Sluggishness 

had  been  evident  in  most  components  of the  index  since  July; 

abstracting  from the  output  of motor  vehicles  and  parts,  which had 

been  subject  to  wide  swings,  the  production  of  consumer  goods  and 

construction  supplies had  been  rising  much less  rapidly since  midyear

while the  output  of  business equipment  had not  expanded much  since 

reaching  its  low  last  March.  Total  industrial  capacity utilization 

edged  lower  in  September.  

Real  personal  consumption  expenditures  advanced  considerably 

further  in  the third  quarter,  partly  reflecting a sharp  rise  in 

purchases  of  motor vehicles.  However,  outlays  for  non-auto  goods 

weakened  in  August and  September,  and  partial  data  for  October 

suggested a slowing  in  sales  of  motor vehicles  in  that  month.  In 

addition, indicators  of  consumer  confidence, which  had  remained  at 

subdued  levels  since  the  end  of  the war  in  the  Persian  Gulf, had 

deteriorated  significantly  in  October.  Housing  starts  declined  in 

September  after  rising  substantially  on  balance  in  earlier  months  of 

this  year.  Sales  of  both new and  existing houses  had  dropped  recently 

despite  lower  mortgage  rates  and  favorable price  developments.  

Shipments  of  nondefense  capital  goods  rose  for a second 

straight month  in  September.  For  the third  quarter  as  a whole,  real 

business  spending for  computers,  aircraft,  and motor vehicles 

registered a sizable  gain  while  outlays  for  industrial  machinery fell 

further.  Recent  data  on  orders pointed  to  some  further  moderate 

expansion in  business  spending  for  equipment in  the  near term.  

Nonresidential  construction continued  to  contract  at  a rapid  rate  as 

outlays  for  all  major  types  of  structures,  but particularly  for 

commercial  buildings,  fell  sharply.  Available  information on  new 

contracts  and  commitments  suggested  that  the  rate of  decline for  non

office construction  activity might  slow in  coming  months.  

The pace  of  inventory liquidation  by  businesses  slowed in 

July  and August  from the  substantial  second-quarter  rate.  Ratios  of 

inventories  to  sales  edged  down at  manufacturing  and  non-auto  retail 

firms.  In  September,  stocks  held  by manufacturers  increased.

The nominal  U.S.  merchandise trade deficit widened 

appreciably in August.  For  the July-August  period,  the trade deficit 

was  significantly  larger  than  its  average rate  in the  second  quarter, 

reflecting a strong  expansion  in the  value of  imports and  a small 

reduction in  the value  of  exports.  The  increase  in  imports was 

entirely in  consumer  goods  and  automotive products:  other  major trade 

categories  registered  small  declines.  Part  of  the  drop  in  exports 

resulted  from a partial  reversal  of  a sharp  second-quarter  increase  in 

exports  of  aircraft and  parts.  Indicators  of  economic  activity in  the 

major foreign  industrial  countries  suggested  continued weak growth 

on  balance  in  the third  quarter.  The  rate  of  growth  in western 

Germany and  Japan was  considerably slower  in  the second  and  third 

quarters  than  earlier in  the year,  although  capacity utilization  rates 

remained  high in  both countries.  In  some  other major  countries, 

economic  activity was  slowly and  unevenly recovering from a period  of 

recession.  

Producer  prices  of finished  goods were  little  changed in 

September;  a firming  of  prices  of  finished  energy  goods  was  offset  by 

lower  food prices.  For  finished  goods  other  than food  and  energy, 

producer  prices  had  advanced thus  far  in  1991  at  a pace  appreciably 

below that  for  1990.  At  the consumer  level,  the  September  rise 

in prices  was  larger  than  the  increases  in the  prior  few months.  

Excluding  food and  energy  items,  consumer  prices  advanced  in  September 

at  the  same  elevated  rate  as  in the  previous three months;  however, 

for  1991  to  date,  nonfood, non-energy consumer  prices  had increased  at 

a slightly slower  pace  than  in  1990.  Total hourly  compensation for 

private  industry workers  rose  at  a somewhat  slower  rate  in  the  third 

quarter than  in  the first  half  of the year.  For  the  year  to  date,

wage  increases had  slowed  appreciably,  but  benefit  costs  had continued 

their  rapid  rise.  

At  its meeting  on  October  1, 1991,  the  Committee  adopted  a 

directive that  called  for  maintaining the existing  degree of  pressure 

on  reserve  positions and  for  giving  special weight to  potential 

developments  that  might require some  easing  during  the  intermeeting 

period.  Accordingly, the directive  indicated  that  slightly  greater 

reserve  restraint  might be acceptable  or  slightly  lesser  reserve 

restraint would be  acceptable  during  the intermeeting  period  depending 

on  progress  toward price  stability, trends  in  economic  activity, the 

behavior  of  the monetary aggregates,  and  developments  in  foreign 

exchange and  domestic  financial markets.  The  reserve conditions 

contemplated  at  this  meeting were  expected  to  be  consistent with a 

resumption  in  the  growth of  both  M2  and  M3;  these  aggregates were 

expected to  expand  at  annual  rates  of  around  3 percent  and  1-1/2 

percent  respectively over  the  three-month  period  from September 

through December.  

Over  most  of  the intermeeting  period,  open market  operations 

were  directed toward maintaining the  existing  degree of  pressure on 

reserve  positions.  At  the end  of  October,  however,  a slight easing  of 

reserve  conditions was  implemented;  this  action was  taken in  response 

to  signs  of  a weaker-than-expected  economic  recovery and  flagging 

consumer  and  business  confidence.  Just before the  intermeeting 

period,  adjustment  plus  seasonal  borrowing  had  averaged around  $340 

million.  During the  period,  several  technical decreases  were made to 

expected  levels  of  adjustment  plus  seasonal borrowing  to  reflect  the 

usual autumn  pattern  of  ebbing  seasonal  credit needs.  By the  end  of 

the  intermeeting  period, following the  slackening  of  seasonal  funding 

needs  and  the easing  of  reserve  conditions,  the  volume  of  borrowing

had  declined to  around  $125  million.  The  federal  funds  rate  remained 

near  5-1/4  percent  during most  of  the  intermeeting period but  slipped 

to  about  5 percent  after  the easing  of  reserve conditions.  

Over the  early weeks  of  the  intermeeting period,  other 

short-term interest  rates  declined somewhat  as market  participants 

interpreted  incoming data  as  indicating a sluggish  economy.  At  the 

same  time,  long-term rates  moved  considerably higher  in  response to 

the  release  of  disappointing statistics  on  consumer  prices  and 

concerns  stemming from discussions  of  possible measures  of  fiscal 

stimulus  that would increase  the federal  deficit and  borrowing needs.  

Subsequently,  short-term rates  fell  further  and  long-term rates 

retraced a portion of  their  rise as markets  reacted to  information 

suggesting  additional  economic  weakness  and  reduced  pressure  on  labor 

costs,  and  to  actual  as well  as  prospective  further  easing  of monetary 

policy.  The prime  rate remained  unchanged at  8 percent  over  the 

period,  but  primary-market yields  on mortgages  fell  to  their  lowest 

levels  since  1977.  Most  stock price  indexes were  slightly higher  on 

balance.  

The trade-weighted value  of the  dollar in  terms  of  the  other 

G-10  currencies  fluctuated in  a fairly narrow range  over  the 

intermeeting period but  declined  slightly  on  balance.  The  dollar  was 

generally higher  over  the  first half  of  the period  but  then weakened 

in response  to  growing  evidence  of  a sluggish U.S.  economy and 

consequent market  anticipation of  an  easing  of U.S.  monetary policy.  

The  dollar was  up  a little  against the mark,  in  large  part  reflecting 

concerns  that  the  Soviet  Union might  default  on  its  foreign debt,  much 

of  which is  owed to  or  guaranteed  by the  German  government.  The  yen

was  strong  on balance,  in  part because  of  continuing  indications  of 

growing  Japanese trade  surpluses.  

M2  expanded  slowly in  October  after  shrinking  on  balance 

over  the  previous three months.  The turnaround was  consistent  with 

the Committee's  expectations  for  the  fourth  quarter  and  reflected  in 

part  the  rapid growth  in  the liquid-deposit  components  of  this 

monetary aggregate.  As  the  Committee  also had  expected,  the pickup  in 

M2  showed  through to  M3,  which  posted  its  first monthly  increase  since 

May.  For the year  through  October,  expansion  of  both M2  and  M3  was 

estimated  to  have  been  at  the  lower  ends  of  the  Committee's  annual 

growth  ranges.  

The  staff projection prepared for  this  meeting pointed  to  a 

continuing  recovery in  economic  activity,  but  recent  reports  on 

business  and consumer  confidence  combined  with  other  information had 

led  to  an appreciable  markdown in  the projected  rate  of  expansion  for 

the  current  quarter  and to  a lesser markdown  for  the first  quarter  of 

1992.  Economic  growth was  projected  to  pick up by  the spring  of  next 

year, but  as  in  earlier  staff  forecasts,  it  was  expected  to  remain 

subdued  in  comparison with  past  cyclical  experience  and the  risks  of  a 

different  outcome  continued to  be seen  as predominantly  on the 

downside.  Increases  in  the  construction  of  single-family housing  and 

in  business  spending  for  equipment,  along with  a shift  from  inventory 

liquidation to  limited  accumulation, were expected  to  give  impetus  to 

the  expansion during  1992.  As  in  earlier  forecasts,  real  federal 

government  purchases were  projected  to  fall  somewhat  next year,  with 

defense  expenditures more  than  accounting for  the  decline, and fiscal 

adjustments  at  the  state  and  local levels  and  a continuing  decline  in 

commercial  construction were  expected to  be  persisting  sources 

of  restraint  on  aggregate  demand.  Significant  though diminishing

slack  in  labor  and  product  markets was  projected  to  induce  a further 

decline in  the  underlying rate  of  inflation  over  the next  several 

quarters.  

In  the Committee's discussion  of  current  and  prospective 

economic  developments,  the members  commented  on widespread  indications 

of  deteriorating business  and  consumer  confidence and  on  evidence that 

the  recovery in  business  activity had weakened  since early  summer.  

Nonetheless,  despite quite  negative anecdotal  reports  from many parts 

of  the  country,  the members  generally concluded that  the available 

economic  data  appeared  consistent  with  continuing, albeit  sluggish, 

expansion  in  overall  economic  activity.  Views  differed  to  some extent 

with  regard  to  the risks  to  a continuing  recovery.  A number  of 

members  expressed  concern about  the potential  for  some  further 

softening,  especially  in  light  of  the vulnerability of  the  expansion 

stemming  from the  troubled  condition  of  many financial  institutions 

and  the heavy debt  burdens  of  numerous  business  firms  and  individual 

households;  other  members  saw the  risks  as  more  evenly balanced  and 

perhaps  even tilted  marginally to  the upside.  While the performance 

of  the  economy was  likely to  remain  relatively lackluster  over  the 

nearer  term and the  risks  of  a downturn would  be  greatest  during  the 

next  quarter  or  two,  many  of  the  members  judged  a resumption  of  growth 

next  year  at  a pace  broadly in  line with  the staff  forecast  to  be  a 

reasonable expectation.  In  this  regard,  some  noted  that much  of  the 

stimulus  from the  easing in monetary  policy  over  the  course of  recent 

months had  not  yet  been  felt  in  the  economy.  Many of  the members 

emphasized  that  the prospects  for  appreciable  progress  toward price 

stability were  quite  favorable,  though  some  expressed  reservations 

about the  extent  of the progress  that  could  be  expected  over  the 

forecast  horizon.

Several members  referred  to  the continuing  adjustments  by 

financial  institutions  and many business  firms to  the  financial 

excesses  of  the past  decade  and  the greater-than-expected  downward 

pressure that  these adjustments  appeared  to  be  exerting  on  the 

expansion.  The  efforts  to  reduce debt  exposure and  rebuild  equity 

positions were necessitated  by the  effects  on  balance  sheets  of  the 

contraction  in the  value of  a variety  of  assets,  notably  in  the 

structually troubled  sectors  of  the economy  such  as  commercial  real 

estate,  and  the  failure of  other  assets  to  appreciate as  expected.  

The rebuilding  of  balance sheets  augured  well for the  future  financial 

health and  stability of  the  economy,  but  members  commented that an 

extended  period would  be  required before that  process  could be 

completed.  In  the  interim, the retrenchment  that was  involved  implied 

reduced  propensities  to  spend  and  constrained  growth  in  business 

activity.  One facet  of  the  adjustment process  was  greater  caution on 

the part  of  institutional  lenders.  Many  business borrowers  continued 

to  complain  about  the difficulty  of  obtaining  credit, while 

institutional  lenders  stressed the  lack  of  demand  from qualified 

borrowers.  

In  the course  of  the Committee's  review of business 

developments  in  different  regions,  members  continued to  report  uneven 

conditions  ranging  from modest  growth to  some further  decline  in 

regional  activity, but business  and  consumer  sentiment was  described 

as  almost  universally  negative.  It  was  unclear  to  what  extent  the 

drop  in  confidence reflected the  disappointing pace  of  the  economic 

recovery  so  far  or  was  a harbinger  of  further weakening in  economic 

activity.  Members  commented  that  surveys  of  consumer  confidence  had 

to  be viewed with  caution because they had  tended  in  the past  to  be 

coincident  rather  than  leading  indicators  of  economic  activity.  More

generally, bearish  sentiment, though  perhaps more muted,  had  not been 

an  unusual  occurrence  in the  early  stages  of past  business  recoveries.  

While the  potential sources  of  economic  stimulus  were 

subject  to  uncertainty and  recent  developments heightened  concerns 

that  the rate  of  economic  expansion would  remain  below a desirable 

pace  for  an  extended  period,  the members  generally anticipated  that 

improvement  in  key  areas  of  the economy,  notably  certain interest

sensitive sectors  and  business  inventories,  eventually would provide 

the  impetus  needed to  promote  at  least  moderate  growth  in  overall 

business  activity.  In the  critical  area of  consumer  demand,  members 

observed  that  consumer  caution reflected  not  only  concerns  about 

employment  prospects  and,  in  the  case  of  many households,  relatively 

heavy debt  burdens,  but  also  appeared  to  stem from  actual  or  perceived 

declines  in  the market value  of  residences.  Consumer  expenditures  on 

services were continuing to  grow, though  at  a relatively slow pace, 

but  spending  on  goods  had  edged  lower  over the  course  of  recent  months 

and many  retailers  reported that  they  expected  very weak sales  during 

the  approaching holiday season.  With  regard  to  the  longer-term 

outlook  for  consumer  expenditures,  some  pickup in  interest-sensitive 

spending  for  durable goods  was seen  as  a likely  prospect that  would 

have feedback  effects  on  the  demand  for  inventories  and  production.  

According to  available  data  and  reports  from around  the 

country,  inventories  generally appeared  to  be near  acceptable  levels, 

and members  continued  to anticipate  that  a further  swing  from 

inventory  liquidation to  modest  accumulation would  provide some 

stimulus to  the  economy over  the year  ahead.  The members  recognized 

that  a number  of developments  argued  against a typical  surge  in 

inventory  investment  during  the recovery,  including the now widespread 

practice  of  "just-in-time" inventory management.  Nonetheless,  despite

-10-

sluggish  demand, the pace  of  inventory  liquidation appeared  to  have 

slowed  in  the third  quarter,  and  there  were scattered  reports  of 

efforts  by  some manufacturers  to  increase their  inventories.  

The  construction  of new  housing also  appeared  likely to  play 

a positive, though possibly  limited,  role in  helping to  sustain the 

recovery.  Recent  indicators  of home  sales  and  housing  starts  were 

disappointing,  but  the  demand  for  new single-family homes would 

respond  over  time  to  the  declines  that had  occurred  in mortgage 

interest  rates.  Some  of  that  demand  might  be  postponed, however, 

until  borrowers were persuaded that  interest  rates had  bottomed  out.  

On  the  negative side,  commercial  construction activity would probably 

remain  depressed for  an  extended  period  as  excess  capacity  in  many 

parts  of  the  country gradually was  absorbed.  With  regard to  business 

spending  for  new equipment,  real  outlays  were indicated to  have  risen, 

especially for  computers,  and  this  sector  could  be  expected  to  provide 

ongoing  strength,  especially once  the expansion  was well under  way.  

In their  comments  concerning the  outlook for  inflation, 

members  observed  that  many  of  the  recent  statistical indicators  and 

especially the  anecdotal  evidence from around  the  country provided  the 

basis  for  considerable  optimism that  progress was  being  made toward 

price stability.  Developments  on  the  financial side,  including  low 

levels  of  business  and  consumer  borrowing and  an  extended period  of 

limited monetary  growth, reinforced  expectations  of  an  ongoing 

movement toward  stable  prices.  Members  also  noted  that  the 

information  on  wages was  consistent with a downtrend  in  labor  costs 

despite  still  substantial upward  pressures  on  employee benefit  costs.  

Some  members  cautioned, however,  that  an  appreciable  inflationary  risk 

remained in  the  economy.  While  inflationary expectations  might well 

be  waning, as  evidenced in  part  by the behavior  of  equity markets, the

level  of  long-term interest  rates  suggested  that  inflation  concerns 

had  not  disappeared.  

In  the  Committee's  discussion  of  an  appropriate  policy for 

the  intermeeting period ahead,  a majority of  the  members  indicated 

that  they  could  support a proposal to  ease  reserve  conditions  slightly 

at  this  time  and to  bias  the  directive toward  possible  further  easing 

later  in  the intermeeting  period.  The members  recognized  that 

monetary policy had been  eased  considerably  over  the  course  of  recent 

months,  including a decision  to  reduce  reserve pressures  at  the end  of 

October,  and  that  all  of  the stimulus  from the  earlier  actions  had not 

yet  been  felt  in  the  economy.  Nonetheless,  in  the view  of  many 

members  further modest  easing  was  desirable  at  this  point  to  provide 

some added  insurance against  the  downside  risks  in  the  economy.  Such 

a policy move would help  counter  the deterioration  in  business  and 

consumer  confidence, and  it  might  also  encourage  some  decline  in 

longer-term interest  rates.  Under  current  economic  and  financial 

conditions,  this  easing would  pose negligible risks  of  deflecting 

inflation  from  its  downward path.  Continuing weakness  in  the monetary 

aggregates  reinforced  the need for  easier  reserve conditions.  

There was  considerable  discussion  regarding the possible 

advantages  of  a somewhat  stronger  move at  this  juncture.  A one-half 

percentage point  reduction  of  the discount  rate was  pending at  several 

Federal  Reserve Banks,  but  the Board  of  Governors had  not yet  made  a 

decision with  regard  to  those proposals.  It  was noted  during this 

discussion  that  the Federal Reserve had  tended  to  implement  its  easing 

of  monetary  policy since  the  spring  of  1989  through a series  of  small 

policy  actions.  That approach  generally appeared  to  have been 

appropriate, but  a number  of  members  expressed  concern that  further 

small  moves would  lack  the  visibility that  was needed  in  present

-12-

circumstances.  If  reserve  pressures were to  be  reduced  only  modestly, 

this  action  should be  accompanied  in  the view of  many  members by Board 

approval  of  the pending  discount  rate  proposals  to  signal clearly  that 

monetary  policy was  moving against  the weakening  tendencies  in  the 

economy.  An  accompanying reduction in the  discount  rate  also was  seen 

as  providing further  encouragement to  a drop  in  the  prime  rate.  

Other members  expressed  reservations  about  the need  for 

substantial  easing,  and  two  indicated  that they  could not  support  any 

easing  through open market  operations  at  this  time.  Some  questioned 

whether  monetary policy actions  could have  a constructive influence on 

business and  consumer  confidence under  prevailing circumstances.  

Indeed,  appreciable  further  easing, or  any  easing, would  incur  too 

much  risk of  reviving  inflationary concerns  with adverse  consequences 

for  longer-term debt  markets.  While none  of these  members wanted to 

rule  out  the potential  need to  ease monetary policy  significantly 

further,  they preferred  to  pause  and wait  for  additional  evidence 

before  such  action was  taken,  especially  given  the  further  stimulus 

that  could be anticipated from previous  easing moves.  Concern  also 

was  expressed that the  Committee might  not  recognize  the need  to 

reverse  its  course and  tighten  policy on  a timely basis  should 

inflationary pressures  tend to  revive  later.  

Members  noted that  the  expansion  of  M2  appeared  to  have 

resumed  in  October,  though  at  a pace  that  kept the  aggregate  only at 

the bottom of  the Committee's  range for  the  year.  According to  an 

analysis  prepared by the  staff  for  this meeting, M2  was  likely to 

continue to  expand  slowly  over  the balance  of the  year,  despite the 

effects  of  earlier  policy  easing  actions,  and  for  the year  as  a whole 

M2  growth was  expected  to  average  close to the  lower  end  of  the 

Committee's range.  Some members  commented that  an  easing  in  reserve

-13-

conditions  would not  only improve  slightly the  odds  that M2  growth 

would end  the year  within the  Committee's range but  would also help to 

put  M2  on  a desirable  growth path  by early next  year.  While  the 

relationship between money  growth  and  economic  activity was  subject  to 

substantial  uncertainty  in  the  short  run,  they saw  a marked  advantage, 

in  terms  of  the  continuity of  monetary policy and  its  credibility,  for 

the  Committee to more  aggressively foster  growth  of  M2  within  the 

annual  range.  

With regard  to  possible adjustments to  the  degree  of  reserve 

pressure  during the  intermeeting  period, most  of  the members who 

favored  some  immediate easing  of  reserve  conditions also  supported a 

directive that  remained biased  toward  further  easing.  However,  some 

also  indicated that  if  the  Board were  to approve the  pending proposals 

to  reduce  the discount  rate,  the  intermeeting instruction  should  then 

be  viewed as  symmetrical.  

The members  discussed  at  some  length  the  appropriate timing 

of  the Committee's  easing  action.  Starting that  afternoon and 

continuing  over  the  next two  days,  the  Treasury would be  conducting 

its  quarterly auctions  of  notes and  bonds.  In  view of  this,  an 

immediate  policy move would come as  a surprise to  many participants  in 

financial markets,  although such  a move  shortly  after the  auctions  was 

widely anticipated.  An  immediate move, even  in the  easing  direction, 

could  have an  adverse  effect  on  some  Treasury market participants, 

with  potentially unsettling consequences  for  current and  future 

Treasury financings.  The members  agreed  that  in  general  it  was 

preferable to  avoid  policy moves  during  Treasury refundings,  but most 

felt  that the  contemplated  easing  move  should not be  delayed  for  any 

significant  period.  They  concluded  that,  on  balance, it  would  be  less 

misleading  to  take  action immediately rather  than to wait until the

-14-

Treasury auctions  were  completed  later  in  the week.  It  was  noted  in 

this  connection  that a prompt  easing  of  reserve  conditions,  and  any 

accompanying  Board  action  to  approve  a lower  discount  rate, would 

become  known  to  outside  observers  after  the  auction  of  the  shorter

term Treasury note  but  before  the  auctions  of  the  intermediate- and 

long-term Treasury issues.  

At  the conclusion  of  the Committee's  discussion,  all  but  two 

of  the  members  indicated that  they favored  or  could  accept  a directive 

that  called for  an  immediate  slight  easing  in the  degree  of pressure 

on  reserve  positions.  These  members  also  noted their  acceptance  of a 

directive  that included  a bias  toward  possible  easing  during the 

intermeeting  period.  Accordingly, the Committee  decided  that  slightly 

greater  reserve  restraint might  be  acceptable  during  the  intermeeting 

period  or  slightly  lesser  reserve  restraint  would  be  acceptable 

depending  on  progress  toward price  stability,  trends  in  economic 

activity, the behavior  of  the monetary aggregates,  and  developments  in 

foreign  exchange and  domestic  financial markets.  The  reserve 

conditions  contemplated at  this meeting  were  expected  to  be  consistent 

with  growth  of M2  and  M3  at  annual  rates  of  around  3 percent and  1 

percent  respectively over  the  3-month  period from September  through 

December.  

At the  conclusion  of the meeting the  following domestic 

policy directive was  issued  to the  Federal Reserve  Bank  of  New York: 

The  information reviewed at  this  meeting  portrays 

a sluggish economy  and  a marked  deterioration  in 
business  and  consumer  confidence.  Total  nonfarm pay
roll  employment was unchanged  in  October  after  rising 
slightly over  the third  quarter,  and  the  civilian 
unemployment  rate  edged  back up  to  6.8  percent.  
Industrial production  has  been  flat  in  recent months.  
Consumer spending  increased  considerably through  the 
summer,  in  part because  of  a sizable  rise  in  expendi
tures  on  motor  vehicles:  sales  of  motor  vehicles  slowed 
in October, however.  Real outlays  for business 
equipment--especially for  computers--have  been  rising,

-15-

but  nonresidential  construction has  continued to 
decline.  Housing  starts  and  home  sales  have weakened 
recently.  The nominal U.S.  merchandise  trade  deficit 
in  July-August was  significantly  above  its  average  rate 
in  the  second  quarter.  Wage  and price  increases have 
continued  to  trend  downward.  

Short-term interest  rates  have  declined  somewhat 

further  since  the  Committee meeting  on  October  1, while 
bond yields  are  about unchanged  to  slightly higher  on 
balance.  The  trade-weighted  value  of  the  dollar  in 
terms  of  the  other  G-10  currencies  declined  on  balance 
over  the  intermeeting  period.  

Expansion  in  M2  and M3  resumed  in  October,  albeit 

at  a slow pace.  For  the  year  through  October,  expan
sion  of  both M2  and M3  is  estimated to  have  been at  the 
lower  ends  of  the  Committee's  ranges.  

The  Federal Open  Market  Committee  seeks  monetary 

and  financial  conditions that  will foster  price  sta
bility and  promote  sustainable growth  in  output.  In 
furtherance  of  these objectives,  the Committee  at  its 
meeting  in  July  reaffirmed the  ranges  it  had  estab
lished  in  February  for  growth  of  M2  and  M3  of  2-1/2  to 
6-1/2  percent  and  1 to  5 percent,  respectively, 
measured from the  fourth quarter  of  1990  to  the fourth 
quarter  of  1991.  The monitoring  range  for  growth  of 
total  domestic  nonfinancial  debt  also was  maintained at 
4-1/2  to  8-1/2  percent  for  the  year.  For  1992,  on  a 
tentative  basis,  the Committee agreed  in  July to  use 
the  same  ranges  as  in  1991  for  growth  in  each  of the 
monetary aggregates  and  debt,  measured  from the  fourth 
quarter  of  1991  to  the  fourth  quarter  of  1992.  With 
regard  to  M3,  the  Committee anticipated  that the 
ongoing  restructuring  of  thrift depository institutions 
would  continue to  depress  the  growth  of  this  aggregate 
relative  to  spending and  total  credit.  The  behavior  of 
the  monetary aggregates will  continue to  be  evaluated 
in  the  light  of progress  toward price  level  stability, 
movements  in  their  velocities, and  developments  in  the 
economy and  financial markets.  

In  the  implementation  of  policy  for  the  immediate 

future, the  Committee seeks  to  decrease  somewhat  the 
existing  degree  of  pressure on  reserve  positions.  
Depending upon progress  toward  price  stability, trends 
in  economic  activity, the  behavior  of the monetary 
aggregates, and  developments  in  foreign  exchange and 
domestic  financial markets,  slightly greater  reserve 
restraint  might or  slightly lesser  reserve  restraint 
would  be  acceptable  in  the  intermeeting  period.  The 
contemplated  reserve conditions  are  expected  to  be

-16-

consistent with  growth  of M2  and M3  over  the  period 
from September  through December  at  annual  rates  of 
about  3 and  1 percent,  respectively.  

Votes  for  this  action:  Messrs.  Greenspan, 

Corrigan, Black,  Forrestal, Keehn,  LaWare, 
Mullins,  and  Parry.  

Votes  against  this  action:  Messrs.  Angell 

and  Kelley.  

Mr.  Angell dissented  because he was  concerned  about  the 

impact  of  further  easing  on inflation  expectations  and  consequently  on 

long-term interest  rates.  In  his  view, the  prospect  for  a robust  and 

long-lasting recovery  is  dependent  on  the  completion of  adjustments  in 

business  pricing  practices,  household  savings, and  balance  sheets more 

generally.  Monetary policy actions  that  are  perceived  as  a shift  from 

a focus  on  price-level stability  to  one  on  short-term  economic  growth 

may well  abort the  needed  adjustments.  In his  view, credible  price

level  targeting would  provide  assurance,  particularly  given  the 

somewhat  precarious  short-term business  outlook,  that monetary policy 

would  act  to  counter  either  deflation  or  inflation.  The  consequence 

would  be to  foster  a considerable downward  thrust  in  long-term 

interest  rates  and  to  set  the  stage  for  sustained  expansion.  

Mr.  Kelley dissented  because  he  believed  that  a steady policy 

course was  appropriate, at  least  for  now, in  the  context  of  the 

ongoing  stimulus  that  could  be anticipated  from the  System's  earlier 

easing  actions.  In  his  view,  the  outlook  for  continuing  expansion in 

economic  activity  remained  favorable,  and he  saw  considerable  risks  in 

further  easing  at  this  time.  In  particular,  he  was  concerned  that  a 

policy  easing move would  stimulate  inflation  expectations with  adverse 

implications  for  long-term interest  rates  and the  performance  of

-17-

interest-sensitive sectors  of  the  economy.  Further,  he did  not 

believe  that many of the  factors  that are  importantly inhibiting 

economic  expansion could  be  constructively  addressed by  a more 

accommodative position.  He  also  feared that the  dollar  would  come 

under downward  pressure  in  foreign exchange markets  with  only slight 

benefits  for  exports  but  added inflation pressures  in the  domestic 

economy.  

2. Authorization for Domestic  Open Market Operations 

The  Committee approved a temporary increase  of  $2 billion, to 

a level  of  $10  billion,  in the  limit  on  changes  between  Committee 

meetings  in  System Account  holdings  of  U.S.  government  and  federal 

agency  securities.  The increase  amended  paragraph  1(a)  of  the 

Authorization  for Domestic  Open  Market Operations  and  was  effective 

for  the  intermeeting period  ending with the close  of  business  on 

December  17,  1991.  

Votes  for  this  action:  Messrs.  Greenspan, 

Corrigan, Angell,  Black, Forrestal, Keehn, Kelley, 
LaWare,  Mullins,  and  Parry.  

Votes  against this  action:  None.  

The Manager  for  Domestic  Operations advised the Committee  that 

the  current  leeway  of  $8 billion  for  changes  in  System Account  holdings 

might  not  be  sufficient  to  accommodate the  potentially  large  need to  add 

reserves  over  the  intermeeting period  ahead  to meet an  anticipated 

seasonal  bulge  in  currency in  circulation and  required  reserves.

