SUMMARY OF COMMENTARY ON CURRENT ECONOMIC  CONDITIONS

BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICTS

October  1991

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY  . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . .

i

First District  - Boston. . . . .

Second District  - New York  . . .

Third District  - Philadelphia..

Fourth District  - Cleveland.  . .

Fifth District  - Richmond.  . . .

Sixth District  - Atlanta  . . . .

Seventh  District  - Chicago  . . .

Eighth District  - St.  Louis.  . .

Ninth District  - Minneapolis  . .

Tenth District  - Kansas  City  . .

Eleventh District  - Dallas  . . .

. . . . .

I-1

. . . . .

II-1

. . . . .

III-1

. . . . .

IV-1

. .. . .

VI-1

. . .

. . .

.

.

VII-1

VIII-1

. . . . .

IX-1

. . . . .

X-l

. . . . .

XI-1

Twelfth District  - San Francisco

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

XII-1

i

SUMMARY*

The  economic  recovery continues  to  be uneven across  the  country.  Although

some  Districts apparently are not sharing  in recovery,  others,  such  as  Chicago

and Cleveland, continue  to  revive largely because  of the upswing  in

manufacturing.  Industrial production has  provided considerable  impetus  to

recovery, reflecting in part  export demand and a reduced pace  of  inventory

liquidation.

As  yet,  there  is  little  sign of a sizable  rebound in  consumer spending

that will contribute  to  a strengthening business  recovery.  Retail  sales  in

recent months  show only  scattered improvement, and most  retailers  are  cautious

about sales  prospects.  Retail  inventories  are  indicated to be  close  to

desired levels.

Residential  investment seems  to  have  lost  some  upward momentum in recent

months, with fewer  than half of the  Districts  reporting  further  increases  in

housing sales  and housing starts.

Hot,  dry weather  in much of the  country has hampered  farm output,

especially corn.  Bumper crops  of rice  in  some  parts  of  the  St.  Louis District

and record  crops  of cotton  are  anticipated in  St.  Louis  and  Dallas.  Farm

commodity prices  and  livestock prices  have  declined recently  (San Francisco,

Minneapolis,  Kansas City,  and Dallas).

*  Prepared at  the  Federal Reserve  Bank of  Cleveland and based on information
obtained before  September  9, 1991.  This  document summarizes  comments received
from business and other  contacts  outside  the  Federal Reserve  and  is  not a
commentary on  the views  of  Federal Reserve  officials.

Loan activity  remains soft  in most Districts.  Chicago,  Cleveland,

Philadelphia, and  St.  Louis report a continued reduction in business loans,

ii

while mortgage  loans  in general  remained  flat.

Manufacturing

The  strongest sector of the  economy  is  manufacturing.  Most Districts note

a continuing upturn in  activity  in recent months, but manufacturing apparently

is still  languishing in a few Districts  (especially Boston and  San Francisco).

Export  growth has been a source of  strength in manufacturing, and more

recently,  a reduced pace of  inventory  liquidation in  some  industries

reportedly is adding to  the  recovery.  Developments  are  not uniform through

all  Districts,  however.  Some  inventory  liquidation apparently continues  in

Chicago, Philadelphia, and Richmond, while Boston reports satisfactory

inventory  levels  and Cleveland comments  that  the correction phase in

inventories  is nearing an end.

Both Chicago  and Cleveland note  strengthening among consumer  durable

producers,  led by rising automotive  and appliance  output, which has  supported

a gradual  rise  in steel production.  Further  increases  in auto  output are

expected for next  quarter  (Cleveland).  Capital  goods industries  are beginning

to  show signs  of recovery.  Chicago points out  that  electronics, heavy

machinery, and food processing machinery have all  shown some  recent turnaround

in  orders,  and Cleveland cites  an uneven revival  in heavy-duty trucks and

industrial  equipment.  Dallas  also reports  that  sales have  increased in  the

electronics and electrical machinery industries because  of some  rebuilding of

depleted inventories.

iii

Retarding a comeback in production in some Districts  is  the  cutback in

defense contracts,  resulting in  declining orders  in  Philadelphia and Atlanta

and in  San Francisco's  aerospace  industry.

Manufacturers  in most Districts appear  to be more  optimistic  about

near-term prospects,  and those  in  Philadelphia and Richmond plan to  increase

their capital  spending over the  next six months.

Consumption

There  is  still  little  indication of a stepped-up pace  in consumer  spending

for  durable  and nondurable  goods.  Retail  sales between July and early

September were  relatively flat  or  slightly higher than  their  levels  earlier in

the  summer.  Sales  of back-to-school merchandise were described as  "weak,"

"slower-than-expected,"  or  "disappointing" (Boston, New York, Philadelphia,

Atlanta, and Dallas).  New car  sales  in August were off in  some  Districts

(Chicago, Cleveland, Atlanta),  although a limited inventory of  1991 model  cars

is  partly blamed for the  reduced sales  pace.  Cleveland, however,  expects  a

somewhat higher  level  of  new car  sales  this quarter  than last.  In general,

retail  inventories  appear to be  close  to  desired levels.

Retailers  generally are  cautious  about near-term sales  prospects, and only

a few of  the Districts  report optimism about  the  outlook.

Real  Estate  and Construction

District  reports  suggest that  recovery in housing sales  and  starts has

slowed recently, although a few Districts  comment that  sales or  starts were

still  rising  in July and August.  Both  San Francisco and Chicago  report that

home  sales  softened  in recent months  after a spring rebound.  Still, housing

apparently has become more  affordable because of  recent easing in mortgage

rates  and because  of lower home  prices  in some  areas.

Commercial construction appears  to  be at  a virtual standstill  in many

Districts.  High vacancy rates  for  commercial buildings and declines  in  rental

prices have been blamed  (New York, Chicago,  Minneapolis, Dallas, and San

Francisco),  but tight  credit standards  for acquisition and development  loans

have  also  apparently restricted commercial construction  (New York, Chicago,

Atlanta).

Agriculture

Dry weather is  expected to  reduce  the corn yield in  Kansas  City, and early

reports on  this  crop in the  St.  Louis District  are mixed.  Richmond expects

that  corn and  soybean yields will  be  normal  to  above normal  in  some areas,

because of recent  timely rain.  A bumper rice  crop  is  expected in Arkansas,

but  yields  in Mississippi may not be as  good  (St. Louis).  A record harvest

for  cotton  is  expected  (St.  Louis  and Dallas).  Crop  yields  in Minneapolis are

predicted to be  "generally good."

Adverse  weather has  also affected pasture conditions  in  Kansas  City, but

the  livestock industry is  nevertheless  "mostly good" in St.  Louis.  Fruit

growers  in California report large harvests,  but dry August weather reduced

the harvest of  apples  and grapes  in Washington  (San Francisco).

Several Districts  report declines  in  farm commodity prices.  Potato, hay,

and beef prices  are  off substantially  from a year  ago in San Francisco,  and

the Minnesota  index of farm products  fell  sharply again for  a variety of crops

and  livestock.

Banking

Nearly all  of the  Districts  state  that  loan activity is  relatively flat,

or  has eased further  in recent months.  The  New York District's  comment that

banks  are willing to  expand loans but  are  facing reduced demand, seems  to

capture a theme  common to  several Districts.  Demand for business  loans

continues  to be weak, and has  softened further in  some  Districts

(Philadelphia, Cleveland, Chicago,  St.  Louis).  In  some  Districts,  consumer

installment loans  either fell  or held steady, except in Atlanta, where some

pickup occurred.  Most Districts report  either  little  demand for new mortgage

loans or  slight  declines  from previous  months,  and even some  easing in

mortgage  refinancing (Cleveland).  Some Districts  find that credit  standards

have not changed in  recent  months  (New York and Chicago),  but  Richmond notes  a

tightening  for  commercial loans  and Atlanta cites  a tightening for both auto

dealer and commercial  development  loans.  In several  Districts, mortgage  rates

have eased recently.

I-1

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

Economic activity  in the First District  has not  improved

noticeably.  Most  retailers report  fairly flat  sales  in  July and August

compared to  a year ago,  but  some  experienced greater weakness or  a

deteriorating trend during this period.  Although a majority of  First

District manufacturers  surveyed express disappointment that  sales  and

orders  continue below year-ago  levels,  one-third see a glimmer of  hope

in  incoming business.  Nevertheless, most  contacts expect no  significant

upturn  in  economic  activity until the  first or  second quarter of  1992.

Retail

The majority of  retail contacts report  small  increases or

decreases  for July and August compared  to a year ago.  However, two

respondents  experienced a deterioration of  results  for August compared

to July,  another saw double-digit declines  throughout the  summer months,

and  still  another went out  of  business.  Back-to-school  and cold-weather

clothing  sales  have been weak.

Several contacts  indicate a concern about  future earnings, given

their  expectations that  continuing job  losses will  deter consumer

spending.  At best, they expect modest  increases  in  sales  in  1992.

Contacts  generally believe  that their own  success  in  paring down

inventories will  reduce the pressure to  lower  selling prices.  However,

they anticipate  heightened competition  as  a result of  discounting by

weaker competitors  and new market  entrants.  They note that  it  will be

hard to  reduce expenses  further because they  have already cut  staffing

from last year's  levels, and because  capital budgets  are  already

I-2

minimal.  Other expenses--such as taxes,  workers' compensation,

insurance,  and rents--are beyond their control.

Auto Sales

Automobile sales  improved in August over previous months, but New

England dealers  attribute much of  the  improvement to  seasonal factors.

Sales  are still  below levels of  a year  ago.  Although  contacted dealers

see  a slight pickup in  consumer confidence, stricter  credit standards at

banks have  reportedly made financing car purchases more difficult.

Lower  interest rates have not  sparked a substantial rise  in  consumer

spending, according to the  dealers.

Manufacturing

Reports  from First District manufacturers  are less  uniformly

gloomy than  in the previous  survey.  At  one-third of the  respondents,

shipments and orders are  flat  or up, by as  much as  10 to  15  percent,

from year-ago  levels.  Areas of  relative strength  include electronics,

gas turbines, and  consumer appliances.  For the majority, however,  sales

and orders  continue below late  summer  1990  levels, with declines ranging

to  20 percent.  One-third of the  contacts  indicate that  new business was

practically nonexistent  in  August, that existing orders were cancelled

or  delayed, and that backlogs  are  dwindling.  By  contrast, another third

saw a glimmer of  hope in  recent orders, possibly attributable to

transitory causes, such the weather or customer  inventory adjustments.

Nevertheless, most  contacts  express disappointment that  business does

not  match their  expectations or  the  improvement reported by the media.

Foreign  sales  are  also reported mixed and  somewhat  disappointing.

Inventory levels  are generally described as  satisfactory.

At most manufacturers  contacted, the workforce  is below year-ago

levels,  by 2 to  15  percent.  Some  firms have  also reduced hours  worked.

I-3

One-third plan further cuts  in  employment, generally through attrition.

Over half of  the respondents  have reduced 1991  capital  spending

below 1990  levels  and below plan.  Several report  that  spending is  now

less  than depreciation.  Only two  firms  are expanding capacity for

specific products.

Input prices  are generally described as  stable, rather  than

declining as they were previously.  All  of the manufacturers surveyed

report that their  own sales  prices are  flat  or falling.  Several firms

complain of  a squeeze on their profit margins.

Although a few contacts report tentative upticks, most  see no

clear  indication that  the recession has ended.  Indeed, a majority expect

the  "tough sledding" to  continue through the  first or  second quarter of

1992.  Because they cannot  see  a potential  source  of  significant growth,

they expect the  recovery to be very slow.

Residential  Real Estate

New England realtors  contacted  in early September blame

questionable job  security  for  sluggish residential  real estate sales.

Only in  eastern Massachusetts have realtors  seen an  increase  in  sales

volume  relative to  last year.  Housing markets in New Hampshire and

Vermont  remain  in the doldrums,  according to respondents, because the

Boston and New York economies,  critical  for both vacation home  sales  and

tourism, have not  yet  recovered.

The consensus  among real  estate  contacts  is  that competition  among

banks  for residential mortgages has  made rates very attractive.  By

contrast,  sharp declines  in residential rents  have made credit for

investments  in  condominiums  and other multifamily residential property

difficult to  obtain.

II-1

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Reports  on  District  developments  remained mixed in recent  weeks.

Relatively  little  new construction together  with  improved  leasing

activity  resulted  in  a decline  in  office vacancy  rates,  and several  areas

reported  a pickup in  home  sales,  particularly to  first  time  homebuyers.

The August  survey of  Buffalo purchasing managers  showed more firms

reporting higher  output and a substantial  drop in  those reporting  lower

output.  District  department  store  sales  results  for July  and August were

mixed, however.  Moreover,  unemployment  rates  in New York  and New Jersey

rose  in August  after declining in  July.  Senior loan officers  at  small

and midsized banks  reported  reduced loan  demand.

Consumer  Spending

Sales  results  varied among District  department  stores  during  July

and August though  all  respondents  reported  an  improvement  from June.

Over-the-year  changes  in  July  ranged  from -5.0  percent to  +9.6  percent

with  several  stores  posting better-than-targeted  sales.  Over-the-year

changes  in August  ranged  from  -3.0 percent  to  6.0  percent  as most

contacts  met  their modest  sales plans.  The  strongest  selling items  in

July and August were  women's  apparel  and  accessories  followed by men's

and children's wear.  However, most  contacts  reported that back-to-school

sales  were  slower than  anticipated.  Some pickup  in home  furnishings

occurred but  respondents  noted continued consumer  reluctance to

purchasing big ticket  items.

Due to tight monitoring and,  in  some  cases,  to better-than-expected

sales,  inventories  are  generally  at  quite  satisfactory  levels  though  one

chain reported  them above plan.  Contacts  remain  cautious  about  the

outlook  for  consumer  spending,  especially those who experienced

II-2

disappointing back-to-school results.

Residential Construction  and Real Estate

Several  areas  in  the District  report a pickup in  home  sales  in

recent weeks,  particularly  to  first-time homebuyers who have watched

prices  decline  over the  past two  or  three  years  and are now  finding  homes

at  affordable  levels.  Lower mortgage  rates have  also  contributed to the

recent  improvement.  In  addition, brokers  in Manhattan  report  increased

investment  demand for  condominium apartments  from foreigners whose

currency  has  appreciated relative  to  the dollar.  Much of  the recent

buying has been in  the  existing home market,  however, and thus  far,

homebuilders have  not  experienced much  impetus  for new construction.  As

a result,  they  anticipate that  sales  of  new homes  this  year  will  be

little  changed from last  year's  low levels.  A shortage  of  credit  for

acquisition  and construction  loans  continues  in much of  the  District.

Relatively little  new  construction of  office buildings and  a

continuing improvement  in  office leasing  activity have  caused vacancy

rates  to  decline  in  several parts  of  the District. 

The declines  have

been  modest,  however, and  rates  remain high in  many  areas.  Leasing  in

midtown Manhattan during  July  was  the  strongest  this  year  and the primary

vacancy rate  edged down  for  the  second  consecutive month.  In  downtown

Manhattan the  July decline  in  the primary  vacancy  rate  was the  third in

the  last  four  months.  The planned merger  between Chemical  Bank  and

Manufacturers  Hanover is  expected  to result  in  a sizable  addition  of

excess  space  in both  downtown  and midtown  Manhattan.

Other Business  Activity

Continuing the volatile pattern  of  the  last  several  months,

unemployment  rates  in New York  and New  Jersey rose  0.4 percentage point

in  August after  declines  of  0.6  and  0.3  percentage  point,  respectively,

II-3

in  July.  New York's unemployment  rate  in August  was  7.5  percent  and New

Jersey's was  6.7  percent.  Both  states  have been  reporting nonfarm

employment at  below year-earlier levels  for a number  of months, a pattern

which  continued in  July.  With the impact  of  recently  announced mergers

and cutbacks yet  to be  felt,  few observers  anticipate a near-term

improvement  in the  District's employment  picture.

The  August  survey of Buffalo purchasing managers  showed  an  increase

in  firms  with  greater  output  and  a substantial drop--from  41  percent  in

July to  18  percent  in August--in  those  with smaller  output.  The

percentage  with the  same  or increased new orders  also  rose  slightly.  The

July  survey  of purchasing managers  in Rochester showed  a sizable  rise  in

the percentage  anticipating improved business  conditions over  the  next

three months.

Financial  Developments

Most  senior loan  officers  surveyed  at  small  and midsized banks  in

the  Second District  reported that  while  their willingness  to  extend loans

remains  unchanged  from three months  ago,  they  are  facing reduced  loan

demand.  In particular, consumer  demand  for  installment  credit  and

automobile loans  has  slowed,  while  demand for home  equity  loans  has  not

shown a trend in  either direction.  The majority  of  senior  officers  also

indicated lower delinquency rates  on  all  consumer  loans  compared with

three months  earlier.

Most  loan  officers  reported that  their interest  rates have  remained

stable  and their  credit  standards  unchanged over the  last  three months.

However,  a few  respondents  are  conducting more  rigorous  background  and

employment verifications  of potential borrowers.  The credit  quality  of

borrowers  at  the majority  of  surveyed banks  has  not  changed in  recent

months.

III-1

THIRD  DISTRICT  - PHILADELPHIA

Economic  conditions  in  the  Third  District  appeared  mixed  in  early  September.

Manufacturers  reported  continuing  improvement,  with  increases  in  orders  and  shipments.

Retailers  indicated  that  sales  have  been  running  only  even  with  a  year  ago.  Bankers  said

commercial  lending  continued  to  slip  while  consumer  and  real  estate  loan  volume  was  just

steady.

In their  forecasts,  most Third  District business  contacts  generally  see  current  trends  in

their  industries  continuing.  Manufacturers  predict  further  improvement  over  the  next  two

quarters.  Retailers  expect  sales to  run  at  just  a  steady  pace  well  into  the  fall.  Bankers  expect

total  loan  volume to  remain  nearly  flat.  While  some  believe  the decline  in commercial  lending

may  bottom  out soon,  they  say  convincing  evidence  of  a  turnaround  is  not  yet  in  sight.

MANUFACTURING

On balance, Third District manufacturers  contacted  in late  August and  early September

reported  continuing  improvement  in business  conditions.  Half  said orders  and  shipments  had

been  steady  in  recent  weeks  while  nearly  a  third  said  orders  and  shipments  have  been

increasing.  However,  some  weakness  was  reported  by  firms  producing  transportation

equipment  and  defense  goods; these companies  indicated that orders were  slipping toward very

low  levels.  Overall,  while  almost  half  of  the  firms  polled  reported  steady  inventories,  more

than  a  third  indicated  that  stocks  were  declining.  Employment  appeared  to  be  stable,  on

balance,  with more  than  three-fourths  of local  firms maintaining  steady  payrolls and  working

hours.

Looking  ahead,  Third  District  manufacturers  are  generally  optimistic.  Most  of  those

contacted  for  this  report  expect  orders  and  shipments  to  rise  over  the  next  two  quarters,  and

many  anticipate  an  increase  in  order  backlogs.  On  balance,  area  manufacturers  plan  to hold

III-2

inventories  at current levels over  the period.  While  most  firms are planning to maintain  steady

employment  through  the  winter,  approximately  one-fourth  intend  to  hire  more  workers.

Overall, capital  spending  plans at area  plants call  for only a slight  increase in  outlays over  the

next  six  months.

RETAIL

Most Third  District retailers surveyed  in early September reported  that sales for August

were  approximately  even  with  August  a  year  ago,  in  current  dollars.  Most  also  said  that  the

year-over-year  comparison  for  early  September  appeared  to  be  flat  as  well.  Similar  reports

were  given by virtually all  types of stores and for all lines of  merchandise.  Merchants  also said

that back-to-school  shopping was not strong.  Several  retail executives  said they believe recently

enacted  income and  sales  tax  increases  in  Pennsylvania  and  New  Jersey  were  a  restraining

influence  on  consumer  spending.

Third District  retailers  generally  share  a  very cautious  outlook.  Most  do  not look  for

significant  growth  in  sales  this  fall.  Some  noted  that  competitive  pressures  appear  to  be

building  as  expectations  for  an  early  recovery  fade;  they  point  to  deep  markdowns  and

extended  sales  at  some  stores.  In  general,  merchants  do  not  expect  solid  improvement  until

Christmas  shopping  begins,  and  they  hope  to  better  the  weak  performance  of  last  year.

Nonetheless,  some  store  officials  indicated  that  they  have  not  ordered  aggressively  for  the

holiday  sales  period.

FINANCE

Total  loan  volume  outstanding  at  major  Third  District banks  continued  to  edge  down

in  late  August  and  early  September,  according  to  local  bankers.  The  decline  is  concentrated

in  commercial  and  industrial  lending.  Bankers  generally  indicated  that  there  is  little  loan

demand  from  potential  business  borrowers  that  meet  their  credit  standards.  Most  of  the

bankers  interviewed  for  this  report  indicated  that  consumer  loan  demand  was  soft  although

outstandings  continued  to  be  nearly  stable.  Real  estate  loan  volume  was  also  described  as

steady.  Although  reports varied  among banks, it appeared  that, overall,  real estate loan  volume

was  being  held  up  by  new  lending  for  light  industrial  buildings  and  extensions  of  loans  to

III-3

existing  commercial  borrowers  who  have  been  unable  to  obtain  permanent  financing;  most

bankers  said  they  were  seeing  little  demand  for  new  residential  mortgages  and  they  were

making  few  new  loans  for  office  or  commercial  space.  Home  equity  loan  volume  has  been

steady  at  most  large  banks  in  the  district.

Most  of the  bankers  interviewed  in early  September  expect  loan  volume outstanding  to

remain  steady  in the short-term.  Some indicated  that seasonal  slowness  may  be obscuring  signs

of  a  pickup  in  commercial  lending;  nevertheless,  most  believe  that  a  rebound  in  financing

activity,  for  both  businesses  and  consumers,  will  not  occur  until  potential  borrowers  become

confident  that economic  conditions  will  improve  soon.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT  - CLEVELAND

Summary.  Recovery underway in both  the nation and the  District appears  to

be  at  a slower pace  than in  even the  mildest of  the postwar  recoveries,

according to most District  respondents.  Real consumer  spending  is  still

sluggish, with  second-half growth predicted between 1% and  3% this half.

Continued recovery  in Fourth District industrial  production, which began

last  spring,  is  expected  to  be supported by a slowing  of inventory  liquidation

and by revival  in most  capital goods  industries.  The  real  estate market has

weakened.  Lenders report continued softness  in bank loans,  and recent

declines  for  mortgage refinancing.

The  Economy.  Respondents uniformly agree  that  recoveries  in both the

nation and the  District  are  off to  a slow start,  and most also expect  that

output growth, at  least for  the  first  year of  the upturn, will  fall  short of

the mildest of  the past business  recoveries.  Most predict that  real GNP will

expand this  quarter  in  a 2% to  3% range, but a few still  expect a

fourth-quarter real GNP  growth rate  of about  3% to 4%.

In Ohio, manufacturing  output, which often lags  the national  recovery,

rebounded last  quarter,  and respondents  anticipate  continued growth based on

the  strength of exports  coupled with  an ending  to  inventory liquidation.

Consumption.  Retail  sales  in  the  late  summer  months have been

relatively  flat,  and early September  sales were  up only  a few percentage

IV-2

points  from a year ago,  according to  a retailer.  Still,  another  retailer

managed  to  liquidate the bulk of  its  excess  stocks.  Retailers are  reported to

be very cautious  in planning  inventories  for the  Christmas season in order to

avoid large  inventory overruns  and  subsequent discounting.

Economists  associated with consumer  goods  are uncertain about  the

short-term outlook for real  consumer  spending.  Some  expect about  a 3% growth

rate  this half, but several others  anticipate  only 1% to 2% growth.

Auto industry  sources estimate  that  domestic new car sales  will  average

about  a 6.5-million-unit-annual rate  this  quarter and next, up a few percent

from  last  quarter.  New car dealers believe that  a shortage  of  many 1991

models  may account for  some  of  the  sales  declines  in August.  They uniformly

believe  that  further price  incentives will not be necessary to  clear  the

remaining car  inventory.

Manufacturing.  The  District's recovery  in manufacturing output, which

began last  spring, has  continued into  the  summer, led especially by higher

auto output.  Several producers  and suppliers  expect  that  auto output will

continue  to  edge  to upward.  Domestic car  production this  quarter  is  estimated

at  about  a 5.8-million-unit annual  rate;  slightly more  than a 6 million-unit

rate  is  expected next  quarter.  Some  concern was  expressed that  the  slowly

rising  trend in production might be  interrupted by consumer resistance  to

higher prices  for  1992 models, which would  leave  the  industry with

larger-than-desired inventories.

Steel producers  in  the  District have been operating at  about  70%  of

capacity  for most  of the  year, but  they expect  a gradual  strengthening over

IV-3

the balance  of the year.  Steel  inventory  liquidation appears  to have  run its

course sooner  than expected because of a recent spurt  in orders  from the  auto

and appliance  industries,  according to  steel  sources.  Recent steel price

increases  appear  to be  sticking, an  indication of stronger demand, and some

workers who were  laid off are  currently being recalled.

The machinery  and industrial  equipment  industries  are  probably close to  a

trough,  and prospects for  a turnaround have  improved since operating rates in

manufacturing have begun climbing, according to  a capital  goods producer.  A

producer  of  industrial  controls equipment expects  that the contraction in

industrial equipment will  end this  quarter.  Domestic  shipments  of commercial

aircraft are expected  to  rebound this  quarter  from last, and  the  gradual

recovery in heavy-duty truck orders  and production should gain  strength by

year-end in response  to  rising operating rates  in manufacturing.  Another

capital goods producer reported a sizable pickup  in sales  and profits  for  its

third quarter, attributable  to both domestic  and international  sales.

Finally, a supplier  to  capital equipment producers  reports  that  its  orders

from general machinery producers  and the  steel  industry are  showing  signs  of

recovery, and that  its  delivery schedules have  begun to  lengthen.

The massive  reduction of business  inventories  during the  latest recession

will be  largely completed this  quarter, according to  an industry economist.

The  source  noted that July's  inventory-to-sales  ratio for nonauto  durable

goods was back  to  its  1987-89  average.

Real  Estate.  Lenders  and realtors  generally report  that  demand  for

housing has  slowed in recent months,  although  some  lenders  experienced a

IV-4

pickup  in new loans  in August.  Listings are  fewer-than-usual  for  the  summer.

Some  attribute  the  less-than-seasonal  strength  in housing starts  and sales

this  summer to  a lack of  consumer confidence.  They claim that mortgage funds

are  readily available  to  creditworthy buyers, and report that mortgage rates

eased recently to an  8-3/4%  to  9-1/4% range  for  a 30-year conventional  loan

mortgage.

Financial  Developments.  Most  lenders report  little change  in  total  loan

activity  in recent months,  except for  declines  in mortgage  loan refinancing

following a surge  in  the  spring and early  summer months.  Some  sources believe

that continued softness  in business  loans may reflect low working capital

needs because of  the  large  liquidation of  inventories,  and  that future  growth

of business  loans may be  constrained by increasing business bankruptcies.

Some  easing  in mortgage  loans  for new and existing homes  is  also noted, but  a

few banks  report  some pickup  in auto  installment loans  in August, and

continued growth in home equity loans.  Several depositors  acknowledge that

they have not been aggressively seeking loans because  of capital  constraints

or  soft demand  for  credit.  They also  report further reductions  in interest

rates  on deposits  in recent weeks.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview

District  economic  activity continued  mixed  in August,  but  respondents

remained  optimistic about  business prospects for the  next  six months.

Manufacturing  activity rose  somewhat but  retail  sales and  exports  declined.

Employment was  steady in  manufacturing but  lower  in  retail  businesses.  Loan

demand  remained weak except  in  home refinancing.  Conditions  in agriculture

improved as  timely  rains  helped  crops.

Consumer Spending

Our regular  survey  of  retailers  indicated  that,  on  balance,  retail

activity weakened  in August.  Total  sales  apparently fell  somewhat  along with

sales  of big  ticket  items.  Shopper  traffic was  lighter  than  in July.  Inven-

tories  were  drawn down  and  employment  declined.  Wages  rose  as  did  wholesale

and  retail  prices.

Looking  forward, retailers  were  optimistic about the  business  outlook

for  the  next six  months.  They anticipated  increases  in  shopper  traffic and

sales.  Most  expected little change  in employment and  inventories but  looked

for wages,  retail  prices,  and  wholesale prices  to rise  further.

Manufacturing

Our  regular mail  survey of manufacturers  indicated  that District  factory

activity  improved  in  August.  Increases  were  reported  in shipments,  new

orders,  and  the length  of the  workweek.  Inventories  apparently shrank while

employment,  prices,  and  other business  indicators  remained  steady.  Manu-

facturers  identified  poor sales,  government  red  tape, competition,  and  excess

capacity  as  their  biggest problems.

Manufacturers  remained optimistic  about general  business  conditions  and

their own prospects  for the  next six months.  They  foresaw increases  in

virtually all  categories of activity  including capital  expenditures  and

exports.

Port  Activity

Representatives at  District ports--Baltimore, Charleston,  and Hampton

Roads  (Norfolk)--reported that  exports were generally  lower and  imports  higher

in August than  in July.  Compared to  a year ago, exports  were  up and  imports

were down.  Contacts  at  District ports  expected export  growth  to outpace

import growth  throughout the  fall  and winter.

Tourism

A telephone  survey of  hotels, motels,  and  resorts  in the  District

suggested that  tourist  activity through  the Labor Day  weekend was  unchanged

both  from July and  a year  ago.  Over half of the  respondents reported  that

fall  bookings were  about even with  last year's,  and almost  all  expected

tourist activity to  remain  about even with  a year  ago  in the months ahead.

Finance

District  financial  institutions contacted by  telephone  indicated that

credit availability was  generally steady over the  last  six weeks.  Several

banks,  however,  said  they had  tightened standards  for commercial  loans.

Commercial  loan  demand was  reported  soft,  but the demand  for residential

mortgages  firmed  as  refinancing activity  increased.  Most  banks  expressed a

continued willingness  to make new consumer loans.

Banks  indicated  that they  had  lowered their  rates on  some  types of  loans

following  recent declines  in money market  rates.  Almost  half reported  that

they  had reduced  their rates  on  consumer  and  mortgage loans.  None,  however,

said that  they had  lowered commercial  loan  rates.

V-3

Housing

Residential  real  estate activity  remained sluggish  in most of  the

District according to  a telephone  survey of housing  analysts  and real  estate

lenders.  Most respondents  reported little  change  in prices, sales,  or

construction  starts,  though  lower  interest  rates were  said to have  slightly

boosted sales  in some localities.  Respondents  in the Washington, D.C.,  area

noted  a glut  of homes  for  sale and for  rent.  Most respondents reported  little

speculative residential  construction.  One exception  to the generally sluggish

housing market  in the  District was  Greenville, SC,  where activity was  reported

to  be  strong.

Agriculture

Recent  rainfall  generally  improved the condition  of District  crops

according to  farm  analysts.  Corn  and  soybean yields  were expected  to be

normal  in Virginia, West  Virginia  and Maryland  and  somewhat above  normal  in

the  Carolinas.  Dry conditions  were noted  in some  areas  of Maryland,  however,

and  poor  pasture  conditions were reported  in some regions.  In the Carolinas,

recent  rains  have damaged crops  somewhat  and  kept  farmers  in some localities

from spraying  their fields  for  insects.

VI-1

SIXTH  DISTRICT  - ATLANTA

Overview:  Economic  recovery  in  the  Southeast  continued  during  August,  but  at  an

unsteady  pace.  Manufacturers'  reports are mixed with nondurable  goods orders expanding  more

rapidly  than  durables.  Realtors  suggest  modest  recovery  in  residential  sales,  reducing  existing

inventories.  However,  builders  are  unwilling,  or  unable,  to  renew  significant  development.

Retailers  were  disappointed  with  August  sales  after  two  months  of  higher  activity.  No

improvement  in  commercial  construction  is expected  this  year.  Regional  convention  bookings

and  tourism  are  up  modestly  from  year-ago  levels.  Bankers  report  some improvement  in  loan

demand  from  earlier  in  the  year,  but  borrowers  continue  to  feel  constrained  by  strict  credit

guidelines.  Aggressive  competition,  soft commodity  prices,  and ample  pools  of job  candidates

are  yielding  product  price  stability  and  restraining  wages pressures.

Consumer  Spending:  August retail  sales were generally below  expectations  and year-

ago  levels.  Confirming  lackluster  consumption  and  lean  retail  profit  margins,  advertising

expenditures  across  all  media  remained  at  reduced  levels  recorded  early  this  year.

Durable goods have shown little improvement,  with home furnishings  especially weak.

General department  store  traffic declined  modestly  from this spring and  early  summer.  Upscale

department  stores report lower back-to-school  sales  from one year ago.  However,  sales at  stores

emphasizing  discount  pricing  expanded,  as  consumers  continued  to substitute  away  from  more

expensive  selections.  Retailers  are  expecting  little,  if any,  increase  in  holiday  sales  from  last

year.

New  car  sales  weakened  in  August  after  moderate  improvements  over  the  summer.

However,  used  car  sales  continued  to  strengthen;  contacts  attributed  this  to  consumer  cost-

consciousness  and  credit constraints.  Dealers  have been  conservative  in  ordering  1992  models.

To  counter  announced  price  increases  and  expected  consumer  reluctance,  rebate  programs  are

VI-2

reportedly  under  development.

Tourism  in  the  region  improved  moderately  during  August  compared  with  year-ago

levels.  Modest  increases  in  convention  bookings  and  visitors  were  reported  in  Atlanta,  New

Orleans,  and  Orlando.  Based  on  advance  bookings,  convention  attendance  should  continue  to

improve  through  the fall.

Manufacturing:  Manufacturing  activity remains  mixed, with little change from the last

reporting  period.  Textile contacts expect  increasing shipments  of denims and fleecewear  through

the  end of the year,  while  producers  of household  textiles,  such  as draperies  and linens,  expect

sluggish  demand  through the  fall.  Increasing  paper  mill shipments  reflect  continued  strength  in

paper-related  production.

Other  manufacturers  expect  little  improvement  until  next  year.  Automobile  and

building  materials  shipments  continue  to  slump.  Weak  commercial  construction  continues  to

adversely impact the region's structural  metal production.  Sluggish construction and auto activity

is  expected  to restrain  demand  for related  chemical  production  through  early  next  year.  New

layoffs  continue  to be reported  at  electronic  equipment  producers  affected  by  declining  defense

contracts.

Financial  Services:  Most  banking  contacts  reported  improved  demand  for consumer

and  mortgage  loans  in  August  from  June  and  July.  However,  loan  demand  for  capital

expenditures  is  unchanged  from  earlier  this  summer,  and  below  year-ago  levels.  Some  auto

dealers  and  developers  maintain  that  credit  terms  have  continued  to  tighten.

Construction:  Southeastern  housing  markets  continued  a  moderate  recovery  in  July

and  August.  Except  for Florida,  single  family  permits  in  July  pulled  ahead  of year-ago  levels;

multifamily  permits  remained  weak.  Most  realtors  reported  modestly  improved  homes  sales  in

VI-3

August  from June and July.  However,  the Atlanta  market  appears to have faltered.  Regionally,

home sales  in the mid-price  range  (trade-ups) are  strong.  Despite lower interest rates,  first-time

buyers  of  lower-priced  properties  are  being  constrained  by  higher  FHA  down  payment

requirements.  Sales  in  the luxury  market are  stagnant.

New home inventories are declining,  but builders report that modest demand  and tight

credit  standards  continue to limit  speculative  development.  Contacts  expect  no improvement  in

nonresidential  construction  during  the  remainder  of this year.

Wages and Prices:  Most  contacts  report stable product prices  and  no acceleration  of

wage  pressures.  Stabilizing  fuel  prices  and  vigorous  competition  have  pushed  shipping  rates

below  year-ago  levels.  Natural  gas  prices  firmed  in  the  last  month  but  remain  below  levels

required  to induce new  drilling.  A producer of air conditioning  equipment  reports  that materials

and parts  prices are  holding  steady  in a very  competitive  market.  Regional  housing  prices have

yet to rebound  in response  to moderately  increased  demand.  Building  supply companies  remain

under downward  price  pressure.  Prices  of the region's  lumber products,  however,  have risen

in response  to firming  domestic  and  export demand,  as  well as  supply  constraints  on  Northwest

lumber.

Generally,  labor availability is  not a problem.  Our contacts  anticipate  no acceleration

of wage  pressures  over  the  next  several  months.  Budgeted  wage  gains  are equal  to  or slightly

below  those  seen  last  year  at  this  time.  The  major exception  continues  to  be  health  services.

According  to  one  contact,  new  medical  technology  requires  more  highly  skilled  labor  and  a

relative  scarcity  of  skilled  technicians  continues  to  exert  pressure  on  wages  in  that  sector.

Escalation  of benefits costs  continues to trouble  employers,  who  are implementing  increasingly

aggressive  policies  to curtail  these  costs.

VII-1

SEVENTH  DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.  The Seventh  District economy expanded modestly  in July  and August, according  to

most contacts,  despite  sluggish consumer spending  growth.  The  overall manufacturing  sector

strengthened  further, with continued  gains in consumer durable  goods production joined by hints of

recovery  in several capital goods industries.  Residential real estate transaction  activity softened

somewhat, but remained  sufficiently brisk to  support gains in household goods production.  The  outlook

for commercial  construction  and  supplier industries was little changed.  Bank asset and retail  deposit

growth in the  District was  restrained by both supply  and demand  factors.

Consumer Spending.  Contacts generally  indicated  that growth in District consumer spending

remained sluggish.  One large general merchandise chain reported relatively flat sales in August (in

nominal  dollars,  year-over-year)  in the District, in line with the national average,  and  stated that regional

differences in sales results have narrowed markedly  over the year.  A large discount chain reported that its

sales  in larger markets in the District declined  in August (compared  to last year), in part due to

competitive  pressures, while  sales rose nationally.  A retailers' association in Michigan  reported that

members continued  to experience  depressed traffic and sales levels, but conditions have  stabilized  in

recent months.  A liquidation trustee  reported  that retail contacts  have experienced  some upturn in sales in

the past month.  A large  automaker reported  that car sales declined in recent weeks,  but still remained

stronger  than earlier in the year.  However, anticipated  strengthening  in sales to  fleets over the next two

months is expected  to boost total  sales.

Manufacturing.  The recovery  in the District's manufacturing  sector continued in recent weeks.

Gains in consumer durable goods production were joined by signs that some capital  goods production

began to turn upward, although  weak  spots still exist.  Purchasing managers'  surveys in Detroit,

Indianapolis,  Western  Michigan  and  Chicago  showed increasingly widespread  expansion.  Detroit

reported  some softening in responses  from nonautomotive  businesses, but widespread  gains were  again

recorded  in the automotive  sector.  The results  from Indianapolis  registered  a significant turnaround in the

second quarter, with an important  contribution from the automotive sector.  Western Michigan  showed

continued  solid  expansion in July  and  August, with new  signs of improvement from  several capital goods

respondents.  Chicago's index  moved strongly into expansionary  territory in August,  after gradually rising

from low  levels early  in the year.  Each of the monthly  surveys recorded  consistent inventory  liquidation
thus far in  1991,  both during the contractions  recorded early  in the year and  during the recoveries  seen in

more recent months.

VII-2

Most anecdotal reports  also suggested strengthening  among consumer durable goods producers  and their
suppliers.  A large steel producer reported that shipments in the summer months were better than
expected,  with important  contributions  from shipments to auto  and appliance  manufacturers,  although

most customers still show little inventory rebuilding.  A large electronics  firm reported  that

semiconductor  order growth continued to trend  upward, with orders from automakers making an

important contribution.  Semiconductor  orders from the previously  weak capital goods sector were

expected to turn up in the fourth quarter.  An electric utility in Michigan reported  its first monthly  year-
over-year gain in power sales to industrial customers  in August.  Several small suppliers  to the auto

industry  reported new hiring  activity, although  a large  automaker plans to use overtime rather than new

hiring to meet labor requirements  for the balance of the year.  A producer of paper containers reported

that demand from appliance  producers has been stronger than expected,  and a large  appliance

manufacturer  stated that the industry  trough had passed.  Reports from the capital goods  sector were

mixed, but generally  better than earlier in the year.  A July survey of metalworking  firms reflected

improved expectations  for business conditions,  although appraisals of current conditions  remained weak.

After recording flat sales in the first half of 1991,  a heavy machinery  producer reported solid order gains

in recent months.  A large manufacturer of heavy-duty trucks  reported renewed  softness in industry

orders.  A producer of a wide range of specialized  machinery reported  that order gains  remained relatively

soft, however, with improved  orders  for food processing  equipment  offsetting continued  weakness

elsewhere.  A large manufacturer of construction equipment experienced  a renewed slump in orders in

August, and  stated that dealers continued to cut inventory  amid low sales expectations.

Real  Estate/Construction.  Several contacts reported  that the sharp pickup in the District's

residential  real estate sector earlier in the year may have softened  somewhat  recently, but activity is still

running at respectable levels.  A large District realtor reported that residential sales gains have been

running in line with seasonal expectations  in recent months.  After home  sales  rose sharply in the second

quarter, housing permits in Indianapolis rose  fairly sharply in July.  A realtors  association reported that

home  sales in Wisconsin remained brisk in the summer, and 1991  sales are running  at a record pace.  A

producer of gypsum wallboard  reported that industry  shipments  into the Midwest strengthened in July.

An appliance  distributor reported that orders  from home builders in the Midwest had improved over the

past several months,  with continued  gains expected  in the second  half of the year.  Year-to-date industry

appliance shipments  to dealers in the Midwest were essentially  flat, according  to one large  manufacturer,

which is relatively  strong performance  compared to much of the  rest of the country.

Commercial real estate  activity generally remained  subdued in August, although  the pickup in

District manufacturing  activity may be beginning to boost the  demand for industrial space.  A brokerage

VII-3

firm reported that rental  rates  for downtown  Chicago office space  continued to decline in the second

quarter, with  rising vacancy rates joined by negative net absorption.  A large District cement producer

tied to commercial  construction  reported  continued year-over-year  shipments declines,  with little near-

term improvement  expected  for shipments in the Chicago  metropolitan area.  A group of small

commercial  lighting companies  anticipate  a 3 to 5 year depression  in sales for nonresidential  building in

the Chicago  market.  The office market in metropolitan Detroit remained  soft in recent months, according

to a brokerage  firm, with vacancy rates continuing to rise.

Few District banks reported  new tightening in standards  for new commercial real  estate loans  in

recent months, but financing generally remained difficult to obtain, with strict preleasing  and borrower

equity requirements  in place.  Lending terms  have become increasingly  costly, particularly  for loan

extensions.  One  District retail store  chain recently  completed a large equity offering designed to allow

the retailer to  internally finance  its store expansion program.  Previously,  expansion had been constrained

by the inability of real estate developers  to  obtain construction financing from banks.

Banking.  Reports  from several large banks  in the District reinforced  earlier indications  that both

demand  and  supply factors  worked to suppress bank credit and retail deposit growth in June and  July.

Several large banks reported  that demand  for retail deposits  was dampened  by increasingly  competitive

returns on nondeposit instruments  and  sluggish economic  conditions in deposit market areas.  At the  same

time, banks themselves reported  somewhat less aggressiveness  in promoting  retail deposits.  Generally,

slower asset growth led to some softening in the desired growth for wholesale liabilities, but neither

increased  deposit insurance premiums  nor slower asset growth affected  the desired  growth for retail

deposits.  Still, several respondents indicated that they were  likely to be less aggressive in attracting retail

deposits  over the balance of the  year.

Most banks contacted  reported  weak asset growth since the end of May.  Each bank that reported

weak asset growth cited softer loan  demand, although other factors  (including  planned  reduction in

lending and  securitization) were  also cited.  At the same time, most banks  reported little change  in

standards  for commercial  and industrial lending in  recent months, after more frequent indications of

tighter  standards being adopted  earlier in the  year.  Weaker loan demand  was  generally  concentrated

among larger corporate customers,  with banks noting several  reasons, including lower  financing

requirements  for inventory and  capital investment,  as well as alternative  nonbank and/or capital market
financing sources.  Some reports of increased  loan demand from  medium-sized  and smaller firms arose,

with one bank reporting increased  capital  spending by smaller businesses.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT  - ST.  LOUIS

Summary

The economy  in the  Eighth  District is  showing  signs  of  growth,

but  contacts  stress  that  any  expansion  is  weak.  Although manufacturing

activity  overall 

is 

stagnant, 

the 

stabilization 

of  auto-related

manufacturing  and  rising  exports  are  encouraging  signs. 

Residential

construction  activity has  picked up  slightly.  Loan  growth  remains  weak.

Tourism has  been marginally higher this  summer  than last in most parts of

the  District.  Most  crops  are 

in  fair  condition  as  the  fall  harvest

approaches.

Manufacturing

Most manufacturers  surveyed expect  to  increase production  in the

next  few months,  but do  not plan  to  increase  the  size  of  their workforce

or  invest  in  new  plant  or  equipment.  Most  also  report  that  inventories

are  at  satisfactory levels,  although an  increasing minority  indicate  that

inventory  levels  are higher  than desired.  Auto-related manufacturing has

stabilized  for  the  most  part,  with  employees  at  some  vehicle  assembly

plants  working  overtime.  Nonetheless,  a drop  in  orders has  reportedly

caused  substantial  layoffs  at  one  steel  factory  that  makes  parts  for

railroad  cars  carrying  new  motor  vehicles. 

A  shoe  manufacturer  will

close several  factories and warehouses  in Missouri  permanently this  fall,

eliminating  1,400 jobs.  According  to  a  company  spokesman, 

the  national

recession and  strong  import  competition were  the  primary  reasons  for  the

closings.

VIII-2

Contacts  generally  report  an  increase  in  exports, 

though  some

mentioned  that  the  rate  of  growth  had  slowed. 

Strong  export  growth was

reported by producers of  furniture  and paper products  in some  rural  parts

of  the  District. 

As  District  exports 

to  Mexico  rise, 

a  number  of

companies  have  begun 

to 

investigate  similar  export  opportunities.

Political  instability has  made  exporters  more  cautious  in  pursuing  sales

to  the  Middle  East  and  the  Soviet  Union,  according  to  some  contacts.

Most  respondents believed that  the  upward movement  in  the  exchange value

of  the  dollar since February has had little  effect on  exports.

Construction  and Real Estate

Residential  construction activity has  picked up modestly  in some

parts  of the  District.  Strong  economic  growth  in  northwest Arkansas has

created  construction  jobs  for  workers  from  other  parts  of  the  state,

where  activity  remains  stagnant.  Contacts  describe  western  Kentucky

homebuilders  as  "holding  their  own," 

largely  because  of  lower  interest

rates  and the  ability  of some  builders  to  get  construction loans  now that

they  could  not  get  several  months  ago.  Despite  increases 

in 

lumber

prices,  new  home  prices  have  remained  relatively  constant. 

Contacts  do

not  anticipate 

a  general 

recovery 

in 

the  residential  construction

industry  in  1991  and  are  split  as  to  whether  the  recovery  will  occur  in

1992  or 1993.

Tourism

Despite  the  recession,  tourism  in Missouri, Arkansas  and western

Kentucky  has  been  somewhat  stronger  this  summer  than  last. 

Contacts  in

Missouri  and  Arkansas  attribute  the  increased  activity  to  the  desire  for

short,  economical  vacations  close  to  home.  Arkansas  tourism  also has

been stimulated by an expanded advertising campaign.  The  recent level  of

VIII-3

tourism in Tennessee, however, is  reportedly the  same  as  last year.  Some

Missouri  contacts  fear  the  state  has  lost  some  tourism  business  because

of  the  legalization of  riverboat  gambling  in  Iowa  and will  incur  further

losses when riverboat gambling begins  in  Illinois  in the  near future.

Banking and Finance

Total  loans  outstanding at  District banks  remain substantially

below  year-ago  levels  as  most  loan  categories  show  a  decrease  during

recent months.  For example,  both business  and  consumer  loans  declined

from mid-June  through mid-August  relative  to  the prior  two months.

Agriculture  and Natural Resources

Although  soil  moisture  ratings  in 

the  District  remain  below

optimal  levels,  most  crops 

in 

the  District  are  generally 

in 

fair

condition. 

The  lack  of  adequate  moisture, 

however, 

has  hampered

development of  the  soybean crop  and accelerated the  maturation process  of

the  corn  crop.  As  a result, harvesting of  the  corn  crop  is  well  under

way  in the  southern regions  of the  District  and just beginning everywhere

else.  Early  reports  suggest  that  corn  yields  are  mixed. 

The  rice

harvest  is  under  way  in  Arkansas  and  Mississippi;  rice  growers  expect  to

harvest  a bumper  crop  in  Arkansas,  but  poor weather  conditions  this  past

spring  have  diminished rice prospects  in Mississippi.  District cotton

producers  report  that  expectations  of  a  record  harvest  have  depressed

prices.  Livestock  are  mostly  in  good  condition,  but  the  dry  weather  has

hurt pastures.  Southern pine  lumber producers report  that production has

picked  up, 

though  it 

still 

lags  behind  a  year  ago. 

Exports  of  Southern

pine  lumber,  on the  other hand, are  running ahead of last year.

IX - 1

NINTH DISTRICT-MINNEAPOLIS

The Ninth District continues to feel the effects of the national recession.

Labor market conditions have improved slightly, though employment growth has been

weak.  Retail  sales  have  showed  only  moderate  growth,  and  automotive  sales

continue  to  be  slow.  Conditions  in  the  manufacturing  and  resource-related

industries were  mixed.  Tourism was  the major bright spot.

Employment, Wages,  and Prices

Labor market conditions  improved in most of the District.  Minnesota's July

unemployment rate  fell to  4.4 percent from 4.8  the previous month, and below the

year-ago rate of 4.9 percent.  Unemployment rates fell in July, relative to their

June levels,  in Montana  (6.1  percent from  6.4),  North Dakota  (3.9 percent  from

4.2)  and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan (8.6 percent from 9.2),  but in all three

cases  remain  above  their  year-ago  levels  (5.0,  4.0,  and  7.7  percent,  respec-

tively).  In  South  Dakota,  the  unemployment  level  in  July  rose  0.1  percentage

point from June to 3.2, but remains substantially below its year-ago level of 3.6

percent.  On a  cautionary  note,  the  preliminary  level  of  Minnesota's  initial

unemployment  claims  was  20  percent higher  in  August  than  its  year-ago  level.

Changes in the July unemployment rates  from year-ago levels were mixed in western

Wisconsin.  The growth in nonagricultural employment in July from year-ago levels

was an anemic 0.52 percent in Minnesota and 0.83 percent in Montana, but a robust

1.41 percent in North Dakota and a whopping 2.74 percent  in South Dakota.  In a

number of sectors of the Minnesota economy July employment levels  fell, relative

to  their year-ago  levels:  manufacturing  down  1.24  percent,  construction  down

6.14  percent,  transportation  down  0.44  percent.  Only  in  the  FIRE  (finance,

insurance,  real  estate),  services,  and  government  sectors  did  Minnesota's

employment rise  substantially  in  July, relative  to  its  year-ago  levels:  1.69,

IX  - 2

3.28,  and 0.54 percent respectively.  In Montana, the weak employment growth was

due in large part to a sharp fall  in mining employment, down 6.06 percent in July

from  its year-ago  level.

Consumer  Spending

Retail sales  in the  District were mixed.  Sales  tax receipts  in Minnesota

were  down 6.25 percent in July relative  to year-ago  levels.  Major retailers  in

the  District  report  August  sales  increases  of  comparable  stores,  relative  to

year-ago  levels,  ranging  from  1 to  13  percent  with  discount  stores  generally

reporting the largest increases.  Retail sales have been strong in Montana, North

and South Dakota, and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, which continue to reap the

benefits  of  the  influx of Canadian shoppers.

District new car  sales  continue  to  be weak, with one  major domestic  auto

company reporting car sales  declines  of 15 percent  in August and 22 percent for

the year to  date,  relative  to  a year  ago.  Used car prices  remain high.

Housing sales remain somewhat weak in the District.  In the Minneapolis-St.

Paul area existing home sales were up 4.1 percent in July relative to a year ago,

after falling in June.  The June drop was attributed to a change in the  terms of

FHA-insured  loans.  The  price  increase  of  the  median-priced  home  in  the  Twin

Cities  area  rose 2.1 percent  in  the  second quarter  over a year ago,  continuing

the  trend of  the  1980's  in which  existing home  prices  in Minnesota have  failed

to keep  pace with  inflation.

Tourism  activity has  been  excellent  in  all  parts  of  the  District.  The

number of crossings over the Mackinac Bridge onto the Upper Peninsula was up 3.3

percent  for  the  first  eight  months  of  this  year  and  6.9  percent  in  August,

relative  to  a year  ago.  Crossings  over  the  International  Bridge  between  the

Upper Peninsula and Canada were  also up  3.8  percent in August relative  to their

IX  - 3

year-ago  level. 

There  has  been  a substantial  increase  in  tourism  at  Mount

Rushmore due  in part to  its  recent  fiftieth anniversary celebration.

Construction and Manufacturing

Conditions  in the  District's construction industry have been mixed, with

the  overhang  of  office  space  in  the  Minneapolis-St.  Paul  area  expected  to

continue  to  depress  commercial  activity  in  the  area. 

The  value  of  future

construction contracts  in  the  Twin  Cities  area  remains  above year-ago  levels.

However, the July level of new housing permits was down 15  percent.

The Minnesota index of economic activity rose  to an all-time high in June,

up 1.2  percent from May and 1.5  percent from  its year-ago level.  However, new

business  incorporations were  down sharply  in August,  only slightly higher than

their  year-ago  level,  while  average  weekly hours  in  July were  slightly below

their year-ago level, and manufacturing employment was down 1.3 percent over the

same  period.

Resource-Related Industries

Crop  yields  in  the  District are  expected  to  be  generally good.  However,

prices  are  sharply down.  The mid-July level of the Minnesota  index of all farm

products  fell  13  percent  relative  to  its  year-ago  level,  with  crop  and  dairy

prices  falling by  18  percent, and  livestock prices  falling by  6 percent.  The

only  bright  spot  was  poultry  and  egg  prices  which  rose  6  percent  over  this

period.  Milk prices  are  reported  to  be below the break-even point.

X-1

TENTH DISTRICT  - KANSAS  CITY

Overview.  Economic conditions in the  Tenth District continue to  improve

modestly.  New home  sales have  increased, auto  sales have picked up,  and other

retail  sales remain steady.  Most  firms  are maintaining or trimming

inventories, and prices  generally are  changing little.  Agriculture  and energy

may be contributing  less  to  district growth than  in the past  few months,

however.  Drilling for oil  and gas  is  off slightly, cattle  prices have

dropped, and hot,  dry weather has reduced expected crop yields.

Retail sales.  Most retailers report sales  unchanged from last month and

down  from a year  ago.  Retailers  generally expect  sales  to  stay  flat  the  rest

of the  year.  Selling prices have changed little  in  the  last  month and  are

expected to  remain flat.  Most retailers  are  satisfied with  their current

inventory levels.

Auto sales have picked up recently in district states.  Potential buyers

are  able  to  get  loans  in most  instances.  As  the new model year begins,

dealers are  trying to  trim inventories  of 1991  cars.  Dealers  in  all district

states  anticipate  stronger sales  of  1992 models.

Manufacturing.  Purchasing agents  report  steady to  slightly higher input

prices  over  the  past month.  Respondents expect prices  to  stabilize  over the

coming months.  Materials  are readily available, with no problems  expected for

the  rest  of the  year.  Most firms  expect to  maintain or  trim  inventories in

the  months  ahead.  While  some plants  are working  close  to  capacity, none  are

facing bottlenecks  or skilled labor  shortages.

Energy.  Weak natural gas  prices  and only  slightly stronger crude  oil

prices  have dampened energy activity in the  district.  The  average number of

operating drilling rigs  in  district states dipped from  244  in July  to  237  in

X-2

the  first three  weeks in August.  The August rig count  fell  to  16  percent

below  its year-ago  level.

Housing Activity and Finance.  Housing starts across  the  district are up

from a year ago and mixed compared with a month ago.  Builders  report mixed

expectations for  starts  the  rest of  the year.  New home sales  are up, helping

to  reduce  inventories  of unsold homes.  Prices  for new homes are up  in  some

parts  of the  district and down  in  others.  While construction materials  are

readily  available, builders continue  to  report increases  in  lumber prices.

Most savings  and loan respondents  report net deposit  outflows  greater

than both  last month and a year ago.  Most respondents expect outflows  to

continue  in  the  coming months.  Demand for mortgage funds has  increased

slightly in most areas  of the  district, but further  increases  in  demand are

not expected by most respondents.  Mortgage rates are  down slightly, and most

respondents  expect  slight downward pressure  on rates  through  the  end of  the

year.

Banking.  Changes  in loan demand were mixed at  district  commercial banks

last  month.  Respondents  reporting decreases,  increases,  and no  change  in

overall loan  demand were  about equal  in number.  Demand for commercial real

estate loans  was  generally lower, while demand for agricultural  loans was

slightly higher.  Other  loan categories  showed no definite  trend.  Most banks

report either steady or  declining loan-deposit ratios.  Total  deposits were

generally unchanged or  somewhat higher  at  responding banks last month, but

large  CDs  and  small time  and savings deposits  declined at  some banks.

Most banks  report no  change  in either  their prime  rate or  their consumer

lending rates.  One  or  two banks  report decreases  in these  rates,  and a few

X-3

respondents expect to  lower  these rates  in the near term.  No banks  report

changes  in  other lending terms.

Agriculture.  Dry weather has  reduced expected yields  from  the

district's row crops.  Dryland crop yields  in much of  the  district may  fall  to

as much as  50  percent below average.  Irrigated crop yields are  expected to

drop slightly below normal.  Due  to  the  reduced yields,  some district  corn

fields  will be  cut  for  silage  instead of being harvested for  grain.  While

more rain will be  of little  help to  this  year's  row crops,  additional moisture

would  improve growing conditions  for  the  district's winter wheat  crop.

Pasture  conditions have also  suffered from the hot,  dry weather.  Many

ranchers are providing supplemental  feed for  cattle grazing dry pastures,  and

a few have  reduced cattle herd sizes  due to  the  shortage  of adequate pasture.

Falling fat  cattle prices drastically  reduced revenues  of  district

feedlot operators  in August.  Operators who paid high prices  for  animals

placed  in feedlots  saw narrow profit margins  turn into  substantial losses  as

finished cattle prices  fell.  Despite  the  losses,  most operators have

continued to  feed a normal number of cattle,  expecting an upturn  in fat cattle

prices.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

Output  growth  in  the  11th  District economy has  increased slightly since

the  last survey.  The  improvement has been centered  in the residential

construction and manufacturing sectors.  Growth has  continued weak in the

service-producing sectors.  Energy extraction has  declined in response  to

persistently  low natural gas  prices.  Consumer  spending remains  sluggish.

Most retailers report  disappointing back-to-school  sales  and auto  sales  remain

at  low levels.  While  the  financial  conditions of banks continue  to  improve,

loan demand is  flat.  Agricultural  conditions have weakened.

Orders  to  District manufacturers  are  rising, and most respondents  say

that their  inventories are at  desired levels.  Growth  in  demand has been

particularly noticeable  in construction-related manufacturing.  Producers of

lumber and wood,  and stone,  clay  and glass  say  that upturns  in  national and

regional  residential building have boosted their  orders.  Apparel,

electronics,  and electrical  machinery firms  note  that  their  sales have risen

because customers are  replenishing depleted inventories.  Demand for refined

petroleum products  remains  flat,  but petrochemical producers  cite  some  recent

gains  in  orders.  Although declines  in  domestic drilling have reduced domestic

orders  for oil  field equipment,  overall District sales  remain unchanged

because  of  rising export  demand.  Indicative  of the  general  expansion in

manufacturing, makers  of packing board and corrugated liners  say  that demand

for  their  products has  steadily  increased over the past three months.

Growth  in the  District service  sector  is  weak.  Respondents  in

consulting and accounting services  say that  demand has been  flat.  Lodging

industry respondents  note  softness  in  demand from business customers.  Legal

XI-2

services, advertising agencies  and temporary employment firms  cite mild

expansions  in activity.  Although most respondents express  a good deal  of

uncertainty  about their sales  outlooks  for  the  rest of the  year,  they

generally expect mild growth.

Retail  sales  have picked up  slightly but are below year-ago  levels.

Respondents report very competitive markets and disappointing back-to-school

sales.  Retailers  are  optimistic that  sales will  improve,  although  they expect

the upturn to  be  slow  in real  terms.  Most firms  say that  their inventories

are at  desired levels  and that prices  are  stable.  Dallas area  sales  show more

weakness  than  elsewhere in the  District.  Auto sales  are below year-ago

levels.

Output in  the District energy sector  continues  to  decline.  While

natural  gas  prices have  increased slightly, they remain near their  lowest

levels  in  20 years.  Drilling activity has  declined, particularly  in the  Gulf

of Mexico.  Respondents  note that  if this  winter is  normal, natural gas  prices

should average a little higher than last  year and oil prices  should experience

their normal  seasonal  rise.  Oil prices  should decline  slightly next year due

to  increased sales  from Iraq  and Kuwait.

Construction  activity has  increased due  to  a moderate rebound  in

residential  building.  During the  Middle East War, residential construction  in

the District  temporarily deviated  from its moderate  growth trend.  Since  the

end of  the war,  residential  construction has  gradually returned  to  its  former

growth  rate.  Commercial  construction remains sluggish.  Commercial vacancy

rates  in the  major metropolitan areas  remain high  although they continue  to

fall.  Builders  show little hope for  any  significant expansion in  commercial

XI-3

construction at  least though  the  end of  this  year.  Respondents note  a recent

decline  in  the  demand for  industrial  office space.  Industrial  rents  and

vacancy rates  are  said to be  flat overall.

District commercial banks  report soft  loan  demand.  While  the financial

condition of banks  continues  to  improve, business  loan demand remains weak.

Respondents say that  the  reduced loan demand stems  from sluggish economic

activity,  regulatory changes,  and an availability of capital  from other

sources.  Bankers  do  not expect  loan demand to  increase  significantly over  the

next  few months.

Agricultural  conditions have worsened.  Cotton prices, which were high

during  the  first half  of this  year, have dropped due to  higher yields.

Although cotton farmers  in the  District  are  expected to  harvest  record volumes

this  year,  shrinking government subsidies  and recent price  declines  are  said

likely  to  reduce  net cash  income.  The dairy  industry remains  depressed  due  to

low milk prices.  Livestock prices  fell  sharply  in the  first part of August

and recovered somewhat in the  following weeks.  Livestock prices  are not

expected to  fully recover until  after September.

XII-  1

TWELFTH  DISTRICT  -- SAN  FRANCISCO

Summary

Economic  conditions  remain  weak  in  much  of  the Twelfth  District, with areas  that  have

felt  the  impact  of the  recession  reporting  few  signs of recovery.  In intermountain  areas where  the

recession  has  had  only  modest  effects,  economic  conditions  continue  to be  much  better  than  in

the District  as  a  whole.  Wage  and  price  increases  throughout  the  District  are  modest,  and

consumer  spending  continues  to  be  sluggish.  Slow  retail  sales have  hurt sales  tax  revenues  in

many jurisdictions,  further  squeezing  already-tight  state  and  local  government  budgets.

Manufacturing  activity remains  mixed, with  the  aluminum  industry  reporting  worsening  conditions.

Some  District  farmers  report  disappointing  fruit  harvests,  due  either  to  poorer than  expected

quality  or  disappointing  volumes.  Construction  and  real  estate  activity  remain  slow,  especially  in

California.  Loan  demand  continues  to  be  sluggish  in  California,  while  Utah  financial  institutions

report  relatively  good  conditions.

Business  Sentiment

Economic  expectations  of Twelfth  District  business  leaders  improved  slightly  in

September.  While  a  majority  of respondents  still  foresee  GNP  growth  of less  than  2.5  percent

during  the  next four  quarters,  only  5  percent  now  expect  the  next four  quarters  to  be

characterized  by  recession.  More  than  half of respondents  project  improvement  during  the next

four  quarters  in  business  investment,  housing  starts,  and consumer  spending.  Expectations  about

inflation  also  seem  to be  improving,  with  61  percent  of respondents  now  projecting  some

reduction  in  inflation  during  the  next  four  quarters  compared  with  50 percent  six weeks  ago.

Wages  and  Prices

XII  - 2

Overall  wages  and  prices  are  increasing  modestly  in  the Twelfth  District.  Retail  prices  are

reported  to be  relatively  stable, while  prices  have  fallen  during  the past  year  for  many food

products.  Prices  also  are  reported down  significantly  for some  office  electronic  products.

Increases  in  health  care  costs  still  outpace  the  general  inflation  rate  by  a wide  margin.  Wage

increases  continue  to  cluster  in the  3.5  to 5  percent  range  throughout  the  District.  In  California,

however,  tight state  government  fiscal  conditions  have  forced  many  middle  and  upper  level  state

employees  to  take  5  percent  salary  cuts.

Retail  Trade  and Services

Consumer  spending  remains weak  in  most  parts of the  Twelfth  District.  A soft  goods

retailer  reports  that  sales  still are  very  sluggish  in California,  Oregon,  and  Alaska.  For  his chain,

sales  are  slightly  stronger in  Washington  and  very  good  in  Utah.  In  California,  higher sales  tax

rates  are  blamed  for some  of the slowdown  in  retail  sales.  Auto  sales  remain  weak  in  much  of the

District,  although  some  improvement  was  noted  in  Arizona  and  among  higher-end  cars  in  Idaho.

Year-over-year  declines  in  newspaper  advertising  volume  have  moderated  somewhat  in  recent

months,  but July volume  was  still  18  percent  below  its  year-earlier  level.

Manufacturing

Manufacturing  activity  in  the  West  is  mixed.  Metals  industries  continue  to  report weak

conditions.  Layoffs  are  mounting  in  the  aluminum  industry, with  one  firm  in  the  Pacific

Northwest  reportedly  cutting employment  by  more  than  50  percent.  Aluminum  and zinc  prices

are  down, while copper  prices  have  stabilized  recently.  Employment  in  the  aerospace  industry

continues  to  suffer  from  defense  cuts.  Helicopter  manufacturing  employment  in  the U.S.  is

expected  to  fall  2  percent  in  1991,  despite  improving  exports.  Boeing  continues  to receive  orders

for  commercial  aircraft,  although  the  pace  of  new orders  has  slowed  in  recent  months.  In  Utah,

XII  - 3

some  non-durable  manufacturing  industries  report  growth  in orders of 8  to  10  percent from  last

year.  A chemical  products  manufacturer  reports  that orders  have  picked  up in  recent  months,  but

remain  7 percent  below  a  year  earlier.

Agriculture  and  Resource-Related  Industries

Agricultural  conditions  in  the  Twelfth  District  have  weakened  somewhat.  Fruit growers  in

California  report  that  harvests  were  large,  but  some  growers  had  trouble  meeting  size  and  quality

standards.  Hot August  weather  in  Washington  reduced  the volumes  of the  apple  and  grape  crops.

Many  commodity  prices  are  reported  down  from  a year  ago.  Potato  prices  are  off 50 percent,

while  hay  prices  are  reported  down  15  percent.  Beef prices  also  are  lower  as  a  result of

increasing  inventories  and  low demand.  In  California,  agricultural  exports  continue  to expand

despite  a  curtailment  of the state's  export  promotion  program  as  a  result  of budget  cuts.

The forest  products  industry  remains  in  poor shape,  although  one  report  from the  Pacific

Northwest  suggests  that some  lumber  mills  have  begun  to rehire  workers.  Lumber prices  have

fallen  back  after  a sharp  run-up  in the  second  quarter.  Forest  products  industry employment  in

Oregon  and  Washington  remains well  below  its  level  a year  ago.

Construction  and  Real  Estate

Construction  and  real  estate  activity  remain  sluggish  in  many  parts of the Twelfth  District.

In California,  home  sales  are  reported  to  have  slowed  following  the rebound  seen  this  spring,

while  median  home  prices  seem  to have  stabilized.  Commercial  markets  in southern  California

continue  to languish,  with  vacancy  rates  in  downtown  Los  Angeles  expected  to  rise  as new  space

comes  on  line.  Residential  prices  also  are  reported  soft  in  Washington,  and residential

construction  activity  there  has  fallen  sharply  since  last year.  Conditions  in  Utah and  Idaho  are

much  better, with  relatively  strong  prices  and sales  activity.  The  median  home  price  is  reported

up  in Arizona.

Financial  Institutions

XII  - 4

Conditions  at Twelfth  District  financial  institutions  remain  mixed.  In  California,  loan

demand  continues  weak  for most categories  of loans,  while  credit quality  is deteriorating  and

write-offs  are  increasing.  Loan  demand  also  is  reported  soft  in  Arizona,  although  auto  and

residential  real estate  loan volumes  have  improved.  Banking  conditions  in  Utah remain  solid.

