SUMMARY  OF  COMMENTARY

on

CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS

BY  FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICTS

July  1991

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY  . ..... 

. ......................................... 

i

First District  - Boston  ..............................  I-i

Second District  - New York  ............................  II-1

Third District  - Philadelphia  ........................  III-1

Fourth District  - Cleveland  ...........................  IV-1

Fifth District  - Richmond  ............o................  V-1

Sixth District  - Atlanta  ..  ........................  VI-1

Seventh District  - Chicago  ............. 

.............  VII-1

Eighth District  - St.  Louis  .........................  VIII-1

Ninth District  - Minneapolis  ......................... 

IX-1

Tenth  District - Kansas City  ........................... 

X-

Eleventh District  - Dallas  ............................  XI-1

Twelfth District  - San  Francisco  ..................... 

XII-1

i

SUMMARY*

According to  contacts  across  the country, national economic

conditions  continue to improve,  but at  a  slow, uneven pace.  Retail

sales  are said to be  flat or edging up on average.  Nevertheless,

respondents from all  areas expect a modest recovery in  retail sales

during the second half  of  1991.  Manufacturers report some  increase in

activity, on balance, but recovery  is not uniform;  demand for  consumer

goods  is  said to be  stronger than demand  for  capital equipment;  demand

for manufacturing  labor  shows  signs  of  stabilizing.  By contrast,

several districts  report that  state  and local  governments and  some

service  industries  are  cutting employment.  The pickup  in home  sales  in

the  spring has  lost  some momentum, and commercial  real estate markets

and nonresidential construction remain  weak.  In most  districts,

business  loan demand  shows  little  strength.  Hot, dry weather threatens

crops  in  several regions.

Retail

Retail  sales during June and early July are described as  flat  or

edging up  in  one-half of  the Federal Reserve districts.  In  the

remaining  districts, New York,  Cleveland, and Richmond respondents

report  declines, while  those in Atlanta, Minneapolis, and  Dallas report

moderate  increases.

Retailers east of the Mississippi note month-to-month variability.

Unseasonably warm weather in  May caused an acceleration in  purchases of

*Prepared at  the Federal Reserve Bank of  Boston and based on information
obtained before July 29,  1991.  This document  summarizes comments
received  from business  and other contacts outside the  Federal Reserve
and  is  not  a commentary on  the views of  Federal Reserve officials.

summer  items,  thereby weakening June  results.  Hot weather in  July

boosted demand for  some seasonal products, but discouraged other

purchases, especially automobiles.

In recent weeks,  apparel sales were strong in  the New York,

Philadelphia, Atlanta, Kansas City, and Dallas  regions.  Major home

furnishings were more often a source of weakness than of  strength.

Sales  figures at  automobile dealerships differed widely both across and

within districts as  a result of  economic and credit  conditions, weather,

consumer  preferences, and the timing of fleet  purchases.  Retail

inventories are  generally described as  satisfactory, and many retailers

remain  conservative  in placing new orders.

The consensus  outlook calls  for a modest recovery in  retail sales

during the  latter  half of  1991.  However, some contacts believe that  a

noticeable pickup will  not occur until the  fourth quarter.

Manufacturing

In  a majority of  Federal Reserve districts, manufacturing contacts

report that, on  balance, demand is  strengthening very gradually.

However, respondents  in the Cleveland, Atlanta, and  San Francisco

regions  describe conditions  as mixed, while those in  Dallas and Boston

note  a recent softening  in  incoming orders.  Although manufacturing

inventories generally appear satisfactory, contacts  in  the Atlanta,

Boston and Dallas districts  note cases of unwelcome buildups.

Producers of  consumer goods and  auto supplies are  said to enjoy

the greatest  improvement in demand.  Contacts  in a number of districts

report  stronger orders  for appliances,  furniture, carpets,  textiles  and

apparel,  and  for plastics,  steel  and parts  for the auto makers.  By

contrast, the  capital equipment industries  remain relatively weak,

according to the Boston, Atlanta, Chicago, Dallas, and Philadelphia

regions.  Demand  for oil  field and agricultural machinery and products

for  aerospace was  also  described as soft.  Exports are a source of

strength  in  several  coastal districts, but contacts  in Dallas and

Chicago mentioned slowdowns  in exports of steel  and agricultural

equipment.

The demand  for  labor in the manufacturing sector is  stabilizing.

Contacts  in the Minneapolis and Atlanta districts report  longer hours,

while respondents in  Chicago  and St. Louis speak of smaller  cutbacks and

shutdowns  averted  (in  steel  and  heavy-duty trucks).

Input prices  are  generally said to be  flat to down.  According to

Dallas district  contacts,  metals  prices are down,  chemicals prices  are

falling but  at  a slower  rate,  and lumber  prices  have stabilized after

surging  earlier  in the year.  Competition is  forcing most manufacturers

to maintain or reduce  their selling prices.  Retail  respondents  report

few wage or wholesale  cost  pressures.

Most manufacturers expect  to see a gradual  improvement in  orders

and production over  the next three to  six months.  Producers  of  consumer

durables  generally believe the trough is  behind them, while producers of

capital goods  and construction machinery say they are close  to the

bottom and expect  a revival  in the  second half.  Respondents  from the

steel  and auto industries  and the Boston district remain very cautious,

however.

Services  and Related Industries

Respondents in  several  districts report  cost cutting efforts by

service industries  and  state and local  governments.  In the New York

district, mergers  in the banking  and  airline industries  are expected to

cause  sizable employment losses.  In St. Louis,  the trucking  industry

is  retrenching, while  weak economic growth in both Europe and North

America is  hurting express shipping.  Contacts  in the San Francisco

region note employment losses  in the professional  services sector.  In

Dallas, however, engineering firms, business services,  and temporary

employment agencies  report weak growth.  The tourist business is

improving  in many parts of the nation.

Real Estate and  Construction

The  spring pickup in home  sales appears to have moderated, with

respondents  in half the districts reporting a loss  of momentum.  In

Minneapolis the  slowing was attributed to increases  in the  cost of FHA

mortgages;  in  contrast, the prospect  of higher FHA costs was  seen  as  a

spur to  sales  in the Dallas district.  Residential construction was  said

to be edging  up in the Atlanta, St.  Louis, and Minneapolis districts,

steady in Richmond  and mixed in  Kansas City.

Although contacts  in  the New York and Philadelphia districts have

seen recent  increases in  commercial  leasing activity, commercial  real

estate markets  are weak across the country.  Nonresidential  construction

is  depressed by high vacancy rates  and, according to contacts  in  New

York and  San Francisco, difficulties securing construction financing.

Banking

Loan demand from creditworthy businesses is  generally said to be

weak.  In New York, banking contacts say they remain willing to lend to

qualified business borrowers, but  credit standards have tightened  in

recent months and borrowers' credit quality has declined.  Philadelphia

district  banks are  actively promoting business loans  but are meeting

slack demand  from creditworthy borrowers.  Moreover, Chicago  respondents

say that businesses are issuing long-term debt and  are using improved

cash  flow to reduce  their bank debt.  However, Atlanta banking contacts

report that  improvements  in customers'  financial condition are resulting

in  slightly higher  loan approval rates;  in the Cleveland district

lenders'  interest  in development loans has revived a bit.

Agriculture and Natural Resources

Although Dallas  and San Francisco report good conditions for most

crops, hot, dry weather has reduced expected yields  of corn,  soybeans,

and cotton  in parts  of the  Richmond, Chicago, St.  Louis and  Kansas City

districts.  Contacts  note that  increased expenses,  weak demand,  and

declining production prospects  are clouding the outlook for  farm incomes

in  some  areas.  Nevertheless, the  cattle industry remains  strong  in all

reporting regions,  despite a recent  drop in  prices.

Kansas  City and  Dallas  contacts describe oil  and gas  activity as

fairly stable.  Rig  counts  remain low, and natural  gas prices are at

their  lowest  level  in  12  years.  In  the San Francisco region, lumber

industry conditions  are said  to have weakened in  recent weeks.  By

contrast,  St.  Louis  and Minneapolis lumber producers see better

prospects.

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

First District business  conditions are mixed and uncertain.

Manufacturers  are impatient to  see clearer evidence of a national

recovery.  Their  sales  and orders are generally flat to down compared

with mid-1990, and slightly more than half report recent  softness in

incoming orders.  Retail  contacts report that June sales were similar to

their levels  a year  ago.  However, two-thirds expect July sales to end

above year-earlier figures.  First District housing markets continue to

improve.

Retail

Retail  contacts  report  that consumer  spending generally remains

weak  in the First  District.  For most  stores,  June sales ranged from 4

percent below to  3 percent above year-ago  figures.  Relatively strong

products  included housewares,  home  repair items,  and electronics.  In

early July, year-over-year percentage changes in  sales  were generally as

good  as  or better  than the June results.  With the hot  weather, air

conditioner sales were  strong.  Tourist business  was brisk in  coastal

areas.

Retailers are  keeping  inventories very lean,  although one contact

is  stocking up on  some electronics  items  to take advantage of  incentives

for  accepting early delivery.  Except  for a sharp rise  in  lumber prices,

any wholesale price  increases have been very modest.

Contacts report  fairly steady employment levels  in recent months.

One retailer is  opening  an anchor store in  a new mall  in August.

However, a recently  acquired chain will  close  its New England

headquarters,  and a third  firm notes that a major competitor recently

went out  of business.

I-2

Several retailers  observe that economic  conditions in New England

are  no longer worsening.  However, retailers universally believe that

continuing problems  in the banking, real estate, and manufacturing

industries,  as well as  state  budget cutbacks, will impede the economic

recovery in New England.  For those contacts providing estimates, sales

expectations for  1991  range between zero and a 5 percent  increase over

1990.

Auto Sales

Auto dealers  indicate that foreign car  sales  are healthy and, at  a

few dealerships, equal  their levels  in previous  good times.  By

contrast, sales of American cars  remain weak.  As  a result, dealers  have

kept inventories  lean,  despite  factory incentives  offered by the U.S.

auto makers.  Foreign  auto dealers expect  sales to remain robust;

American dealers  are  less  optimistic.

Manufacturing

Half of  the  First District manufacturers contacted express

disappointment that  they are not experiencing a recovery.  For a

majority,  sales  and orders are  flat to  down compared with year-ago

levels,  with declines  ranging  as high  as  15  percent.  Slightly over half

of  the respondents  also  indicate that  incoming  orders have  softened

recently.  Orders  from the  semi-conductor and capital goods  industries,

retailing, and defense exhibit weakness.  By contrast, two contacts note

that orders  from the auto  industry have stabilized.  Most respondents

discussing overseas demand report that  it  continues stronger than

domestic;  however, two  firms describe  foreign sales as  slowing.  For the

majority,  inventories are  at  satisfactory levels.  However, one-third of

the respondents refer to problematic increases.

According to most contacts,  input  prices  are stable or  falling,

I-3

but  a minority report  increases  in prices  for  rubber, chemicals, and

packaging materials.  Intense competition is  forcing most respondents to

maintain or reduce their  own selling prices.  Only a minority had raised

prices  in  1991  (by 2 to 6 percent).

Employment  is  below year-ago levels  at  all but one of  the

manufacturers  surveyed.  The declines range from 2 to 10 percent.

Respondents also describe  furlough and work-sharing programs, extended

summer  shutdowns, and postponed salary increases.  A majority plan

further  cuts,  primarily through attrition or reductions in  the workweek.

Over  one-half of  the manufacturers questioned expect capital

spending to continue at  last year's pace, but  one-third have reduced

their  capital budgets -- by double-digit percentages  from 1990  levels.

Investment plans  focus  on maintenance and modernization.

Most  First District manufacturers contacted describe themselves as

guardedly optimistic or hopeful about their own firms'  prospects.

However, half  see  little or  no  sign that  a national recovery  has begun.

They worry that the upturn may be  slower to arrive or weaker than they

originally anticipated.

Residential  Real Estate

First District  realtors report  that residential  real estate  sales

have improved  slightly over the past couple of months.  Sales are

noticeably better than a year ago,  but below the traditional  summer

volume.  Housing prices  continue to fall  but have almost  hit bottom,

according to most  realtors.  Lower priced homes are  selling better than

higher priced property.  Moreover, the condominium and second home

markets  show no sign of improvement.

II-1

SECOND  DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Developments  in  the District  economy have  remained mixed in

recent weeks.  The  pace  of  office  leasing picked up in  parts  of the

District  and the  June  surveys  of purchasing managers  in both Buffalo

and Rochester  showed  some  improvement.  The  unemployment  rate declined

in  New Jersey but  rose  in  New York and  further substantial  job losses

are  expected in the banking,  airline, and government  sectors.  Many

homebuilders  now expect  that  sales  of  new homes  this  year  will be  at

best  only  slightly  improved  over  the  low levels  of  1990.  June  sales

at  District  department  stores  were below year-ago  levels though  in

some  cases  these  results  were  on  or  above plan.  Most  officers

surveyed  at  small  and midsized banks  reported no  change in  the  ratio

of business  loans  to  total  credit  over the  last  three months.

Consumer  Spending

June  sales  at  District  department  stores were below year-ago

levels  though  in  some  cases these  results  were  on  or even  above plan.

Over-the-year decreases  of  from 1.0  to 11.0  percent were  attributed to

a recessionary environment  and stronger-than-expected May  sales  due to

unusually warm weather  which borrowed from June.  Most  respondents  do

not  anticipate much  improvement  in  sales before  the  fourth quarter  at

best.

Sales  of  big ticket  items  remained sluggish  at most  stores  though

extra promotional  activity  brought  a pickup  in  furniture  sales  in  one

case.  Items  that  sold best  were various types  of men's  and women's

apparel.  Despite  June's  slow  sales,  most  respondents  reported that

inventories  were  right  on target  when  July summer  clearance  sales

began.

II-2

Residential Construction  and Real Estate

After  a flurry of homebuying  activity during the  spring,  sales

have become more  subdued.  Moreover, since much of the earlier buying

was  in the resale market,  many homebuilders  now expect  that  sales of

new homes this  year  will be  only  slightly to  somewhat  improved over

the  low  levels of  1990.  On the  cost  side,  builders  report that  lumber

prices have  recently  risen,  and a shortage of  credit  for acquisition

and construction loans  continues  in much of the District.  One  large

builder  reportedly  faces  bankruptcy because  of  nonrenewal of a loan

for a sizable  development  he  is  constructing.

The pace  of  office  leasing picked up  in parts of  the  District

during  recent  weeks  though vacancy  rates  remain high in many areas.

Leasing  in midtown  Manhattan was the  strongest  in  several months  and

no  major blocks  of  new space  were marketed.  As  a result,  the primary

vacancy  rate  declined  for the  first  time  since  last  fall  after  several

months  of  no  change.  While  the primary  vacancy rate  in  downtown

Manhattan was  unchanged in  June,  this  followed declines  in April  and

May.  Office  leasing activity  has  also reportedly  improved in  northern

New Jersey, but  in  some  other  parts of the  District  such  as  Buffalo

and Fairfield County,  Connecticut, vacancy  rates  have been rising,

largely  as  a result of  corporate  consolidations  and moves.

Other Business  Activity

The  June  surveys  of purchasing managers  in  both Buffalo  and

Rochester  showed  some  improvement.  In  Buffalo the percentage  of

surveyed  firms  with an  increase  in  new orders  rose  to  27 percent  from

4 percent  in May while  the percentage  with  greater production  rose  to

31  percent  from 25 percent  in  May.  More than  30  percent  of  surveyed

firms  in  Rochester reported  improved business  conditions,  up  from  19

percent  in May  and 14  percent  expected a worsening of business

conditions  over the  next three  months,  down  from 26 percent  in  May.

II-3

The  June unemployment  rate  declined  in  New Jersey to  6.6 percent

from 6.8  percent  (seasonally adjusted) but rose  in New York  from

7.4  percent  to 7.7  percent.  New York's rate  has  surpassed the

national  average  for the  last  three months  while New Jersey's  has been

somewhat below.  The  District's employment outlook  is  dimmed by

several  recent  announcements.  The planned merger of  Chemical Banking

and Manufacturers  Hanover is  expected to reduce employment by  some

6200,  with up  to  70  branch closings,  while  further  restructuring at

Citicorp could result  in  a job  loss  of  another  10,000.  In  addition,

the  proposed sale  of much  of  Pan Am to  Delta is  expected to  leave  some

10,000 more  District  workers  without  jobs. 

Government  layoffs  have

also begun  in New York and New  Jersey and thousands  of  additional  jobs

may be eliminated.

Financial  Developments

Most  senior officers  surveyed  at  small and midsized banks  in the

Second District  reported that  their ratio  of business  loans  to total

credit  extended has  not  changed over the  last  three months.  The  few

respondents  noting  a change were  evenly divided  as  to the  direction.

A majority  of the surveyed banks have tightened their  credit

standards  over  the  last three  months.  Most loan  officers  also  stated

that  the  credit  quality  of  their applicants  has  declined.

Nevertheless, they  say their willingness to extend business  loans  to

qualified borrowers  has  not  changed.

The planned merger of  Chemical Banking and Manufacturers  Hanover

would realign the banking market  of  the District.  Their  combined

assets of  $135.5  billion would  constitute  the  second  largest banking

company in  the  nation behind Citicorp  with  $216.9  billion  in  assets.

Their  combined deposits would  constitute  11.1  percent  of  the  New  York

market  behind Citicorp's  12.5 percent  share.

III-1

THIRD  DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Economic  conditions  in the Third  District in  late July  appeared mixed.  Manufacturers

indicated  that business continued  to  improve.  Reports  from retailers varied; but, overall,  sales

appeared  to  be  sluggish.  Bankers  generally  were  experiencing  declining  loan  demand.  Real

estate  contacts  said  commercial  leasing  activity  was  slow  but  showing  some  signs  of

improvement,  and  residential  sales  were  picking  up  also;  however,  construction  activity

remained  weak.

Overall, sentiment  among  Third District business contacts  is slightly  positive, although

reservations  about commercial  real estate persist, and  the  outlook  for bank  lending  is clouded.

The  balance  of  opinion  among  manufacturers  is  optimistic,  with  improvement  anticipated  in

orders  and  shipments,  and  gains  forecasted  for  employment.  Retailers  look  for  some  slight

improvement  in  the  fall  and  winter.  Bankers said  a  rebound  in  lending is  dependent  upon  an

economic  recovery,  which  they  do not believe is firmly established  yet.  Realtors expect further

increases in residential  sales,  but believe  significant  improvement  in  commercial  activity  is at

least  a  year  away.  The  pace  of  construction  is  expected  to  remain  slow.

MANUFACTURING

Manufacturing  activity  in  the  Third  District  continued  on  the  uptrend  that  began  in

May, according  to firms contacted in July.  Although half of the companies  polled reported  just

steady business in  recent  weeks, one-third noted improvement.  Gains were fairly evenly  spread

across  industries  in the  region  except  for  manufacturers  of industrial  equipment and  building

products;  these  firms  indicated  that  demand  for  their  products  remained  weak.  Overall,

however,  both  new  orders  and  shipments  were  moving  up  at  plants  in  the  District, and  both

delivery  times  and  order  backlogs  were  edging  up.

Improving business conditions  were  not being accompanied  by  increases in employment.

Two-thirds  of  the  manufacturers  contacted  said  they  were  holding  the  line  on  payrolls,  and

one-fourth  were  making  cuts.  Most  firms  also  reported  no  change  in  the  length  of  the

III-2

workweek  in  July,  and  those  reporting  increases  just offset  those  reporting  decreases.

Looking  ahead,  most  of  Third  District  manufacturers  surveyed  expect  business  to

continue  to improve  over the  next six months.  On  balance, they foresee  gains in new orders and

shipments.  In  line  with this  outlook,  they  plan  to  add  workers  and  step  up  capital  spending

during  the rest  of  the  year.

RETAIL

Retailers  contacted  in  late  July  gave  mixed  reports  on  recent  sales  results.  Some

specialty  retailers,  particularly  those  selling  apparel  and  jewelry,  indicated  that  sales  were

improving, but general  merchandise and department  stores appeared to be experiencing sluggish

sales.  Some  store officials  said  that although  hotter than  normal weather  boosted  sales of  fans

and  air  conditioners,  the  heat  was  having  an  overall  depressing  effect  on  sales  by  reducing

store  traffic.

Opinions  about  the  balance  of  the  year  vary.  Some  merchants  believe  a  pickup  may

begin  this  fall  but  others  think  that  sales  could  remain  slow  until  the  Christmas  shopping

season.  Few  merchants  expect  a  strong  recovery,  and  some  said  they  were  being  cautious  in

placing  orders  for merchandise  intended  to  be  sold during  the fourth  quarter.

Auto  dealers  generally  indicated  that sales slipped  somewhat  in  July  after  a  pickup  in

June.  The  selling  rate  has  varied  considerably  month-to-month  so  far this  year,  according  to

dealers,  and  they  say  it  is  difficult  to  predict  sales  for the  second  half.  On  balance,  however,

they  expect  auto  sales  will  improve  only  slowly  even  with  an overall  economic  expansion.

FINANCE

Most Third  District bankers  contacted  in  late July  said loan  volumes  outstanding  were

falling  in  nearly  every  credit  category.  Home  equity  loan  volume  was  showing  the  least

slippage, and  some  bankers  said  they were  promoting  these  loans aggressively.  Other  types  of

consumer credit  have been  declining  at a more  rapid  rate, as have  real estate  and business  loan

volumes.  While some  bankers  said  they  were  continuing  to  trim real  estate  portfolios,  several

said  they  were  stepping  up  promotion  efforts  for  business  lending  but meeting  slack  demand

from  creditworthy  potential  borrowers.

III-3

Third District bankers generally indicated  that they expect loan demand  to remain slack

in  the  near  future.  Several  said  they did  not  believe  an  economic  recovery  was  firmly  under

way  yet, and  most  expect  only a  slow  expansion  following the current  recession.  Nevertheless,

some  optimism  was  expressed  that  loan  growth  would  resume  with  a  recovery  as  consumer

demand  increases  and  improved  business  revenues  qualify  more  firms  for  credit.

REAL  ESTATE  AND  CONSTRUCTION

Third  District real  estate  executives  reported  that commercial  leasing activity  for  the

first  half  was  quite low  compared  to  the  past  few  years,  but some  noted a  pickup  in  the  past

month.  Estimates  of  vacancy  rates  for  office  space  in  the  Philadelphia  area  range  from  14

percent  for  the  central  business  district  to  26  percent  in  some  suburban  areas.  Some  realtors

believe  vacancy  rates  could  decline  during  the  second  half  given  the  lack  of  significant

construction  activity  in  the  region;  however,  most  expect  that  solid  improvement  in  overall

commercial  real  estate--including  hotel,  retail, and  office  space--is  at  least  a  year  away.

Residential  realtors  expressed  some  optimism  that  the  sales  trend  may  be  improving.

Many reported  a  sales  pickup in  February  and March,  and, while  there  are indications  that the

upward  momentum  has  flagged  recently,  realtors  do not  expect  sales  to  fall off,  after  taking

into  account  seasonal  factors.

Overall, construction  activity in the Third  District remains weak  and  the latest  reports

on new  contract values  in the Philadelphia  SMSA (May)  indicate a  continuing downward trend.

Industry  contacts  polled  in  July  said  that  some  financially  strong  residential  builders  were

continuing work on  projects and  that some new  commercial  construction  was being  planned for

the  fall;  but,  overall,  private  construction  activity  is  expected  to  remain  low.  Significant

increases  in  public  construction  are  precluded  by  budget  pressures  on  state  and  local

governments,  according  to  industry  sources.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT  - CLEVELAND

Summary.  Activity in  the Fourth District continues to  improve

gradually.  Consumer spending  for automotive and nonautomotive goods slowed in

July, but retailers  and producers  of consumer goods remain cautiously

optimistic for a continued, mild recovery in spending.  Most manufacturers,

except  for some producers  of construction machinery and machine tools, believe

that they  are  in the  early  stages  of a recovery.  Builders of high-priced new

homes  report  that demand is weak but note  that  lenders  recently have been more

actively seeking  loans,  including construction loans.  Loan activity remains

generally  soft, with scattered  signs  of  increases  in business  loans.

Regional  Economy  The 

economy  in  the  Fourth District continues  to

improve gradually.  In Ohio, employment has  risen in three  of  the  last  four

months,  and in June was  nearly back to  its  latest peak in December 1990.  The

unemployment rates  in Ohio and  in  the  District's top  four  metropolitan centers

were all below the  national average  in May and June.  While  respondents

believe  that  the  recession in  the  District  is  over, they continue  to  expect

that recovery will  be mild.

Consumption.  Retailers  report a slowdown  in consumer  spending in the

past month, which some  attribute  to  the  unusually hot weather, but which

others  blame  on tight  inventories  of summer-related goods,  especially apparel,

IV-2

fans,  and air conditioners.  They are  cautious about near-term sales prospects

because  they believe  that revival in consumer spending in spring and early

summer was partly weather-related and because they anticipate only moderate

gains  in employment and income  in the  coming months.

Auto  dealers  report  that car sales have eased since early July, which

some believe was  due  to  the  heat  wave  of recent weeks.  They nevertheless are

encouraged about  sales  prospects for  the  1992 model year, because  initial

orders for  the new models  are  said  to be at or  above levels at comparable

periods  in  the  past.  Dealers report  about a 60-day inventory of new cars,

with higher consumer  and dealer  incentives  likely  to  slash the  stocks  of

models  in excess  supply.  "Nearly new" cars  are  still  selling well  and may be

a substitute  for new  cars,  according to  some  dealers.

Auto  producers believe  that  fleet  sales  in June  were higher  than

usual, and consequently are  cautious about  the  strength of new car  sales.  One

producer expects a sales pickup of about  10 percent in the  second half of the

year.

Manufacturing.  Recovery  in production has been mixed, and respondents

anticipate  continued but slow growth.  Major producers of consumer  durable

goods  believe  the  trough  in their orders  and output was  in late  1990  and early

1991, but capital  goods  industries are marked by mixed patterns.

Auto producers  acknowledge that new car production will not be a drag

on GNP and industrial  production as  it was  earlier this  year, but are  cautious

IV-3

about whether auto production will contribute as much to total output in the

second half of 1991  as  it  did last quarter.

Production of major home appliances  is  on a rising trend, according to

a producer, because  sales to  dealers have strengthened and inventories are

being rebuilt  following a liquidation in late  1990 and early 1991.

Capital  goods producers uniformly expect a revival  in output in the

second half of this  year, but  some  still believe  that  their business is in a

declining phase.  One  forecaster will  trim his  second-half outlook for

producers'  durable equipment because industrial  and transportation equipment

production last  quarter was  less  than he  expected. Heavy-duty truck orders

revived moderately  last  quarter from a 1991:IQ trough, and by year-end are

expected to  be  about  twice  the  level  of the weak first  quarter, according to a

supplier.  A producer of electric motors  and  industrial equipment reports

signs  of revival  in  that  industry late  last quarter.  The worst of  the decline

in the  construction machinery industry is  over, according to a producer, but

recovery has not  yet begun because construction activity,  except for housing

and highways,  remains  in recession.  Finally, a machine tool producer believes

that  the  decline  in orders  is  close to bottom and expects  a revival  in  the

second half of this year.

Steel analysts  see  little  change  from  the current  70 percent operating

rate over  the next few months.  Orders  from  the auto  industry have picked up,

IV-4

but not so  from the  capital  goods  and construction industries.  Steel

inventory  liquidation by customers  is  said to have run its  course  last

quarter.

Construction  and Real Estate.  Some builders  of new homes

priced at  $250,000  and higher complain that  demand has weakened since early

June,  and  that second-half construction  appears  to  be  limited to  replacing

homes  that were  sold earlier  this year.  One builder reports  that  banks  are

now  interested in making development  loans  that  were not accepted just  a  few

months  ago.  A  major  lender  agreed that  demand and new construction  for  the

high  end of  the housing market  is  weak, and that  his  firm is  now  looking at

custom home builders  that  previously were not  its  customers.

Financial  Developments.  In general,  loan activity  remains  soft.  There

are  only scattered  signs  of a  pickup  in business  loans,  despite  the  revival  in

economic activity.  Some  lenders note  that  commercial  and industrial  loans  in

recent business  recoveries  declined for  several  quarters before  strengthening.

Lenders  insist that  loan standards have  not tightened  in  recent months, but

neither have they been relaxed.  Some bankers  note a  small pickup  in consumer

loans,  especially  for cars.  One banker reports  that  business, consumer, and

mortgage  loans were  off  slightly in June, but that  loan officials  continue to

search for  creditworthy borrowers because  loan growth  so  far  this year has

been disappointing.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview

District economic performance was mixed from June through mid-July, and

some of those surveyed expressed concern  over the  evidently slow and uneven

pace  of the recovery.  Manufacturing improved,  but  retailing  and  commercial

lending  apparently did not,  and no  improvement was seen  or expected in

commercial  real  estate.  Most  state budgets  had been  balanced;  at  the time of

the  survey,  however, South Carolina and  the  District of Columbia were  still

revising their  spending  plans.  Agricultural  conditions  remained favorable,

though  inadequate  rain  threatened  crops  in some  parts of  the  District.

Consumer Spending

Our  regular  survey  of  retailers  indicated that  business  slowed  in the

past month.  Most  retailers  noted  declines  in  their  sales  and  shopper traffic,

as  well  as  in their  inventories,  employment,  and  capital  expenditures.  Their

wages  and  prices  rose  somewhat.

Despite  slower  current activity,  respondents were optimistic  about  the

business outlook  for  the  next  six  months.  Most expected general  economic

conditions to  improve  locally and  nationally, and  they also  expected  a rise  in

their own  sales  and  shopper traffic.  Wholesale and  retail  prices  were also

expected to  rise.

Manufacturing

Our  regular mail  survey  of manufacturers  indicated that  District  factory

activity  improved  slightly  in July.  Manufacturers reported  stable to higher

levels  of  shipments and  new orders.  Inventories  and order  backlogs apparently

fell,  while other business  indicators remained  steady.

A majority of manufacturers  foresaw improvement over  the next six months

in national  and  regional  business conditions  and  increases  in their own

shipments, new orders,  and prices.

Economic Recovery

We  asked  our manufacturing and retailing  respondents if they thought the

recession was  over.  Nearly half of the  manufacturers  believed the recession

had  bottomed  out--both for  themselves  and  for the economy as  a whole--while

less  than  a fourth  thought  it had  not.  Retailers  had mixed  feelings about

whether general  economic recovery had  begun;  almost  half believed that  the

retail  sector was  still  in a downturn, while  less  than a third thought the

downturn  had  ended.

Port  Activity

Representatives  at  District ports--Baltimore,  Charleston,  and  Hampton

Roads  (Norfolk)--indicated that  exports  rose  and imports  fell  in June  from May

and from a year earlier.  Exports  were expected to  increase faster than

imports  throughout  the  remainder of the  summer  and  fall.

Those surveyed  thought that  the declining dollar had boosted exports.

Hampton Roads  reported stronger exports of higher-valued  items--such  as

industrial  machinery--to Northern  Europe.  Coal  exports  rose at  both Hampton

Roads  and  Baltimore.

Tourism

A telephone  survey  of District hotels,  motels  and  resorts  indicated that

tourist  activity  remained flat  in July despite  some  reports  of a strong  July

V-3

4th.  A majority of respondents  expected tourism to  remain  lackluster for the

rest of the  summer  and  into  the fall.

Finance

District  financial  institutions contacted  by telephone  indicated that

the demand  for commercial  and  industrial  loans weakened  slightly  in June  and

early July.  Few new businesses  reportedly  sought  financing.  Loan  delinquency

rates  evidently edged down.

State Budgets

According to  a telephone survey of  state budget forecasters,  four Fifth

District states  entered  the  new fiscal  year with  their budgets  balanced.

South Carolina was  in the  process  of revising  its  spending plans  in  response

to  new revenue estimates.  West Virginia had no shortfall  going  into  the  new

fiscal  year, and  the  other states  corrected  their shortfalls  by either

reducing  spending,  increasing  taxes  or  a combination of  both.  The District  of

Columbia's  fiscal  year  ends September 30  and  some  revenue  shortfall  remained

when  the survey was  taken.  Further budgetary  actions were expected,  including

possible D.C.  government  employee layoffs.

Housing

A survey of  homebuilders suggested  that the housing market was  steady  in

recent  weeks.  Builders  reported little  change  in  starts and most  indicated

that  sales were  flat  or slightly up,  with low-priced  and  medium-priced homes

selling best.  Inventories  of unsold  homes  reportedly  fell.  Nearly  all

builders  said  that  home prices  were  steady, despite  a rise  in lumber prices.

Most  expected no  improvement  in housing activity over  the  next  few months.

Commercial  Real  Estate

Real  estate  contacts said  that District commercial  construction  had come

to a standstill.  Weakness  was  especially pronounced  in the Washington, D.C.

area,  where prospects for  an  upturn were  termed  poor because of high  vacancy

rates.  In other large  cities,  commercial  real  estate markets were  sluggish--

though  less  than  in Washington--and problems were even  less  severe  in smaller

District cities.

Agriculture

Conditions  in the  District's  farm sector were generally favorable,

according to  analysts contacted,  but  hot  and  dry weather conditions  in

Virginia  and  Maryland threatened  crops.  Throughout the District,  the planting

of  soybeans and  the  harvesting  of small  grains were  almost complete.  The

condition  of soybeans,  corn,  pastures, fruits  and  vegetables  was  reported to

be  good  in most  areas.  Tobacco marketing was  underway with  both production

and  prices  reported strong.  In Virginia and  Maryland, hot  temperatures and

scarce  rainfall  had  begun  to  stress  crops.  Corn,  soybean,  and peanut yield

prospects were  beginning to  dim,  and  the crops  faced  severe damage  if adequate

rain  were  not  received  soon.

VI-1

SIXTH  DISTRICT  - ATLANTA

Overview:  Businesses  contacted  in July  indicate  that signs of recovery  are  spreading

slowly  through  the  Southeast.  Retailers  report  continued  sales  improvements  which  included

scattered  gains  in  consumer  durables.  Manufacturers'  reports  continue  to  be  mixed,  but more

told  of increased  orders  and  production  than  earlier  this year.  Though  home  sales leveled  off,

inventories  of unsold  homes  have  fallen  and building has edged  up in a  few  markets.  Industry

contacts  report that cotton and peanut crops have shown marked  improvements  from earlier rain-

related  conditions.  No  exceptional  wage  or price pressures  were  reported.

Retail  Sales:  June  and  early  July  retail  sales  have maintained  the  modest  growth  rate

posted  in  the  spring.  District  retail  contacts  all  stated that  apparel  and home  furnishings  were

leading  the  sales  increases;  reports  on  durables  were  mixed.  One  large  retailer  reported  that

furniture and  appliance  sales are down  after doing better earlier in the year.  Although,  three out

of four automobile  dealers  contacted  increased  orders of new models  in  response  to better sales,

their  orders are  still  below last  year's levels.  Merchants plan  no  increases  in orders  except  for

apparel,  and  inventories continue  to be lean.  Reported declines  in June retail advertising confirm

retailers'  cautious  behavior.

Tourism  and convention  travel  continues  to do relatively  well.  Adjusting  for normal

seasonal  fluctuations,  contacts  in  Atlanta,  New  Orleans,  and  Orlando  report  further  monthly

increases in convention  bookings and visitors for June and early July.  The owner of an economy

hotel reported  that business  "bounced  back" in the second quarter and future sales look promising

for  that  segment  of  the  market  since  travelers  continue  to  trade  down  in  the  cost  of

accommodations.

VI-2

Manufacturing:  Mixed  manufacturing reports mirror the scattered  improvements noted

by  retailers.  A  little  over  half of the manufacturers  contacted  saw evidence  of a turnaround  in

orders.  Textile  producers  unanimously  report  increased  work  hours  and  production  levels  in

response  to rising orders.  Producers  of refrigeration and air conditioning  equipment,  and carpet

and  carpet  tiles  all  report  stronger  orders  and  production  over previous  months  this  year.  A

furniture manufacturer  has increased  production  in response  to better sales.  A  spokesperson  for

an automobile  company  expects  one assembly  plant in the region  to soon  increase hours worked

in  response  to  rising orders.  Exports  of paper  products  and kaolin  continue to  grow.

The  remainder  of the manufacturers  have  not yet  seen any  improvement in orders.  A

heavy equipment dealer,  upon seeing further  declines in sales early this summer,  made additional

inventory  reductions. 

In  Florida,  a  packaging  company  contact  reported  that  June  sales  were

down  significantly  on  a year-to-year  basis  while  a building  materials  manufacturer  with excess

inventory  has  seen  no rebound  in  sales and is continuing to trim payrolls.  Farm equipment  sales

have  not  recovered  from  their  earlier  depressed  levels  even  though  the  weather  has  improved

significantly.  Grain  and  phosphate  rock  exports  remain  weak.

Financial  Services:  Three  out  of four  bankers  contacted  reported  some  increases  in

June  and  July  loan  demand  over last year.  A  few  bankers  also indicated  that a strengthening  of

the  financial  condition  of their  customers  has  resulted  in  a  slightly  higher  loan  approval  rate.

A real estate  lender in  Georgia said  that improved profitability  of single family homebuilders  has

helped  this June's  new  residential  construction  loans  to  significantly  exceed  last June's  levels.

However,  some residential and  commercial  developers  still say that they cannot get the financing

to build.  Auto  dealers  emphasize  that credit terms  are tight.  Credit terms  for  small  businesses

do not  appear  to have  eased.

VI-3

Construction:  Most  residential  realtors  reported  that  home  sales  levelled  off in June

and  July  at  levels  about  even  with  or  slightly  above  those  of last  year.  Higher  FHA  down

payments  have  reportedly  knocked  out  some  potential  home  buyers.  Diminished  new  home

inventories have  recently  stirred  activity  in  some  residential  markets.  All  commercial  builders

contacted  believe that  nonresidential  construction  has hit bottom  but no rebound  is expected  for

some  time.  Public  projects  are  still  the  only  reported  strength  in  nonresidential  construction

throughout  most of the  region.

Wages  and  Prices:  Employers  generally  report  no  increases  in  wage  pressures.

Substantial  layoffs over  the  last  year have  increased  pools  of job applicants.  Some natural  gas

producers  are  scaling  back  production  and  contemplate  layoffs  as  a  result of depressed  prices.

Several  leasing  agents  reported  that  office  rental  rates  have levelled  off in the  last  sixty  days  at

about  thirty  percent  below  last  year's  rates.  Rising  lumber  prices  have  raised  residential

construction  costs;  however,  homebuilders  noted  that  they have  been  purchasing  appliances  at

prices  below  those  four or  five  year  ago.

VII-1

SEVENTH  DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.  The  Seventh District economy  generally  remained  on a  modestly  expanding  path in

June and  early July.  District consumer spending appears to  have  risen slightly over this period, according

to several contacts.  On  balance,  District manufacturing  activity  strengthened  in June, and  the recovery  in

the  auto  sector  continued.  However,  several  contacts  reported  that  the  capital  goods  sector  remained

weak.  Drought-like conditions have  placed  stress on potential District crop  yields.  Bank  credit growth in

the  District  was  restrained  by  both  demand  and  supply  factors,  and  commercial  real  estate  portfolios

continued  to weigh on bank  capital positions.

Consumer  Spending.  Consumer spending  gains  in  the  District  were  sluggish  in June  and early

July.  A recent survey of retailers  in Illinois and  Michigan indicated  that June sales  were about equal  with

last  year,  in  contrast  to  a  decline  nationally.  Earlier-than-expected  growth  in  sales  of  seasonal

merchandise  helped  generate  a  good  national  retail  sales  report  in  May,  but  was  followed  by  some

softening in  June,  according  to  one  District  contact.  Sales were  not  simply  shifted  to  the  earlier month,

however,  as  many  retailers  found  themselves  low on  stocks  of  items  that  remained  in  demand  through

June.  Several  appliance  retailers  in  the  Illinois  state  capital  reported  that  year-over-year  sales  gains

resumed  after state  workers  began  receiving  paychecks,  which  had  been suspended  during  recent  budget

negotiations.  The  Wisconsin  vacation  season  is  going  very  well,  but  low  occupancy  rates  and  heavy

discounting  continue  to depress  the Detroit hotel industry.

Autos.  National  reports  showing  car sales rising from low levels  in March  and  April  were joined

by  increasingly  optimistic  reports  from  several  District auto  dealers.  The  slippage  in auto  sales  reported

for mid-July  may  have  been  due  in  part  to  a  heat  wave  that  made  shopping  unattractive,  according  to

several  dealers.  An  industry  economist  noted  that sales  were  buttressed  by  fleet  purchases  in June  and

should  have been expected  to  ease  somewhat, but auto  sales in the  second  half of 1991  are  still expected

to  be better  than in the  first half.  Several  dealers located  in stable markets  reported  that sales have  begun

to  show  a  steady  rebound.  Dealers  located  in  less  stable  or  more  diverse  markets  reported  that  sales

remain  sluggish,  in  part  due  to  stricter  financing  conditions.  A  distributor of transplant  autos  reported

good  sales growth  in the  Midwest  in June  and  early July,  and market  share  gains in the District continue.

Several contacts  indicated a growing importance  of need-based  buyers in the sales mix.  Fewer buyers  are

"reaching up" to more  expensive models.

VII-2

Manufacturing.  The  balance  of momentum  in  District  manufacturing  activity  shifted  toward

expansion  in  recent  months,  after  lagging other  sectors  of the  region's  economy.  Purchasing  managers'

surveys  around  the  District  continued  to  show improvement.  In July,  the  Chicago  index  registered  net

expansion  for  the  first time  since  last  August,  although  new  orders  was  the  only  component  to  register

over  50 percent.  Slower employment  cutbacks  also contributed  to  the  rise in the overall  index.  Still, the

trend  in  the  overall  Chicago  index  has  been  unambiguously  positive  since  a  January  low.  Sharper

improvement  was  recorded  in  June  by  two  surveys  in Michigan.  The  Detroit  index  for June  registered

what the  survey  director  described  as  "the  first  full-fledged  recovery  signal,"  with  above-average  gains

recorded  in the  auto  sector.  A  survey  conducted  in Southwest  Michigan has  shown  solid  expansion  for

several  months,  and  sharp  gains  in  the  employment  and  production components  of the  June index joined

continued  expansion  in new orders.

Reports  by  individual  manufacturers  suggested  continued  gains  in  production  of  consumer

durable  goods,  while  reports  from  capital  goods  manufacturers  were  mixed.  A  large  steel  producer

reported  that  its order  book  points  toward  shipment  increases  through the  end  of the  third  quarter  (on  a

seasonally  adjusted basis),  and  additional  growth is  anticipated  in the  fourth quarter  as well.  This  contact

cited  strength  in  orders  from  auto  and  appliance  manufacturers,  while  bookings  from  producers  of

construction  equipment,  agricultural  machinery,  and  office  furniture  remained  soft.  A large  electronics

supplier reported  that  new  orders  gains,  which began  in April,  continued  through  June.  A manufacturer

of paper containers  reported  that  year-over-year  shipment  growth  returned  in June,  after new  weakening

was  recorded  earlier  in  the  second  quarter.  This  contact  also  cited  strength  in orders  from  appliance

manufacturers.  A  survey  of  printers  indicated  modest  yet  clear  improvement  in  orders  from  District

manufacturers  in May  and  June.  Heavy-duty  truck orders  softened in June,  but only after an earlier surge

generated  by  a  price  increase  announcement,  and  one  large  manufacturer  delayed  a  temporary  factory

shutdown  for  the  second  time.  Several  other  capital  goods  producers,  which  typically  lag  in  the  early

stages  of  a  recovery,  reported  that  orders  remain  soft.  Sales  and  rentals  of construction  equipment

remained  weak.  Promotional  activity  bolstered  sales of agricultural machinery  in the second  quarter,  but

one  manufacturer  stated  that  diminishing  earnings  prospects  have  dampened  farmers'  capital  spending

plans,  both domestically  and internationally.

VII-3

Agriculture.  Crops in major portions  of the  District have been under considerable  stress recently

because  of the  drought-like  conditions  that  have  prevailed  since  the  end  of May.  The  hardest  hit  areas

stretch  from north  central Indiana to  central  Iowa.  Many observers believe that corn yields in the hard-hit

areas  suffered  considerable  irreversible losses  during  the past two  weeks.  Forecasts  of continued  hot and

dry  weather  during  early  August  raise  the  possibility  of  more  extensive  crop  damage,  especially  for

soybeans.

Financial  Markets.  The  need  to  strengthen  capital  positions  and  uncertainty  over  the  future

course  of financial  market  regulation  continued  to suppress  the  demand  for  and  supply  of District  bank

credit.  One  large bank  reported  that  its  loan  portfolio  declined  in the  second  quarter,  despite the  bank's

growth  objective.  Customer  demand  ebbed  in  several  areas,  including  cyclically-sensitive  working

capital  financing.  A  middle-market bank  in Michigan reported net shrinkage  in its loan portfolio  in recent

months,  after  showing growth through most of 1990  and into  early  1991.  A contact with  this bank stated

that  improving  customer  cash  flow  led  to  higher  levels  of debt  retirement,  which  combined  with  low

levels  of demand  for  new  financing  to  produce  a  net  decrease  in  the  portfolio.  The  surge  in  long-term

debt  issuance  since  the  first quarter  also  contributed  to  the  decline.  A bank economist  cited uncertainty

over the future  structure of financial  market  regulation as an important  factor  affecting banking  markets.

Commercial  construction loans  secured  by real estate  continue  to  weigh on bank capital  positions,

according  to  a  recent survey  of large  District banks  and  branches  of large  foreign  banks.  Roughly  one-

third  of these  loans  that  expired  over  the  past  year  were  retired  as  specified  in the  loan  contract.  Most

respondents  expect  the  proportion  of loans  requiring  renegotiation  or foreclosure  to  rise  over  the  next

twelve  months.  However,  most  respondents  had not  yet  committed  to  internal  refunding  of the  credits

scheduled  to mature over  the  next year, and  few contacts  had purchased  commitments  by other lenders  to

provide  takeout  financing.  Still,  several  lenders  reported  making  new  commercial  construction  loans  in

1991,  suggesting  that at least some  credit-worthy projects continue  to find  funding.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT  - ST.  LOUIS

Summary

The  District  economy  remains  sluggish.  Car  sales  have  picked up

slightly,  but  spending  on  general  merchandise  is  flat.  Manufacturing

activity  is  mixed  and residential  construction remains  weak.  Shipping

companies  report declining business.  Loan  growth at  large  District banks

has  picked up  in  recent  months.  Weather-related problems  continue  to

hinder  agricultural production.

Consumer  Spending

Most  retailers  of  general  merchandise  report that  sales  have  not

strengthened appreciably since  spring and, in  real  terms,  are  down from a

year  ago.  Inventories  are  generally  at  planned  levels.  Some  retailers

feel  that  consumer  confidence  is  increasing,  but  that  heavy  debt  loads

are  forcing  many  consumers 

to  curtail  their  purchases. 

Declining

prospects  for  farm  income  are  expected  to  reduce  retail 

sales  in 

some

rural  areas.  Some  contacts  anticipate  a slight  sales  increase  in  the

third quarter, while  others  expect no  increase  before  the  fourth  quarter.

Most  car  and  truck  dealers  report  that  sales  have  strengthened  slightly

in June  and  July,  though  they  remain  below last  year's  level.  Reduced

profit  margins  and  slow  sales  have 

lowered  dealers'  profits. 

Many

customers  are  buying  used  cars  rather 

than  new  ones. 

Inventories

generally  are  near  desired  levels. 

The  outlook  for  vehicle  sales  is

cautiously  optimistic;  some  contacts  expect  a moderate pick-up  as  1992

models  are  released.

Manufacturing

Unlike  most  District  manufacturers, 

food  processors  have

continued 

to  add  workers 

in 

recent  months. 

Some  District  poultry

VIII-2

processors,  for  example,  are  expanding  their  facilities  and workforce.

One  contact,  however,  reports  that  the  Soviet Union,  a primary buyer  of

U.S.  poultry, has  cut  its  orders  for  poultry  because  of  a  shortage  of

hard  currency.  Some  manufacturers  making  auto-related  goods,  such  as

chemicals  and  plastic  products,  have  received  increased  orders.  One

steelmaker,  who  has  ordered  intermittent  layoffs  this  year,  expects

increasing orders  from the  auto  industry, which will make  further layoffs

unnecessary.  This  contact  anticipates,  however, 

that  orders  from  the

commercial  construction 

industry  will  remain  at  their  currently  low

level.  The  indefinite  shutdown  of  another  steel  factory  was  attributed

to  a sudden  downturn  in  orders  for  castings  for  railroad freight  cars.

Construction and Real  Estate

Residential  construction activity remains  depressed  throughout

most of  the  District.  Homebuilders  in St.  Louis,  Memphis  and Little Rock

report  that  year-to-date, 

single-family  home  permits  are 

still

substantially  below year-ago  levels.  Contacts  report  some  strengthening

in  the  second  quarter,  however.  Louisville  continues  to  be  a  bright

spot,  with  new  home  prices  steady  and  year-to-date  permits  down  just

slightly  from  a  year  ago. 

Other  contacts  report  that  declines 

in

existing home  prices  have  depressed new home prices.  In  addition, rising

lumber  costs  have  squeezed  builders' 

profit 

margins  further.

Nonresidential  construction  activity,  with  the  exception  of  seasonal

infrastructure  repair work and other  public works projects,  remains weak.

Shipping

Contacts  report  that  depressed  economic  conditions 

in  North

America  and  Europe  have  led  to  a  decline  in 

the  business  of  two  major

express  shipping  firms.  One  company  spokesman expects  that  revenues will

continue  to  be  depressed by  the  soft worldwide  economy  in  the  next  few

months.  The  U.S.  recession has  resulted  in  intensified  competition  in

VIII-3

the  trucking  industry  and has  led  to  the  liquidation of  an Arkansas-based

trucking firm,  idling  3,800  workers  in  the Midwest and  South.

Banking and  Finance

Total 

loans  on  the  books  of  12 

large  District  banks  rose

slightly  from  mid-May 

to  mid-July,  after  a  small  decline  during  the

previous  two months.  Real  estate  loans  increased almost 4 percent  during

the  period,  compared  with  1  percent  growth  from  mid-March  to  mid-May  and

2.6  percent  growth  a  year  earlier. 

Commercial  and  industrial  loans

outstanding declined just  0.6  percent during  the past  two months,  after a

3.6  percent  drop 

the  period  before. 

In  contrast 

to  other 

loan

categories,  consumer  loans  dropped  more  than  1  percent  from  mid-March 

to

mid-May, after  rising almost  1  percent during  the previous  two  months.

Agriculture  and Natural  Resources

Significant  yield  reductions, 

resulting  from  weather-related

diseases,  caused  the  recently harvested winter wheat  crop  in  the District

to  be  at  its 

lowest  level 

in  several  years. 

Hot  and  dry  weather  is

beginning  to  stress  the  corn,  soybean  and  cotton  crops  in  most  areas.

The exceptions  are  west  central  Illinois  and parts  of northern Missouri,

where  corn  and  soybean  crops  are  reported 

in  excellent  condition.

Because  of  the  costs  associated with  the  delayed  spring plantings  in  the

Delta  region  of  the  District  (for  example,  additional  tillage  operations

and  increased  chemical  usage),  this  year's  crops,  primarily  cotton and

rice,  will  be  among  the  most  expensive  ever  to  produce. 

As  a result,

some  farmers  are  reported 

to  have  exhausted  their  short-term  credit

lines.  Contacts  report  that  a  decline  in  available  Pacific  Northwest

timber acreage  and  a rise  in  lumber  prices,  associated primarily with  the

spotted  owl  protection  plan,  has  stimulated 

increased  inquiries 

to

Southern 

lumber  producers. 

Two 

large  plywood  producers  have  even

increased shipments  to  the West Coast.

IX-1

NINTH  DISTRICT-MINNEAPOLIS

The  Ninth  District  has  continued  to  feel  the  effects  of the  national  recession,  but there  are

signs  of  recovery.  Labor  market  conditions  have  continued  to  improve,  while  retail  sales  have

exhibited moderate growth.  Conditions in construction and resource-related  industries  have remained

mixed,  while  manufacturing  has  shown  signs  of rebounding.

Employment,  Wages,  and  Prices

Labor  market  conditions  generally  improved  in  the  District,  but  still  remained  depressed.

Minnesota's  unemployment  rate fell  to 4.8 percent  in June,  down from  5.5  percent  in the previous

month,  and  only  slightly  higher  than  the  4.6  percent  level  of  a  year  ago.  May  unemployment

figures,  while  somewhat  lower  than  in  April,  were  still  above  their  year  ago  levels  in  Montana,

western Wisconsin,  and  the Upper  Peninsula of Michigan.  The May unemployment  rate in Montana

was  6.4 percent,  1 percent  above  its  year  ago  level.  In the  Upper  Peninsula  of Michigan  the  May

unemployment  rate  was  10.4  percent  as  compared  to  8.5  percent  a year  ago.  South Dakota's  May

unemployment  rate of 3.4 percent was  unchanged,  both relative  to  the previous  month  and  year-ago

levels.  In  North  Dakota,  by  contrast,  the  May  unemployment  rate of 4.2 percent  was  0.5 percent

higher  than  the  previous  month,  but  only  0.6  percent  higher  than  a  year  ago.  The  growth  of

nonagricultural  employment  in May  relative to  its year  ago level was fairly strong in North and South

Dakota,  1.2 and  2.6 percent respectively,  but generally weak  in the rest of the District,  rising by 0.3

percent  in Minnesota,  and  0.4 percent  in  Montana.

Consumer  Spending

District  retailers  of general  merchandise  report  slightly  higher sales  figures  for June  relative

to  year-ago  levels,  (figures  are  for  the  five-week  period  ending  July  6)  with  sales  increases  in

IX-2

comparable  stores ranging  from 2.3 to  8 percent relative  to a year ago.  Minnesota  sales tax  receipts

were  down  6.2  percent  in June,  but  up 2.6 percent  in  May  relative  to year-ago  levels.  Retail  sales

in  North  and  South Dakota,  as  well  as  in  Montana,  continue  to  benefit  from  the  strong  influx  of

Canadian  shoppers.

New car  and truck  sales  continue  to be weak,  though used  cars show some improvement,  and

dealers  report that  their  service  departments  are  running  close to capacity.  Dealers report  new  car

sales declines  ranging  from 5 to as  much  as 40 percent  at  some small  dealers  for the first half of this

year relative  to a year ago.  However,  recreational  vehicle  and  boat  sales  are  reported  to be  strong.

Housing  sales  in  the  District  have  been  mixed  lately.  The  depressed  Minneapolis-St.  Paul

area  experienced  a  surge  in  May,  with  sales  at  their  highest  level  in  three  years.  However,  June

sales  were  down  9.6  percent  relative  to  a  year  ago,  and  23.2  percent  from  May,  with  the  change

being  attributed  to  a  recent  rising  cost of FHA-insured  mortgages.  Home  sales  are  reported  to  be

especially  strong  in parts  of South  Dakota.

Tourist activity  has  been  strong  in  the District.  The  number  of crossings over  the Mackinac

Bridge onto the  Upper  Peninsula  of Michigan  relative  to year-ago  periods  were  up 3.6 percent  in the

first  22  days  of July,  and  up  3.4  percent  in  the  first  half of the  year.  Bookings  in  Montana's

Yellowstone  National  Park  are  up  substantially  from their  year-ago  levels.

Construction  and  Manufacturing

Conditions  in the  District's  construction  industry  have  been  mixed with  the  large  overhang

of office  space  in the  Minneapolis-St.  Paul  area  depressing  local  activity.  The  office  vacancy  rate

in downtown Minneapolis  and  St.  Paul was  13.6  and  20.1  percent respectively  in the second quarter

of this  year,  and  is  expected  to  rise  as  current  construction  projects  are  completed.  The  number  of

IX-3

housing  permits  issued  in  Minnesota  rose by  7  percent  in  May  relative  to  a year  ago,  but  was  still

slightly  below  its  level  of two  years  ago.

Conditions in the District's manufacturing  industries appear  to be improving.  In Minnesota,

the  total  hours  worked  in  manufacturing  rose  1.4  percent  in  April  from  March,  but  was  still  0.6

percent below  its  year  ago  level.  The  level  of new  business  incorporations  in the  state  was  down

6  percent  in  April  from  March's  all  time  high,  but was  still  18  percent  above the  year  ago  level.

The medical  industry is reported  to be doing  well,  while the computer  and electronics  industries  are

holding  steady,  and  the  aircraft  supply  industry  has  slowed.

Resource-Related  Industries

Agricultural  conditions  have been  mixed lately  with  some parts of the District receiving badly

needed  moisture  while  others  have  been  hurt  by  excess  precipitation. 

In  southern  Minnesota,  18

counties  were  declared  to  be  a  natural  disaster  area.  In  Montana,  North  and  South  Dakota,  small

grains and  feed  crops  are  in good  shape.  Prices  of cereal  grains were  slightly  higher while  livestock

prices  were  lower  in  June  as  compared  to  May.  The  Montana  and  Minnesota  farm  price  indexes

were  respectively  2.0  and  13  percent  lower  in  June  as  compared  to  a  year  ago.  Ranchers  in  the

District  continue  to  do well  due to  cattle  prices  which  are  still  high despite  recent  declines.

Conditions  in  the  District's  mining  and  lumber  industries  have  been  fairly  good.  Lower

inventories  of lumber have  led  to  higher prices.

X-1

TENTH DISTRICT  - KANSAS  CITY

Overview.  Economic conditions  in the Tenth District appear  to be

improving modestly.  Supporting growth in  the district are  steady to  slightly

higher retail  sales,  increasing new home  sales,  continued strength  in  the

livestock sector, and increased drilling for oil and gas.  Further momentum is

expected from increases  in housing starts  and auto sales  in the  last half of

the  year.  Neither retailers  nor manufacturers are adding  to  inventories, and

both retail  and wholesale prices are  generally holding steady.

Retail  sales.  Retailers  report steady to  somewhat higher sales  over  the

last three  months.  Clothing and  seasonal merchandise  sales  are  strong,

although home  furnishings  sales  remain sluggish.  Retailers  generally expect

strengthening sales  over  the  last half of the  year.  Prices have been  steady

to  somewhat  lower  over the  past  three months  and are  expected to  remain

steady.  Most retailers  are  satisfied with their  current  inventory  levels.

Auto  sales  are mixed across  district states.  Some potential buyers  have

to  shop  around to  get  loans,  but adequate financing is  available for  dealer

inventories.  Dealers  are  striving for  lean inventories  even though  sales are

expected to  increase  in the  second half of  the  year.

Manufacturing.  Purchasing agents report steady  to  slightly  lower  input

prices  compared with three  months  ago.  Input  prices are  generally expected to

remain stable  over the  next three months.  Materials are  readily available,

with no problems  expected  for  the  rest of the  year.  Most firms  are

maintaining  or  reducing inventories.  Some  plants are  increasing operations

but are not putting pressure on either labor  supplies  or plant capacity.

Energy.  Energy activity  in the  district has  edged upward in  recent

weeks  in response  to  modestly higher oil prices.  The  average number of

X-2

operating drilling rigs  in district states  increased from 230 in June  to 243

in the first  three weeks  of July.  Despite this  improvement in drilling

activity, the district rig count remained about 20 percent below its year-ago

level.  Moreover, weak prices  for  their products have discouraged producers of

natural gas  and sour crude oil  (especially abundant in Wyoming).

Housing Activity and Finance.  New home sales are generally steady to

slightly higher, but housing starts  across the district are mixed.  With sales

expected to be steady to  slightly higher  in the months ahead, a declining

inventory of unsold homes  is likely to  encourage further gains  in starts later

this year.  Builders report no problems acquiring materials, although lumber

prices have been climbing.

Most savings  and loan respondents  report  increased net deposit inflows

last month.  Respondents expect  inflows to  continue  in coming months.

Mortgage demand and commitments are  stable, although respondents expect

somewhat stronger demand for  housing finance  later in the  year.  Mortgage

rates have  stabilized and are  expected to  fluctuate  in a narrow range for  the

rest of the year.

Banking.  Changes  in loan  demand were mixed at district commercial banks

last month.  Demand for consumer  loans at most banks was  stable  to up

slightly, while demand for  home mortgages was generally stable.  Demand for

commercial and industrial  loans and commercial real estate  loans varied

widely.  Most banks  report declines  in their  loan-deposit ratios.  Total

deposits were  generally stable  or up  slightly, with demand deposits  accounting

for most of the  strength.

None of the  respondent banks  changed its  prime  rate last  month, or

expect to  change  it  in the near future.  Consumer lending rates were generally

X-3

unchanged, although several respondents had reduced their rates.  No banks

report changes  in other lending terms.

Agriculture.  The  cattle  industry remains  a major source of strength in

the  district farm economy.  A combination of low feed costs and high feeder

cattle prices have boosted profits  for district cattle ranchers.  Pastures and

rangelands are  generally in good shape, providing abundant, low-cost forage

for cattle herds.  Despite strong profits, ranchers are expanding their herds

cautiously.  High feeder cattle prices and a sharp decline in fed cattle

prices have squeezed profits  for  district cattle feeders.  While an unusually

large number of cattle on feed has  pushed fed cattle prices down in recent

weeks, prices are expected to rebound later in the year.

The winter wheat harvest is  complete  in all district states except

Wyoming.  Overall,  the district's  crop  is  about a fourth smaller  than last

year's bumper crop, due  to  smaller planted acreage and lower yields.  Yields

vary from 20 percent above normal  in southwestern Oklahoma to  30  to  50 percent

below normal  in parts  of Missouri and Nebraska.

Reduced production of spring-planted crops  is also possible.  The

district's  corn, soybean, and milo crops  got a strong start due  to plentiful

spring rains, but more rain is needed now.  If the  recent hot, dry weather

continues,  crop yields could be sharply reduced.

XII  - 2

rise  in  the  general  sales  tax,  an  expansion  of coverage  to  include  snacks,  newspapers,  and magazines,

and an increase  in  taxes  on  alcohol.  Food  prices  are reported to be stable, and livestock  prices  remain

at  relatively  high  levels.  Substantial  discounting  was  reported  for  computers,  hotels,  fast food,  and

designer  clothing.  Respondents  from  banking  and  service  sectors  report  stringent  efforts  to  control

costs  in  response  to weak  markets  and  competitive  pressures.

Retail  Trade  and  Services

Consumer  spending  remains  sluggish  throughout  the Twelfth  District.  Auto sales  in Utah

Arizona,  and  Idaho  are  reported  flat.  Department  store  sales  still  are  slow, but  inventories  remain

under  control.  Some  retailers  are  scaling  back  hiring  substantially,  especially  in  southern  California.

Japanese  tourist  visits  to  Hawaii  have  picked  up  recently,  but  their  spending  remains  below  pre-Gulf

War  levels.  California  state  government  workers  are  facing  pay  cuts,  work  furloughs,  and  reduced

hours  in  response  to  budget  cuts.  Respondents  report  recent  layoffs  among  lawyers,  accountants,

architects,  real  estate  firms,  banks,  and  community  colleges.

Manufacturing

Manufacturing  conditions  in  the  West  are  mixed.  Boeing  continues  to  operate  at  or  near

capacity  and  has  plans  to  expand  and  modernize  facilities  over  a  10  year  period.  Metals  industries,

however,  are  facing  sluggish  demand  and  some  firms  supplying  the  aerospace  industry  currently  are

operating  at less  than  50  percent  of capacity.

Exports  remain  a source  of strength  for District  manufacturers.  During  the first  quarter,  all

new  orders  at  Boeing  were  from  foreign  carriers.  Small  to  mid-sized  communications,  electronics,  and

paint-products  firms  reported  increased  orders  during  the  second  quarter.  Foreign  inquiries  also  have

been  made  for  the  purchase  of military  helicopters.

Agriculture  and Resource-Related  Industries

XII  - 3

Agricultural  conditions  in  the  Twelftn  District  are  generally  good,  but recent  unseasonable

weather  hurt some  crops  including  the  table grape  crop  in the  southern  San  Joaquin Valley.  Exports

of agricultural  products  to  Latin  America  are  a  source  of strength.  Mexico  in particular  is  a  growing

market  for  California pears,  peaches,  wine,  and  nuts,  and Washington  apples.

Lumber  industry  conditions  remain  weak, with  orders and  prices  slipping  in recent  weeks.

Year-to-date  lumber exports  (volume  terms)  were  up  2 percent  through April,  as a 37  percent  decline

in  exports  to  Canada  was  offset  by  a  doubling  of exports  to  Mexico.  Log  export  volume to  Japan  has

dropped  32  percent,  but  exports  to  other  Pacific  Basin  markets  have  increased  42 percent.

Construction  and  Real  Estate

Construction  and  real  estate  markets  remain  weak  in  much  of the  West.  The  rebound  in

California  and  Washington  markets  seen  after the  Gulf War  shows  signs  of tailing  off.  Home  sales

have  picked-up  somewhat  in  Los  Angeles,  but  the  rebound  has  moderated  in  Sacramento  and  Seattle

with  unsold  inventory  putting  downward  pressure  on  prices.  Commercial  real  estate  in  southern

California  continues  to  face  high  vacancy  rates.  declining  rents,  and  a lack  of financing.  Respondents

report  that  several  southern  California  real  estate  development  firms  are  under  financial  stress.  Real

estate  markets  in  Utah  remain  strong.

Financial  Institutions

Financial  institutions  in  the  Twelfth  District  report  mixed conditions.  In  California, loan

demand  remains  weak  while  deposit  generation  is  solid, led  by strong  growth  in  money  market  deposit

accounts.  Mortgage  demand  is  strong  in  Oregon  and  Utah.  In  Hawaii,  loan  demand  remains  high, but

it  is  becoming  more  difficult  to  secure  financing  from mainland  U.S.  and Japanese  banks.

Respondents  in  southern  California  report  the  unavailability  of long-term  financing  for  commercial  real

estate  except  for  "institutional  grade"  projects  with  long-term  leases  already  in  place.

