FEDERAL  RESERVE  press  release

I'' 

I 

i 

-~-~N

r .

'  G

-A 

E

For  Use at  4:30 p.m. 

August 23,  1991

The Federal  Reserve Board and the Federal  Open Market

Committee today  released the  attached record of policy actions

taken by the Federal  Open Market  Committee at  its meeting on

July  2-3,  1991.

The  record for  each meeting of the  Committee is made

available a few days  after the next  regularly scheduled meeting

and  subsequently is  published in the  Federal  Reserve Bulletin

and the  Board's Annual  Report.  The  summary  description of

economic  and  financial  conditions  contained in each record  is

based  solely on the  information that was  available to  the

Committee at  the  time of the meeting.

Attachment

RECORD  OF POLICY ACTIONS  OF THE
FEDERAL OPEN MARKET  COMMITTEE

Meeting Held on July 2-3,  1991

Domestic policy  directive

The  information reviewed at  this  meeting suggested  that  an

upturn  in economic  activity had begun  in recent months.  Sizable gains

in consumer  spending and small  increases  in expenditures  on residential

construction appeared to be  fueling a moderate  rise  in domestic final

demand.  Although inventories  were  still  being liquidated, data for

industrial  production and  labor markets indicated that output  was  being

stepped up to meet  that  demand.  Excluding  food and energy  items,

increases  in consumer prices  had been small  in  recent  months.

Total nonfarm payroll employment  edged up  in May, following

nearly a year of  uninterrupted declines,  and the average workweek posted

a sizable gain.  The  turnaround in employment  in May was  fairly  broad-

based.  In manufacturing, recalls  of  workers  in  the motor  vehicles

industry more than accounted  for the  overall  increase, but  most  other

manufacturing industries registered  either small  job  gains  or greatly

moderated job  losses.  Employment  also turned  up in the  construction

sector and in  private  service-producing  industries.  The  unemployment

rate  rose to  6.9  percent  in May but,  averaged over  April and May, the

unemployment  rate was  little  changed  from its  March level.

Industrial production rose  in April and May, after declining

sharply earlier in  the  year;  the  limited product  data  available  for  June

pointed toward another gain.  Perhaps  reflecting the  pickup in housing

starts  in recent months,  production of  construction  supplies  turned  up

in April  and May.  Further advances  in  assemblies  of motor vehicles

contributed  to a slight  rise in manufacturing output over the two

months;  in  spite  of the  overall  increase  in activity, though, the

operating rate in manufacturing edged lower  in May and remained  well

below its  level  of a year earlier.

Real personal  consumption expenditures  rebounded in May from an

April decline;  over the March-to-May period, the  rise in outlays  out-

paced gains  in personal  income.  In  May, a sizable  increase  in spending

for  durable goods  reflected  stronger outlays  for motor vehicles  and

higher expenditures  for most major categories  of nondurable goods.  Ex-

cluding outlays  for electricity  associated with unusually warm weather,

spending for  services  increased  only modestly in May.  Continuing a

pattern of gradual  recovery recorded  in earlier months,  housing starts

rose  over April  and May.  In  these two months,  single-family  starts

strengthened further  but, with apartment vacancy rates  continuing high,

multifamily construction  remained quite  weak.

After declining in the  first  quarter of the  year,  shipments of

nondefense capital  goods  increased in both April and May.  The  turn-

around resulted mostly  from larger shipments of aircraft;  shipments  of

other types  of business  equipment increased  slightly over  the  two

months.  Recent  data  on orders  pointed to  some firming in  the demand for

business equipment.  Near-record vacancy  rates  for  office buildings  and

above-average vacancy  rates  for  industrial buildings  suggested  continu-

ing  weakness  in nonresidential  construction,  although a small  increase

was  recorded  in April.  The pace of  liquidation of manufacturing and

trade  inventories  slowed  in April  from the  very rapid March rate,

largely reflecting a slower  rate  of reduction  in stocks  at  auto dealers.

-3-

In May, manufacturing  inventories  fell  appreciably further,  with draw-

downs  occurring in most durable  and nondurable  categories.  For most

industries, the  sharp inventory  corrections of  recent months  along with

a pickup  in  sales  have  reduced inventory-to-sales ratios  substantially.

In  April, the preliminary nominal  U.S. merchandise trade

deficit  widened  slightly  from the  revised March level;  however, the

April  deficit  was  somewhat  smaller than the  average  for the  first

quarter,  which itself had registered a sizable decrease.  The  value of

both exports  and  imports  rose in  April.  For  exports,  the  increase

occurred primarily  in capital  goods and automotive  products,  but  gains

also  were  indicated for  a broad range  of  industrial  supplies.  Increases

in  the value  of  imports  were  spread among capital  and consumer goods  and

non-oil  industrial  supplies.  Recent  indicators of  economic activity in

the major  foreign industrial  countries  had been mixed;  on balance,

growth seemed to  have been  sluggish in  the  second  quarter, while infla-

tion  in most of  these countries appeared to be  stable or  declining.

Nonfood, non-energy consumer prices  increased over  the March

through May period at  a substantially slower pace than over  the  first

two  months  of the  year.  Part  of the  slowdown in recent  months  reflected

an unwinding  of  large price  increases  that had occurred in  certain com-

ponents  of  the  index  early in  the  year.  In May, producer prices  of

finished goods  firmed somewhat,  largely  reflecting an  upturn in  energy

prices.  Although average  hourly earnings  of production  or  nonsuper-

visory workers  rose  at  a faster  rate  in April and May than  in  the  first

quarter of the year, the  increase  in  earnings  over the  twelve months

ending in May slowed  somewhat.  For the twelve months  ending in March,

-4-

growth  in total employer  costs  for  compensation of  private  industry

workers  had slowed  from the  comparable  year-earlier period.

At  its  meeting on May 14,  1991,  the Committee  adopted  a direc-

tive that  called for maintaining the  existing degree  of  pressure  on

reserve positions  and that  did not  contain any presumption about  the

likely  direction of  possible  intermeeting adjustments.  Accordingly, the

directive  indicated that  somewhat more  or  somewhat  less pressure  on

reserve positions might be  appropriate during the  intermeeting period

depending on progress  toward price stability, trends  in  economic

activity, the behavior of  the monetary aggregates,  and developments  in

foreign exchange  and domestic  financial markets.  The  contemplated

reserve  conditions were expected to  be  consistent with  growth of  M2  and

M3 at  annual  rates  of  around  4 and  2 percent  respectively over the

three-month period  from March through  June.

Open market  operations  during the  intermeeting period were

directed toward maintaining the existing  degree  of pressure  on  reserve

positions.  The  federal  funds  rate  remained near  5-3/4  percent,  while

adjustment plus  seasonal borrowing tended to  average  a little  above

assumed levels  because  of  somewhat  greater usage  of  adjustment  credit.

Several technical  changes  were made  to  assumed levels  of  borrowing to

reflect  expected  increases  in the  demand for  seasonal  credit  during the

spring crop  planting  season.  Against  a backdrop of  accumulating evi-

dence  that  the  economy was  beginning to recover  and related expectations

that  no  further easing of monetary policy was  likely  in  the near  term,

many interest  rates  rose  slightly during the  intermeeting period,  while

most major  stock  price  indexes edged higher  on  balance.

-5-

The trade-weighted value  of the  dollar in  terms  of the other

G-10  currencies  increased substantially on  net  over the  intermeeting

period, partly  in  response to  news  suggesting that  the  U.S.  economy was

turning upward.  The dollar  rose  strongly against  the mark  and other

European  currencies,  which also were  affected by political  developments

in Europe.

Growth of  M2  rebounded in May from its  tax-related weakness  in

April but  slowed  again in  June.  Over  the  three months  ending with June,

the  expansion of  M2  fell  somewhat  short  of  Committee  expectations.  In-

flows  to the  liquid retail deposit  components  of M2 were  strong in  the

latest two months,  but  small time  deposits  declined at  an  accelerating

rate;  depositors  evidently responded to  less  attractive  offering rates

on  these deposits  by  shifting  some  funds  not  only  into  liquid money

stock  components but  also  into bond and  stock  mutual  funds  and  other

capital market  investments  not  included  in this  aggregate.  M3  fell

slightly in  June  and had grown  little  since  February,  reflecting con-

tinued  shrinkage  of  the  thrift  industry and  the  weakness  in bank  loan

demand and therefore  in  overall  funding needs.  For the  year thus  far,

expansion of M2  and M3  had been  in the middle  portion of  the Committee's

ranges.

The  staff  projection prepared  for  this meeting  suggested that

economic  activity was  beginning to  recover from the  recession and  that

moderate  growth in  final  demand accompanied by  a shift  in  business  in-

ventories  from substantial  liquidation  to modest  accumulation would lead

to  considerable  growth over  the  second half  of the  year.  The  stimulus

from the  inventory swing  was projected  to  diminish next year  and the

-6-

expansion to  slow gradually to a pace  consistent with continuing

moderate growth in final  demand.  On balance, the early and  subsequent

phases  of  the recovery were projected to be  relatively slow by past

cyclical  standards,  reflecting the  limited impetus  that  could be

expected from some key  sectors of  the  economy, such as  nonresidential

construction  where activity  would be  depressed by high  vacancy rates.

In addition, fiscal  policy, including the budgetary stance of  state  and

local  governments,  was projected to remain  fairly restrictive.  Against

the  background of continuing,  albeit decreasing, slack in  labor and

product markets, the  core  rate of  inflation was  expected to decline

considerably over the  period through the end of  1992.

In the Committee's  review of current  and  prospective economic

developments,  the members  generally agreed that  a recovery very likely

was under way, that  final  demand would grow moderately  for  some time,

and that  an  end to inventory  reductions would provide  an impetus  to

production over  coming quarters.  A number of  factors  were  expected to

damp the expansion, notably the  budget policies  of  governments  at  all

levels and  continuing weakness  in nonresidental  construction.  There

also  were puzzling aspects  to the  current  situation and  attendant  risks

to  the  outlook:  commodity prices had  failed to  firm in their  usual

pattern in the  early  stages of  a recovery;  on  the  financial  side, money

and  credit  growth  had remained modest,  and conditions  were  still  fragile

in many  respects.  However,  sources of  strength  in an  economic  expansion

often have been difficult to anticipate  near a cycle  trough.  Moreover,

while  the expansion was  expected to  be  slower than the  average  in post-

war business  cycles,  the recession  had been relatively  shallow, and  a

-7-

moderate expansion was more  likely to be sustained  for a considerable

period ahead,  in  large measure because it  would be  consistent with

containing inflation pressures.

The  members  projected  that  the  underlying  rate  of  inflation

would decline in  coming quarters--despite quite limited  progress  thus

far  this  year--in  light  of  some  continuing  slack  in  demands  on  produc-

tion  resources  and  efforts  by  businesses  to  contain  costs. 

A  number

stressed  that  the  moderate  monetary  growth  over  recent  years  suggested

that  monetary  policy  had  been  positioned  to  foster  a  reduction  in

inflation,  and  they  anticipated  that  the  beneficial  effects  of  this

policy  would show  through  over  the  projection  period.

In keeping with the practice at  meetings when the  Committee

considers  its  long-run ranges  for the  money and  debt aggregates,  the

members  of  the  Committee  and  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  presidents  not

currently serving as  members provided specific projections  of the  growth

in  real  and nominal  GNP, the  rate  of  unemployment, and the  rate  of

inflation for  1991 and 1992.  These  projections took account  of  the

monetary  growth  ranges  that  the  Committee  reaffirmed  for  1991  and  estab-

lished  on  a  tentative  basis  for  1992  at  this  meeting;  these  ranges  are

expected to be  consistent  with the  Committee's  goal of  promoting a sus-

tained  expansion  in  the economy,  fostered  by  further  progress  toward

price  stability.  Forecasts of nominal GNP  converged on  growth rates  of

4-1/2  to 5-1/4 percent  for  1991  and 5-1/2 to  6-1/2  percent  for  1992.

With  regard  to  the rate  of  expansion  in  real  GNP, 

the  projections  had  a

central  tendency  of  3/4  to  1  percent  for  1991  as  a  whole, 

implying  a

sizable  rebound  over  the  balance  of  the  year;  for  the  year  1992,  the

central tendency of the projections  was  2-1/4  to  3 percent.  While the

civilian unemployment  rate  was  not projected to  fall much over  the

balance of the  year, the expansion was  expected to  result  in a decline

to  a somewhat  lower  range of  6-1/4 to  6-1/2  percent by the  fourth

quarter  of 1992.  With regard to  the  rate of  inflation  as  measured by

the  consumer  price index, the  projections  had a central tendency of

3-1/4  to 3-3/4  percent  for  1991  and  3 to  4 percent  for  1992;  because

declines  in  energy prices  had damped  the  rise of  consumer prices  sub-

stantially thus  far in 1991,  the  similarity of the ranges  for the  two

years  masked expectations  of a pronounced  decline in the  core  rate  of

inflation.

In the  course  of the  Committee's  discussion, members  reported

tha'  business  conditions  remained uneven,  depending on the mix of local

industries,  but  overall economic  activity now appeared to  be  expanding

at  a modest  pace  in  a number  of regions  and to  have stabilized  following

earlier  declines  in  several  other parts  of the  nation.  However, in some

areas,  notably portions  of  the Northeast,  business  activity appeared to

be  weakening further.  Business  sentiment  remained  cautious  on the

whole,  but many business  contacts  were  expressing greater  confidence  in

the  outlook  for  the  economy and  their  own industries,  at  least  looking

ahead to  1992.  Agriculture was  a source  of  strength  in many parts  of

the  country, but  drought conditions  in  some  areas  and excessive  rains  in

others had  given  rise  to  some  concerns.

As  has  tended to  occur  in  the  early  stages  of previous  cyclical

recoveries,  the  swing  in business  inventories  from substantial  liquida-

tion toward  accumulation was  likely  to  play  a leading role  in  bolstering

the expansion during the next two or three quarters.  The members ac-

knowledged that  inventory developments were  difficult  to project, and

views differed to  some  extent  regarding the  strength of the impetus that

might be  forthcoming from this  source over the next  few  quarters.  In

any event, the available data tended to confirm reports  from business

contacts regarding the absence of excessive  stocks in most  sectors  of

the economy and parts  of  the country.  In these  circumstances,  the

firming in final sales that  appeared to be under way was  likely to

result  in a cessation of  inventory liquidation over the  nearer term and

to induce an actual buildup at  some point  later.  It was  suggested that

this  process already had begun and might  indeed be  somewhat  ahead of

earlier expectations.

While the swing in inventories  was  likely to provide a substan-

tial boost  to economic activity over the next  few  quarters,  some members

questioned the  potential strength of  ongoing factors promoting expansion

once  the adjustment  in  inventories  had largely run its  course.  Growth

in  consumer spending might  well remain relatively  restrained.  The

saving rate  already was  low,  and the willingness or ability of many

consumers to  incur debt to  finance increased spending would tend to be

inhibited by existing debt burdens  and perhaps  also  by the  loss  of tax

deductibility on consumer  loan interest.  In addition,  widespread pub-

licity about the  fragility of  some financial  institutions  and continuing

concerns  about  employment prospects might damp  consumer sentiment,  and

the absence of a strong rebound in residential  construction would tend

to moderate the growth in spending on  consumer durables 

On the  posi-

tive side, the  favorable effects  on disposable  income of the  earlier

-10-

decline  in oil  prices  was being supplemented by a resumption of  appre-

ciable growth  in personal  income  as  final  sales  and production improved.

With regard to the outlook for business  fixed investment,  con-

tacts  around  the  nation  suggested that  business  executives  remained

cautious  about making  capital  spending  commitments.  Nonetheless, the

recent pickup  in new orders  for business  equipment  and a more mixed

pattern in nonresidential  building contract  awards and permits  were

promising developments  that tended to  reduce earlier concerns  about  a

possible  cumulative weakening  in business  investment.  Among the  com-

ponents  of this  key sector  of the  economy, nonresidential  construction

activity was  expected to remain depressed, probably for an extended

period  in many localities,  because of the  substantial overhang of  vacant

office  space  and other  commercial  facilities.  Some members  noted,

however, that nonresidential  construction was  improving  in  some areas,

in  part  as  a result  of public works  projects.  Despite the  likelihood of

persisting weakness  in nonresidential  construction, overall business

fixed investment  was  expected to  strengthen to a limited extent  once the

recovery  in economic  activity was more  firmly established.

The outlook for  residential construction was viewed as  somewhat

more promising.  Home  sales  appeared to be on a distinct  uptrend, not-

withstanding the  temporary  reversal in new home  sales  in May, and resi-

dential  construction  was picking up  in many areas  as  housing backlogs

were  worked  lower.  Members commented,  however, that the  upswing in  such

construction might be  relatively  subdued by past  cyclical  standards,

reflecting fairly high  vacancy rates  and the  failure  of mortgage rates

-11-

to decline  as  much as  they had  in previous  recession periods.  Continu-

ing constraints  on the availability  of  loans  for  land acquisition and

construction might also be a factor tending to  inhibit  construction

activity, at  least  currently.

With regard to the  financial  setting of  the  economy more

generally, members  noted that  the  distress  being experienced by some

financial intermediaries  was  a key  source of  concern and downside risk

for the economy.  One  could not  rule out  a major deterioration in  con-

fidence in one  or more types  of lenders,  which could  seriously  disrupt

their ability or willingness to  supply  credit.  However, that  risk  was

likely to  lessen over time.  The  rebuilding of balance  sheets,  including

those of  commercial banks,  was  a promising development,  and the  strength

of the  stock market along with  lower  risk premia on debt  obligations

pointed to an  improving  financial climate.  Borrowers  with direct  access

to  capital markets were  finding abundant  credit  at  lower  spreads.  Many

depository institutions apparently were  continuing  to pursue very

cautious  lending policies,  though the  shift  toward even more  stringent

terms on  loans  seemed to have abated. 

Overall, debt  growth appeared

be quite  sluggish, with much of the weakness concentrated at  depository

institutions;  this  probably was  contributing to the  relatively damped

expansion  of the  monetary aggregates  around the  cycle trough.  The  rela-

tionship between borrowing and spending  seemed to be adjusting in ways

that  were not  entirely understood, but  the  behavior of both debt and

money were  cautionary  signs  that  needed to be monitored carefully.

A number  of members commented that  in comparison with  prior

cyclical  experience the  budget  policies  of all levels  of  government were

-12-

likely to be relatively restrictive  over the  projection horizon.  At the

federal level,  despite burgeoning borrowing requirements  in  the  near

term, cutbacks  in  defense  spending and other efforts to  curb expendi-

tures under the budget  agreement  of 1990  and to maintain that control

under procedures put  in place by the  agreement,  appeared to have helped

put  federal spending for goods  and services  on a downward path.  At the

state  and local  level,  severe  budgetary problems  were being addressed in

many areas  by increased taxes and restraints  on spending.  These efforts

to control  governmental  spending  were  likely to be  an important  factor

contributing to a subdued expansion in nonresidential  construction.

Turning to the  outlook for  inflation, the  members  remained

optimistic that  substantial progress  could be made  in reducing its

underlying  rate over the  projection horizon.  Some expressed disappoint-

ment that, while  a number  of  special  factors  had been involved,  the

deceleration  in  consumer  prices had been very limited this  year, ex-

cluding the effects of a sharp drop  in  energy prices and  slower  in-

creases in food prices.  Nonetheless,  the members  generally believed

that  if the  recovery tended to unfold as  they were projecting, pressures

on production resources  would remain  subdued and efforts  to  contain

labor and other business costs  would continue,  especially in the  context

of very competitive markets  for most  products.  Additionally, the  appre-

ciation of the dollar this year  could be expected to exert  a damping

effect  on inflation.  As  a trend toward  lower inflation became more pro-

nounced and widely perceived, the disinflationary forces  in the  economy

would be reinforced by a moderation of  inflationary expectations.  An

integral part of these  developments,  which several members emphasized,

-13-

was  the  role  of restrained monetary expansion over an extended period in

curbing underlying  inflation pressures

Against  the background of the Committee's  views regarding

prospective economic developments  and  in keeping with the  requirements

of  the  Full  Employment  and Balanced Growth Act  of 1978  (the Humphrey-

Hawkins  Act),  the Committee  at  this meeting reviewed the ranges  for

growth in the monetary and debt  aggregates that  it  had  set  in February

for  1991,  and it  established on a tentative basis  ranges  for  growth in

those measures  in 1992.  The  current  ranges  included growth of  2-1/2 to

6-1/2  percent  for M2  and  1 to 5 percent  for M3  for  the period  from the

fourth quarter of  1990 to the  fourth quarter of 1991.  A monitoring

range  of 4-1/2  to  8-1/2 percent had been set  for  growth in  total domes-

tic  nonfinancial debt  in  1991.

In  the  course of the  Committee's  deliberations,  all  of  the

members  agreed that  the  ranges  established  for this  year remained

appropriate.  The members  noted that  both M2  and M3  were  in  the middle

portions  of their ranges.  With  regard to developments  affecting M2,

growth of  nominal income had  weakened over  the first  half  of the year,

but demands  for M2  balances had been bolstered by declines  in market

interest  rates  that  had brought  a narrowing of  the  opportunity costs

associated with holding deposits.  On balance,  growth of  this  aggregate

thus  far  in  1991  had  fallen short  of what  might  have been expected  on

the  basis  of historical  relationships  with nominal  income  and  interest

rates.  The  reasons  for  the  shortfalls were  not  fully  understood, but

the  continuing  redirection  of  credit  flows  away from depository institu-

-14-

tions  and toward market  channels  as  well as apparent  investor prefer-

ences for the higher yields offered by longer-term investments appeared

to be  contributing factors.  The projected pickup in nominal  GNP growth

in the second half of the year would by itself tend to boost the growth

of  M2 somewhat, but increases  in velocity also were quite possible.  Any

strengthening of M2 probably would be  limited by some widening of oppor-

tunity costs associated with a further decline in  offering rates  on

liquid deposits in lagged response  to earlier declines in market rates.

Moreover, the likely persistence of a steep yield  curve could lead

depositors to  continue to place  some maturing time deposits  in long-term

market instruments that  had more attractive yields,  such as bond mutual

funds.  Considerable uncertainty continued to  surround the  demand for

money and the behavior of  velocity.  However, in the  judgment  of the

Committee,  it now seemed that  growth within the  current range would

indicate that  policy was  positioned to  foster a sustainable economic

expansion,  and that the four percentage-point range provided adequate

leeway  for any  adjustments that might be needed  in the event the  economy

or monetary velocity were to diverge substantially from their expected

paths.

Through the  remainder of  1991,  M3  growth also could  be expected

to be boosted by the strengthening  of the  recovery,  which was  likely to

stimulate some pickup  in bank  credit extensions.  However, a faster  pace

of  resolutions by the Resolution Trust  Corporation  (RTC) would tend to

depress  thrift  credit--by placing more thrift  assets  under government

control or  in the hands  of private nondepository institutions--and

issuance of  large time  deposits by branches and agencies of  foreign

-15-

banks  could be expected to slow from the pace earlier  in the year  as

more of the  adjustment  to the  change in relative borrowing costs  caused

by the  reduction in reserve requirements  late  last  year was  completed.

The members  took note of  a number of  factors that  had tended  to

depress the growth of domestic nonfinancial debt,  which had been growing

at  the low end of the Committee's monitoring range.  The  latter included

the  slower pace of economic activity, more  cautious attitudes  on the

part  of borrowers  toward taking  on debt  and lenders  toward extending it,

and a sharply  lower pace  of  net equity  retirements.  Looking ahead, the

members  anticipated that,  with the pickup in the  economy,  nonfinancial

debt  would expand more  rapidly in the  second half of the  year.  While

slowing debt  growth had a number of positive aspects  for the  long-run

stability of the financial markets  and the  economy, a tendency  for  debt

to drop  below its  current  range might  indicate that  supply or  demand

conditions  were  inconsistent  with a satisfactory economic expansion.

At the  conclusion of this  discussion, the  Committee  voted to

approve the  following broad policy statement  and to  reaffirm the  1991

ranges that  it  had established in February  for growth of M2,  M3,  and

nonfinancial debt:

The  Federal  Open Market  Committee seeks  monetary and

financial  conditions  that  will  foster price  stability and
promote  sustainable  growth in output.  In  furtherance  of
these  objectives,  the  Committee  reaffirmed at  this meeting
the  ranges  it had established  in February  for  growth of M2
and M3  of  2-1/2  to  6-1/2  percent and 1 to  5 percent,
respectively, measured from the  fourth quarter of  1990  to
the  fourth quarter of  1991.  The monitoring range  for
growth  of total  domestic  nonfinancial  debt  also was
maintained at  4-1/2  to 8-1/2  percent  for the year.

Votes  for this  action:  Messrs.  Greenspan,

Corrigan, Angell,  Black, Forrestal, Keehn, Kelley,
LaWare, Mullins, and Parry.

Votes against this  action:  None.

-16-

In the Committee's  discussion of  the  ranges  for  1992,  most  of

the members  supported  a proposal  to  extend the  1991  ranges  provisionally

to  next  year.  Insofar  as  developments bearing  on economic and  financial

conditions  in  1992  could be  anticipated at  this  point,  these members

believed  that monetary growth within the  current  ranges  would be  con-

sistent  with sustainable  economic  expansion in  the  context  of  continuing

progress  toward price stability.  The  upper bounds  of  those  ranges  pro-

vided desirable leeway  for policy to resist  any tendency  for  the  recov-

ery to  falter while the lower ends  allowed ample  room for policy to

counter  stronger-than-expected inflationary pressures.

Several members  favored a reduction in the  M2  range  for next

year.  Such a move would continue  the trend  of moving the range  downward

until  it  was  consistent with price  stability.  Recent  developments

suggested that  conditions  were  favorable  for making substantial progress

toward lower  inflation,  and these members  emphasized that  it  was  impor-

tant  for  the  Committee  not  only to  take  advantage  of  this opportunity

but to  signal  its  determination in  this  regard.  The  resulting improve-

ment  in the  credibility of the  Committee's  anti-inflationary policy  and

the  related  favorable effects  on  inflationary  expectations would  reduce

the transitional costs  of  achieving price stability.

Those  in  favor  of  retaining the  current  range  for M2  commented

that  the  range  had been reduced  substantially in  recent  years  and that

its  midpoint  already was  close to  a rate  consistent with price  stability

over time,  presuming no  unanticipated trend  in the velocity  of M2  and

some  upward bias  in measured  inflation.  For  1992,  some  members were

concerned that,  absent  a significant  increase  in the velocity  of M2,

-17-

satisfactory nominal  GNP  growth--within the central  tendency  of  the

members'  forecasts--already implied expansion of M2  in  the  upper part  of

a 2-1/2  to  6-1/2 percent  range.  A lower  range might not  provide  suffi-

cient  flexibility to deal  with an unanticipated  shortfall in aggregate

demand or  disturbances to  still-fragile  financial markets.  Uncertain-

ties  about  the behavior  of velocity at  a time  when an  important  restruc-

turing of  financial flows  appeared to be  in process,  especially with

regard to  the  role of depository  institutions,  also  argued  for simply

carrying  over the  existing  range.  There would be  an opportunity to

review the  range  next  February, when evidence  would be  in  hand about

velocity  in the  second half  of  the  year and  some  of  the  uncertainties

about the  strength of the  recovery would be  diminished.  At  that time,

careful  consideration would need  to be  given to reducing the  range,  if

conditions  implied that  such an  action was appropriate  in  furthering and

underscoring the  System's  goal  of  reducing  inflation over time.

At  the conclusion of this  discussion, with two members

dissenting, the Committee  approved provisional ranges  for  1992  that  were

unchanged from those  for 1991,  and  it  voted to  incorporate the  following

statement  regarding the  1992  ranges  in  its  domestic policy directive:

For  1992,  on  a tentative basis,  the Committee  agreed

to  use the  same  ranges  as  in  1991  for  growth  in  each  of
the monetary aggregates  and debt,  measured from the  fourth
quarter  of  1991  to the  fourth  quarter of  1992.  With
regard  to M3,  the  Committee  anticipated that the  ongoing
restructuring  of thrift  depository institutions would
continue  to depress  the  growth of  this  aggregate relative
to  spending  and total  credit.  The  behavior of  the
monetary aggregates  will  continue to be  evaluated in  the
light  of  progress  toward price  level  stability, movements
in  their velocities,  and  developments  in  the economy and
financial markets.

-18-

Votes  for  this  action:  Messrs.  Greenspan,
Corrigan, Forrestal,  Keehn, Kelley, LaWare, Mullins,
and Parry.

Votes  against  this  action:  Messrs. Angell  and

Black.

Messrs.  Angell and Black dissented because  they preferred to

reduce  the M2  range  for  1992 by  1/2  percentage point.  They pointed out

that  the  lower range would be  centered on  the  average growth  of M2  in

recent years  and would provide a timely  signal  of  the Committee's  con-

tinuing  commitment to price  stability, thereby reinforcing  and extending

the progress  in  curbing inflation anticipated over the next  several

quarters.  They believed that  the  resulting decline  in inflationary

expectations would lower the  transitional  costs of  achieving price

stability  and,  by  favorably affecting long-term interest rates,  would

help  sustain the expansion  in  economic activity.

In the  Committee's  discussion  of policy  for  the intermeeting

period ahead, all  of the members were  in favor  of maintaining  an un-

changed  degree  of pressure on  reserve positions.  They believed that  at

this  juncture  an unchanged policy  course  offered the greatest promise  of

reconciling the  Committee's  goals  of sustaining the nascent business

recovery while  also fostering  further  progress against  inflation.  There

were  obvious  areas  of  uncertainty and vulnerability  in the  current

economic and  financial  situation, but  developments  were  unlikely to

require  an  immediate  adjustment  in  reserve market  conditions.  For now,

monetary  policy appeared to be  on  an  appropriate  course.

The members  devoted some  attention during this  discussion to

the relatively  sluggish growth  of M2  and M3  in  recent months.  Some

commented that  the behavior of  the broader  aggregates might  imply  that

-19-

monetary policy had not  been eased sufficiently in  recent months  and

therefore might  not provide  adequate support  to sustain the  expansion.

It was  noted, however, that  apart  from the usual uncertainties  about the

relationship of M2 and M3 to  growth and spending in  the  short  run, the

expansion of Ml  and especially of reserves  and the monetary base had

been fairly robust  since  early spring.  Moreover, many borrowers were

meeting their  financing  needs  through market  sources.  In this  situa-

tion, the members  generally concluded that  the behavior  of M2  and M3,

which  on a cumulative basis  were  still  in  the middle  portions of the

Committee's  ranges  for the  year, did not  call  for  any policy adjustments

at  this point.  Nonetheless,  continuing  weak  growth might  require  a

review of  this  conclusion.  A staff projection prepared for  this meeting

indicated that,  with reserve market  conditions  unchanged, somewhat

faster  growth  in the broader  aggregates was  likely to  emerge  in  the

months  ahead, induced by  greater money demands  in the  context  of a

strengthening  economy.

With regard to possible adjustments  to the degree  of reserve

pressure  during the intermeeting period ahead, nearly all  the members

expressed a preference  for a directive  that  did  not  bias  prospective

operations  toward tightening or easing but made  an intermeeting adjust-

ment,  if  any,  equally likely  in either  direction  depending on economic

and  financial  developments  and the  behavior of  the monetary aggregates.

One member  preferred a directive  that  was  tilted toward possible

tightening;  in  this view,  a prompt  response  to any tendency  for  infla-

tionary conditions  to  re-emerge would have  a favorable  effect  on  infla-

tionary expectations  and long-term debt markets and might avert  the  need

-20-

for  a more  substantial policy adjustment  later.  Other members  agreed on

the  desirability  of  a prompt  adjustment  to  inflationary developments,

but  they did not  see  a special  need to anticipate  such an  adjustment  in

the  period ahead.

At  the  conclusion of the  Committee's discussion, all  of the

members  indicated that  they favored a directive  that  called for main-

taining the  existing degree  of  pressure on  reserve positions.  The

members  also noted that  they preferred or  could accept  a directive that

did not  include  a presumption  about  the  likely direction of  any inter-

meeting adjustments  in policy.  Accordingly, the  Committee  decided that

somewhat  greater  reserve  restraint or  somewhat  lesser  reserve restraint

might be  acceptable during the  period ahead  depending on progress  toward

price  stability,  trends  in economic  activity, the  behavior  of the

monetary aggregates, and  developments  in  foreign exchange  and domestic

financial markets.  The reserve  conditions  contemplated at  this meeting

were expected  to  be  consistent  with  some increase  in the  growth  of M2

and M3  to annual  rates  of  around 5-1/2  and 3 percent  respectively  over

the three-month period  from June through September.

At  the  conclusion of the meeting, the  following domestic policy

directive was  issued to the  Federal  Reserve Bank  of New York:

The  information reviewed at  this meeting suggests

that economic  activity has  begun to  recover  from the
recent  recession.  The unemployment  rate  rose to  6.9
percent in May, but  total  nonfarm payroll employment
edged up and the  average  workweek posted  a sizable
gain.  Manufacturing output has  risen in  recent months,
led  by appreciable  increases  in assemblies  of motor
vehicles.  Consumer  spending has  been  bolstered in part
by an  upturn in  personal  income.  An increase  in  orders
points  to  a firming  in  demand for business  equipment,
but  nonresidential construction  remains  weak.  Housing
starts  rose  over April  and May.  The  nominal  U.S.

-21-

merchandise trade deficit  in April  was  somewhat below
the  average  rate in the  first  quarter.  Increases  in
consumer prices  have been  small in recent  months.

Most  interest  rates have  risen slightly since the
Committee meeting on May 14.  The trade-weighted value
of  the  dollar in terms  of the  other G-10 currencies
increased substantially on balance over the  inter-
meeting period.

M2 grew at  a moderate  pace  over May and  June,

while M3  changed little.  For the year thus  far,  ex-
pansion of M2  and M3  has  been  in the middle portion of
the Committee's  ranges.

The  Federal Open Market Committee seeks  monetary

and  financial  conditions that  will  foster  price  sta-
bility and promote sustainable  growth  in output.  In
furtherance  of these objectives,  the  Committee re-
affirmed at  this meeting the  ranges  it  had established
in February  for  growth of M2  and M3  of 2-1/2  to  6-1/2
percent  and 1 to  5 percent,  respectively, measured from
the  fourth  quarter of  1990 to  the  fourth quarter of
1991.  The  monitoring range  for  growth of total domes-
tic nonfinancial debt  also was  maintained  at  4-1/2  to
8-1/2  percent  for  the  year.  For 1992,  on  a tentative
basis,  the  Committee agreed to  use  the  same  ranges  as
in  1991  for  growth in each of the monetary  aggregates
and debt,  measured from the  fourth  quarter  of  1991  to
the  fourth quarter of 1992.  With regard to M3,  the
Committee anticipated that the  ongoing restructuring  of
thrift depository  institutions  would continue  to
depress  the growth of this aggregate  relative  to
spending and total  credit.  The behavior  of the
monetary aggregates will  continue to be  evaluated in
the  light of progress toward price  level  stability,
movements  in their velocities,  and developments  in the
economy and  financial markets.

In the  implementation of policy for  the  immediate

future, the  Committee seeks  to maintain the  existing
degree of pressure on  reserve positions.  Depending
upon progress  toward price  stability, trends  in
economic activity,  the behavior of  the monetary
aggregates,  and developments  in foreign exchange  and
domestic  financial markets,  somewhat  greater  reserve
restraint  or  somewhat lesser  reserve  restraint  might be
acceptable  in the  intermeeting period.  The  contem-
plated reserve  conditions  are  expected to be  consistent
with growth of M2  and M3 over the  period  from June
through September at  annual  rates  of about  5-1/2  and 3
percent,  respectively.

-22-

Votes  for  the paragraph on short-run policy

implementation:  Messrs.  Greenspan, Corrigan,
Angell, Black,  Forrestal, Keehn,  Kelley, LaWare,
Mullins and Parry.

Votes  against this  action:  None.

