SUMMARY  OF  COMMENTARY  ON  CURRENT  ECONOMIC  CONDITIONS
BY  FEDERAL  RESERVE  DISTRICTS

March 1992

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS

SUMMARY

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . .

i

First  District  - Boston 

................... 

...... 

................... 

Second  District  - New  York 

........................ 

............... 

Third District  - Philadelphia 

...... 

.. 

......... 

................... 

Fourth  District  - Cleveland 

. ....... 

................................ 

Fifth  District  - Richmond 

......... 

......................... 

Sixth  District  - Atlanta  ........ 

......... 

......................... 

-1

.

II-1

III-1

IV-1

V-1

VI-1

.

.

.

..

.... 

Seventh  District  - Chicago 

........ 

.

........ 

.. 

.

.................. 

. VII-1

Eighth  District - St.  Louis  ...................... 

... 

...  ............. 

Ninth  District  - Minneapolis 

....................................... 

Tenth  District  - Kansas  City 

........................................... 

Eleventh  District  - Dallas 

......................................... 

Twelfth  District  - San  Francisco  .....................................

VIII-1

. IX-1

X-1

XI-1

XII-1

SUMMARY*

Most Federal  Reserve  Districts  report  some  improvement  in economic  conditions.  Business

sentiment  is  described  as  modestly  more optimistic  in many  parts  of the country,  though  it remains

cautious.  Representative  of many  Federal  Reserve  Districts,  Chicago notes  "a  slow but increasingly

widespread  advance  in  the  economy  since  the  end  of January."  Or  as  St.  Louis  puts  it,  "Most

sectors  ...  are  reporting growth."  Most-often mentioned  as improving  are  residential  construction

and home  sales,  auto  sales,  and  other retail  sales.  There  are  few  indications  of significant  upward

pressures  on  retail  and  wholesale  prices  of goods.

Most-often  mentioned  as  flat  or  weak  are  manufacturing  and  nonresidential  construction;

bank loan  demand  is  described  as  little  changed.  The  manufacturing  sector  remains  generally  flat,

with  layoffs  and  rising  unemployment  often  noted.  Yet  several  districts  report  glimmerings  of

recovery  in manufacturing,  with improving  expectations  for future activity.  Commercial  construction

remains  moribund.  Bank loan demand is best described as  flat,  although residential  mortgage  lending

is often mentioned  as a bright  spot.  Mortgage  refinancing  activity  appears  to  be tapering  off some-

what.

Wages  and Prices

Continuing  the  trend  of  recent  reports,  wage  and  price  pressures  appear  generally  quite

moderate.  An  exception  is  a  survey  of Buffalo  (New York)  purchasing  managers: 

the percentage

reporting  higher  input prices  jumped  markedly  in February.  In  addition,  several  districts  mention

lumber  prices.  These  are  up  sharply  in  some  areas,  due  to  increased  construction  activity  and

*Prepared  at the  Federal Reserve  Bank of Minneapolis  and based on information  collected before
March  9,  1992.  This  document  summarizes  comments  received from businesses and  other  contacts
outside  the  Federal  Reserve  and is  not  a  commentary  on the views  of the  Federal  Reserve  officials.

restricted  supply.  San Francisco  observes  that some  grades of lumber  are  selling  at historically high

price  levels.  As  reported  in the  last  Beige  Book,  oil  and gas  prices  remain  low.

Consumer  Spending

Most Federal  Reserve  Districts  report  some  improvement  in retail  sales  so  far  in  1992  and

guarded  optimism  on  the  part  of merchandisers.  An exception  is  San  Francisco,  which  notes  that

retail  sales  remain  soft  in  that  district.  Perhaps  more  representative  is  Boston,  which  reports

improvement  for  retailers  of all  types.  Richmond  notes  that  consumer  spending  improved  in  late

January  and  February  after  a  flat  December  and early  January.  And  Cleveland  observes  that  con-

sumer  spending  exceeded  expectations  in  both  January  and February.

Automobile  sales have exhibited widespread (if often modest) improvement.  Districts report-

ing  at  least  some  increase  in  car  sales  include  Boston,  Philadelphia,  Cleveland,  Atlanta,  Chicago,

Minneapolis,  Kansas  City,  and  San  Francisco.  Only  Dallas  notes  declining  auto  sales.  Several

districts  also  mention strength  in  light truck  sales.

Manufacturing

The  manufacturing  sector  is  probably  best  described  as  "mixed."  A  number  of districts

report  continuing  layoffs  and  rising  unemployment  in  manufacturing  (for  example,  New  York,

Minneapolis,  and  San Francisco).  But  other  districts  describe  modest gains  in  manufacturing  ship-

ments or output (Philadelphia,  Richmond,  and Dallas).  St. Louis notes that several outside manufac-

turers  are  relocating  in that  district.  Those  areas  reporting  some  strength  in manufacturing  often

attribute  it to  improved  demand  from the  retail  sector and residential  construction.  Several  districts,

including Richmond  and Kansas  City, report declining  inventories,  but Cleveland notes that inventory

liquidation  may  have  ended.

Real  Estate  Sales  and  Construction

Continuing the trend noted in the last Beige Book,  all Federal  Reserve Districts report at  least

modest  improvement  in  real  estate  sales  or  residential  construction  or both.  In  a  few  areas,  gains

have been  quite  substantial.  In Chicago,  building material  sales  to homebuilders  were quite  strong,

and  Dallas  reports  that  the  inventory  of houses  has  fallen  to  a  low  level. 

In  many  parts  of the

country,  demand  is  apparently  strongest  for  moderately  priced  homes.  Richmond,  San Francisco,

and  Chicago  report  that  home  prices  are  generally  flat,  but  Minneapolis  and  Dallas  note  some

increases.  As  has  been true  for  some  time,  nonresidential  construction  is  moribund  in  most  parts

of the  country.  San Francisco  notes  a  decline  in commercial  building  sales  prices,  and  New  York

mentions  rising  vacancy  rates  for  commercial  office  space.

Banking  and  Finance

Loan  demand  is  generally  flat,  with  most  districts  reporting  little  change  in  demand  for

consumer or commercial  loans  and commercial real estate  lending  remaining in the doldrums.  Credit

standards  are  described  as  largely  unchanged.  Although  most  districts  note  that the  wave  of mort-

gage  refinancing  has  continued,  it  appears  to  have  slackened  in  response to  the  recent  rise  in  mort-

gage  rates.  New  residential  mortgage  lending  is mentioned  as a bright spot by  a number  of districts.

Agriculture  and Resource-Related  Industries

Conditions  in  agriculture  are  varied,  depending  on the product  and the weather.  Richmond

reports  that weather  and crop  conditions  were  excellent  in January  and February.  However,  Kansas

City cites  a recent  downturn  in farm  incomes  and  a slight rise  in problem agricultural  loans.  Dallas

and  Minneapolis  comment  that  declines  in  livestock  prices  have  hurt  some  ranchers.  Recently,

much-needed  rains  fell  in the  Kansas  City  and  San  Francisco  districts.

iv

Dallas,  San Francisco,  and St. Louis note continued  low oil and  gas prices.  Minneapolis  and

Dallas  report  that  as  a  result  of these  low  prices  energy  exploration  and  development  expenditures

are  down.

FIRST DISTRICT-BOSTON

According to  contacts made  in  early March,  First District

retailers  appear to  be emerging from recession  ahead  of  the region's

manufacturing  sector.  Most retail contacts  report  an increase in  sales

but  are  not sure whether  this uptick presages  a significant turnaround.

By contrast, at  most First  District manufacturers  surveyed, total  sales

and orders  have continued to  decline from year-ago  levels.

Nevertheless,  almost  half the manufacturers  see  improvements in demand

from the  retail  trade, residential  construction or  auto  industries, and

most  expect a modest  recovery in  the second  half of  1992.  Reports  from

local  auto dealers  and realtors  have a positive tone.

Retail

First District  retailers, now tallying results  for the  fiscal  year

ending in  January, report  that  1991  sales  were below those of  1990.

However, a late  1991  improvement has extended  into  1992  for  retailers of

all  types.  While  the rise  has boosted  retail optimism, some  respondents

feel  that  comparisons to  year-ago performance may overstate the

improvement, given the  low  level  of  activity during the Gulf War.

Virtually all contacts  agree that  consumers remain cautious,  but one

respondent  observes the first  significant  interest  in  regularly priced

items  in  some time.

Despite the noticeable uptick  in sales,  retailers remain reluctant

to  change their present  plans.  Some  have experienced increases  in  the

cost of  goods  sold but will  absorb them to  avoid raising their  own

prices.  Similarly,  inventories remain  stable, as  retailers believe that

demand  has not yet  increased enough to  justify extending themselves.

Margins  and profits  show no consistent trend.

Retailers'  employment  levels  are  flat  and  are expected to  remain

so.  Planned wage  increases remain minimal.  A few  firms opening  stores

at  new locations are hiring to  staff  them, but  for most, capital

spending budgets continue to be restrained.  Most describe themselves  as

"guardedly optimistic"  that the  current  upturn marks  a reversal  in  the

recent  pattern of  decline.

Auto Sales

Auto sales  in  the First  District have  generally  improved over  the

past  several months.  The used car market  continues to be  relatively

strong.  Expectations  are mixed, although the  majority of  dealerships

appear  slightly bullish.

Manufacturing

According to  a panel  of  First District manufacturers,  January-

February  shipments and  orders were generally below their year-earlier

levels.  Reported declines ranged  from slight to  20  percent.  As  several

contacts pointed out,  however, the Gulf War made January  1991

exceptional -- in  some  cases,  exceptionally busy,  in other  cases,

exceptionally slow.  Despite  the continuation  of  generalized weakness,

almost half of  the  respondents  saw modest  improvements  in  demand from

customers in  retail  trade,  residential construction or the auto  and

computer industries.  By contrast,  defense,  commercial aircraft  and

commercial and  industrial  construction were  described as  still very

weak.  Views on overseas demand were mixed.  In general, however,  Japan

and Europe were  said to be  slowing while Canada and  the United  Kingdom

I-3

show little  sign of  improvement.  By  contrast, Latin American markets

were termed promising.

Input prices were described  as  stable,  with several  respondents

seeking and  receiving better prices and  service from vendors.  Half of

the  contacts have  left  their own sales prices unchanged,  in  some  cases

for  over two years.  Others  report  a less  competitive pricing

environment.  Small  price increases taken last  fall  are  sticking, and

discounts  are declining.

At most manufacturing  contacts, employment  is  below its  year-ago

level,  with declines generally  in  the 3 to  4 percent range.  Roughly

half  expect  the downtrend  in  employment to  continue.  A few  firms  are

hiring  selectively.  By  contrast, over  half the contacts expect capital

spending to  equal  or  surpass  last  year's  levels.  These expenditures

will focus  on maintenance and productivity  improvement;  only one  firm

plans to increase capacity.

Most  respondents  hope to  see  a modest  recovery in  the second  half

of  1992.  While  a few contacts are  starting to  think that  an  upturn

could occur even sooner,  firms with no  evidence of  improvement continue

to  outnumber those where promising signs have  materialized into  new

business.  Some  contacts  see their firms  as well poised to  take

advantage of the turnaround when  it occurs.  Others  report the need  for

continued restructuring.

Residential Real Estate

First District  realtors report  increased residential  sales

compared with  last  year and the past  few months.  Most  realtors

registered a slight  increase;  a few report  healthy sales.  Sales of

condominiums  and  high-priced homes  are weaker than  low-priced,  single-

family homes.

II-1

SECOND DISTRICT--NEW YORK

Reports  on District developments  in  recent weeks were mixed, as  has

generally  been the case  for  some  time.  Department  store  sales  in  the

District were  stronger  than  expected in January  and February, with most

stores  reporting no  inventory problems.  At  the  same  time, homebuilders  in

the  District  reported a significant  increase  in  customer  interest,  with

actual  sales  improving  though still  light.  By  contrast,  labor market

developments  continued to  be unfavorable  in  the  District  with state

unemployment  rates  rising and with a continued heavy  schedule  of  planned

corporate  layoffs.  Loan officers  at  small  and midsized banks  report  only

few changes  in their willingness  to  lend  as  compared with their  practices

two months  ago.

Consumer Spending

Most  contacts  at  District  department  stores  reported stronger-than-

expected sales  in both January  and February  and positive over-the-year

changes.  However, while generally pleased with the  results,  retailers  cited

the  Persian Gulf  War as  a deterrent  last year  and exceptional promotional

activities  this  year as  major  factors  in  the  recent  improvement.  Year-to-

year gains  ranged from  5 to  10  percent  in January  and  5 to  7 percent  in

February.  The major  exception was  a chain with a sizable  over-the-year

decline in  January.

Most  categories  of merchandise  registered year-to-year gains  in  the

first  two months  of  the year with the  strongest  results  in women's  and men's

apparel,  cosmetics and accessories.  In  addition,  for  the  first  time  in many

months,  all  respondents  noted some  improvement  in  furniture sales.  With the

relatively strong  sales  performances, most  retailers  reported inventories  in

good  shape  and on plan  or  a little below.

II-2

The  retail  scene  in  the  District has  undergone some  churning in recent

weeks  with one major group  emerging from two years  in Chapter  11  bankruptcy

and several  other chains  filing  for protection under  that  chapter.  While

some  chains  are having difficulty, a large  jewelry and houseware  chain

announced plans  to  build a $194  million shopping center  on Long Island and

several  national  and foreign  retailers  are  entering the New York City market

now that  rents  are  lower  and desirable  space  is  available.

Residential Construction and Real Estate

Homebuilders  in  several parts  of  the District  report  a decided pickup

in buyer interest  as  evidenced by  increased traffic  and phone  inquiries.

However, the  volume of  sales  has  been light,  although improved, as  consumers

remain hesitant  due to  economic  uncertainties  and the possibility of  future

tax  incentives  for homebuyers.  In general,  builders now  expect  this year to

show some modest  improvement  over  1991.  Credit  conditions  reportedly  are

still  tight,  particularly  for  acquisition and development  loans,  though

money for  construction loans  has  become more available.

Office  leasing  activity increased  somewhat  in  recent weeks  but  with

the continued release  of  excess  space  resulting  from corporate  restructuring

and relocation, vacancy  rates  in much of  the  District  have been  rising.

Moreover, some  areas  have also  had new office  construction  coming on  line,

adding  further upward pressure on vacancy rates.  The latest  data  show

office vacancy rates  of  20  percent  or more  in northern New Jersey,  Fairfield

County,  (Connecticut),  Long  Island and Buffalo.  While rates  in Westchester

County, Manhattan and  Syracuse remain below the national average  of  about

19  percent, most  of  them have been rising as  well.

Other Business  Activity

District unemployment  rates  rose  in  February to  their highest  levels

since  the  early  1980s.  New York's  rate climbed to  8.9  percent--the second

highest  among  eleven  large states--from  8.4 percent  in January while New

II-3

Jersey's  jumped to  7.6  percent  from  6.8 percent  in January.  The District's

employment  outlook was  dimmed further by  General  Motors'  announced plan to

close  its  Westchester  County plant,  with almost  3500  jobs,  by mid-1995.

More  immediately, thousands of  layoffs  are  scheduled to  take place this  year

and next  at  several  large banks,  A.T.&T. and NYNEX, the  regional  telephone

company.  In addition,  I.B.M. will be  cutting back substantially  through

early retirement  and attrition.  On the positive  side, G.M. will  invest

$65  million in  updating and technological  improvement  at  two  Buffalo  area

plants  and Continental Airlines plans  to  add up  to  1000  jobs  in northern New

Jersey.

The February  survey  of  Buffalo purchasing managers  showed  somewhat

higher percentages  of  firms  reporting reduced new orders  and production

following  substantial  improvements  in these  categories  in January.  There

was  also  a sharp  increase  in  the percentage reporting higher  input  prices  in

February.  The January  survey  of  Rochester purchasing managers, however,

showed a decrease  in the percentage anticipating  a deterioration of  business

conditions  over  the  next  three months.

Financial Developments

Most  senior  loan officers  surveyed at  small  and midsized banks  in  the

Second District  indicated no  change  in  their willingness  to  lend as  compared

with two  months  ago,  although a few respondents  did report  tightening their

credit  standards.  Consumer loan demand  remained weak.  Demand for  residen-

tial mortgages  continued to  rise  sharply due to  the  surge  in mortgage

refinancings  resulting  from the  drop  in  interest  rates  two months  ago.

Almost  all  surveyed loan  officers  indicated that they  do not  expect changes

in  their  lending practices or  deposit  rates when lower  reserve  requirements

become  effective April  2.  A majority  of  respondents  reported no  change or a

decrease  in  loan delinquency rates  during January  or  February,  contrary  to

the  usual pattern of  increased delinquencies after the holidays.

III-1

THIRD  DISTRICT  - PHILADELPHIA

Conditions  varied  across  major  sectors  in  the  Third  District  in  late

February and  early  March;  overall,  economic  activity appeared  to  be  steady  or

slightly improved.  Most manufacturers reported that business has been stable to

somewhat better  in  recent  weeks,  and  new orders  were  on  the  rise.  Retailers

generally  indicated  that  sales were  running  a  few percent  above  the  levels  of

last February  in  dollar  terms.  Many  auto  dealers  said unit  sales  picked up  in

January, and although results were mixed for February, customer traffic continued

to be  good.  Most major banks  in  the Third District reported continuing declines

in loan volume outstanding although residential mortgage activity was generally

up.  Realtors and home builders said sales were rising, especially for moderately

priced houses.  Commercial and industrial real  estate was characterized as  soft.

Looking  ahead,  Third  District  business  contacts  express  some  optimism.

Most  manufacturers  expect  orders  and  shipments  to  increase  over  the  next  six

months.  Retailers  and auto dealers  look for  gradual improvement.  Bankers  said

they were  receiving  more  inquiries  from potential  business  borrowers  although

loan applications had not yet picked up.  Realtors  foresee  further  increases  in

residential  activity although  the  recent  upturn in  mortgage  interest rates  has

caused  some  concern  that  recent  gains  could  be  short-lived. 

Demand  for

commercial  office  and  retail  space  is  not  expected  to  strengthen soon.

MANUFACTURING

Manufacturing  activity has  been running  at  a  steady  pace  according  to  a

majority of the industrial firms contacted for this report, and a good percentage

reported some  recent  improvement.  Although  shipments  remained stable  at  about

III-2

half of the manufacturers polled, they were up at almost one-third of the firms.

Both  durable and nondurable  goods  producers  reported  increases  in  new  orders.

Manufacturing employment remained weak, however.  While a large majority of firms

reported steady payrolls,  a considerable number are  still making reductions.

Most Third District manufacturers expect business to improve over the next

six months.  A majority of managers at area plants look for an increase in orders

and shipments  during the  spring  and summer, and order backlogs  are  expected  to

rise.  Expectations of  improved business  are  leading area firms  to  plan higher

capital  outlays  over  the  next  two  quarters.

RETAIL

Reports  from  Third  District  retailers  indicated  that  sales  in  January

exceeded  sales  in  the  same  month  last  year. 

Although  the  year-over-year

comparison for  the  month is  skewed by  the  low  level  of  sales  in January  1991,

most  merchants  said  that  they  continued  to  make  gains  in  February  as  well.

Although  results  varied  greatly  from  store  to  store,  on  balance  retailers

indicated that sales  in late February were running a few percent above the year-

ago  period  in  dollar  terms.  Most  store  officials  said  they  continued  to  be

aggressive in pricing and promotion.

Third District merchants expressed some optimism for the rest of the year.

Although most remain cautious  in  their planning,  some store  officials said they

were  reviewing their  sales  forecasts  and might  raise  them.  However,  retailers

continue to  mention  the  fragile  state  of consumer  confidence,  and  several said

that a stronger sales  trend will not take hold until worries about job security

diminish.

Third District auto dealers said that unit sales in January were generally

above  the  average  for  the  month  in  the  past  few years.  Although  reports  were

III-3

mixed  for  February,  most  dealers  reported  that  customer  traffic  had  remained

fairly healthy.  On  balance,  dealers  look  for  gradual  improvement  during  the

year, especially if auto  loan rates  remain at  or below  current levels.

FINANCE

Most  Third  District  bankers  contacted  for  this  report  indicated  that

overall  loan  volume  was  continuing  to  edge  down.  Most  large  banks  in  the

district were experiencing declines in business and consumer installment lending.

Some  bankers  said  seasonal  factors  could  account  for  much  of  the  drop.

Residential real estate lending--including home equity loans, purchase mortgages,

and refinancings--was generally steady  or  up  at banks  in  the  district.

Looking ahead, commercial bank lending officers generally expect the demand

for  residential  mortgages  to  continue  moving  up,  although  a  few  believe  the

recent  backup  in  mortgage  interest  rates  could  slow  the  current  spurt  of

activity.  As  for commercial and industrial lending, most of the Third District

bankers surveyed said that loan applications were not on the rise, but they were

receiving more inquiries  from potential business borrowers.

REAL  ESTATE

Reports from some realtors and home builders indicated that home sales were

on the rise.  Several builders said customer traffic at their projects had grown

in recent weeks and sales had picked up, especially for moderately priced houses.

Realtors noted  increased interest  from potential buyers  of  existing homes, but

they  indicated  that  sales  have  been  picking  up  only  slowly,  especially  for

higher-priced homes.  According to  real  estate contacts,  the  recent behavior of

mortgage interest rates--falling, then moving back up--may spur some sales in the

short  run, but could restrain  sales  if  the  rates  continue  to  rise.

Commercial  and  industrial  real  estate  values  remain  under  downward

III-4

pressure, according to Third District brokers.  They reported that office leasing

activity has been fairly healthy, but property values  and rents  have been soft

as  excess capacity remains  to be absorbed.  While new office buildings have been

finding  tenants,  older  buildings have been  losing tenants.  Demand for  retail

space and industrial buildings was  reported to  be weak.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT  - CLEVELAND

Summary.  The  tone of District  comments  is  mixed, but a little more

optimistic  than in  recent months.  Retailers  are buoyed by

better-than-expected sales  in recent weeks,  and automotive  sales  are  expected

to  rise  next quarter from this.  Several District  respondents expect an

impending recovery  in manufacturing production,  in part because  inventory

liquidation appears  to have  about  ended.  A recent flurry of consumer  traffic

and new mortgage  loans  suggest better home  sales  and starts  this  year  than

last,  according to  both builders  and lenders.  Loan demand, except for

mortgages,  remains  relatively  flat.

Consumer  Spending.  Retailers are  a little more  sanguine  about second  -

quarter sales prospects  than they were a few weeks ago because  of

better-than-expected sales  in both January and February.  A national  chain

described its  performance  in this  District as  being somewhat stronger

than  in the  nation.  Retail sales  in an upscale  shopping center, and a large

discount chain excelled  February, 1991  levels,  and a large retailer  described

its  sales  as  being better  than consumer confidence  surveys would suggest.

Some  large  retailers were  able  to  reduce  their  excess  stocks,  substantially,

although one indicated  that  inventories are  still higher  than desired.

Automotive.  Auto producers  and dealers  continue  to be  cautious  about new

car  sales  and production over  the  next few quarters.  Motor vehicle  sales  in

February  rose a few percent from January, but  still  fell  short  of the pace

last December.  Big Three  auto makers  apparently plan to  trim production  from

IV-2

earlier projections  again  in March, with some weeklong furloughs likely,

according  to  a producer.  Motor vehicle  sales  in  the  first  quarter are

estimated at just below the  level of  last quarter, but economists  in the

industry still expect a second quarter increase  of 5% to  8%.  These  sources

believe  that consumer confidence  is  no  longer declining.

Auto dealers  in  the  District  are also  cautious  about near-term sales

prospects,  and apparently do not plan much change  in factory orders  from

recent months.  The  present 60-day supply of new cars  is  considered

satisfactory  in view of an uncertain outlook.  Despite the  "Buy American"

campaign, dealers  of Japanese  cars  and Japanese and domestic cars  report

higher  sales  than  dealers  of only Big  Three models.

Manufacturing.  An impending rebound  in  output is  expected by  some

manufacturers,  who are  encouraged by recent  improvements  in orders  and

profits.  They point  out  that manufacturers  are no  longer  liquidating

stocks,  and that rising numbers of  inquiries  and requests  for prompt delivery

of small  orders  suggest that  inventories  may be  low  relative  to  sales.

A major appliance producer, however, sees  little prospect for an early

comeback in appliance production even though shipments are expected to  climb

slowly  over the next  few months.  In this view, inventories will be trimmed

further in order to  reduce  costs  and improve profits.  In contrast,  a producer

of small  appliances posted record  sales  and earnings  last quarter.

Capital goods production  is  recovering  slowly and unevenly.  Industrial

controls used  in machine  tools  are  strengthening, but  orders  for the

construction and farm machinery industries remain weak, according  to  some

producers.  An industrial instrument manufacturer reported an unexpected

decline  in January and February  orders,  following a bubble late  last year.

IV-3

Orders for heavy-duty trucks  soared in February, which sharply boosted the

January-February average  from the  second half of  1991.  A small  computer

producer experienced a surge  in sales  and profits  last quarter, and expects  an

even better year  in 1992.  Orders  for forgings  rose  sharply in January from

December levels,  and shipments were  relatively unchanged, which  some producers

believe will  add to  production and shipments  in the months  ahead.

Steel output has held up better  than  some  producers had anticipated for

this  quarter.  Steel  service  centers have been ordering more than expected

because of growing  optimism about  the  capital  goods  outlook, according  to  a

producer.  Operating  rates  of some  steel producers  are between 80%  and  83%  of

capacity, but steel prices  are  still declining, and the outlook for profits

remains  depressed.

Housing and Construction.  Home builders  and lenders are  encouraged by the

step-up  in consumer  traffic  and sales  in January and February, and several

expect that home sales  this  spring will  top  that of a year ago.  Home buying

and starts have been especially  strong  in Cleveland and Cincinnati, according

to  builders and realtors.  Some officials believe  that the  recent runup  in

mortgage  interest  rates has  not deterred buying, and may  indeed be an

incentive for  consumers  to buy before  rates  advance  further.

A large builder of single-family homes  and condominiums  reports  good

demand for  units priced between  $100,000  and $125,000.  Credit  is  available,

according  to  those  contacted.  Some builders  complain that  environmental  and

other regulations are  increasingly  a constraint on new housing starts.

Financial  Conditions.  Most large  commercial banks contacted report little

change  in commercial  and industrial  loans,  although one noted  its  first signs

of  a pickup  since early  1991.  A banker also  states  that a combination of

IV-4

developments  improved its  capital position, and that  the  bank is  now more

aggressively seeking loans.  Both banks and thrifts  report a slowed pace  in

mortgage  refinancing.  Until  the  latest runup  in mortgage rates,  several

lenders  temporarily  suspended accepting refinancing  applications.  New

mortgage loan demand, however, has  been rising even since  recent hikes  in the

mortgage  rates,  according  to  several banks  and thrifts.  Depositories

contacted reported  that they have ample  funds  available for what  they expect

to  be better  spring sales  this year  than  last.  Commercial  real estate  loans,

however, are  still difficult  to  get,  but are  available to  qualified borrowers.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview

Most  sectors of  the District's  economy improved  modestly  in late January

and  in February,  in contrast  to  the  sluggish  conditions reported  in mid-

January.  Retailers  noted  a rise  in sales  and  in spending  by  tourists,  and

factory  activity apparently  increased modestly.  Most  retailers and

manufacturers were  optimistic  that  business  conditions would  improve  further

in coming  months.  Realtors  reported  a rise  in home  sales which they

attributed to  a combination  of lower  interest rates  and  improved  consumer

confidence.  In the  financial  sector,  lending  and  interest rates  were  steady.

District  port  activity  rose, mainly  because of  higher  imports,  and  farm crop

prospects  were  good.

Consumer Spending

Our regular mail  survey  indicated that  District  retail  activity  improved

in late January and  in February  after  having  been unchanged  in December  and

early January.  Survey  respondents  reported  increases  in most  indicators  of

retail  activity,  although  sales  of big  ticket  items were  flat  and  retail

employment apparently declined.  Most  retailers  reported  that  factors  other

than  this year's low  interest rate  environment had  helped profit  margins  and

sales;  one  in three,  though,  believed  that the  decline in rates  had helped

business.  Retailers  continued to  be  optimistic about  their prospects over  the

next  six months.  They  expected  activity,  particularly  sales  and  shopper

traffic,  to  increase.

Manufacturing

Manufacturers  indicated  that District  factory  activity improved  somewhat

in past weeks,  in contrast  to  the decline  reported  in the  previous  survey

period.  Respondents  reported  increases  in shipments,  new orders  and  exports.

They noted  little  change  in most  other  indicators,  and  inventories  apparently

declined  somewhat.  Manufacturers  indicated that,  besides  poor  sales,  excess

capacity was  their most  important  current  problem. About  two-thirds of  the

respondents said  that  lower  interest rates  had not  boosted  their  profits  or

sales  significantly so  far  in 1992.

Manufacturers  gave  optimistic forecasts  for the coming  months.  They

expected  all  indicators  of production and  sales  to  improve,  and  thought that

their  inventories would  be  stable.

Ports

Representatives  at  District  ports--Baltimore, Charleston,  and  Hampton

Roads  (Norfolk)--indicated that exports  were  unchanged and  imports were  higher

compared  with  early  January and  with  a year  ago.  They  expected export

activity  to  increase  somewhat  over  the next  six months  and  import  activity to

be  flat.

Tourism

Hotels, motels  and  resorts  throughout the  District  reported  by  telephone

that  tourist  activity in February remained  unchanged compared  to early  January

and to  a year  ago.  Most  respondents  reported  that bookings  were  about even

with  a year  ago.  Tourism was  helped  by  a good  ski  season  and  strong

convention bookings.  Over half  of the  respondents expected  activity  to

strengthen throughout  the  remainder of  the winter and  into  the  spring.

Finance

District  financial  institutions contacted  by telephone  indicated  that

credit  conditions were  mostly  unchanged  over the  last  eight  weeks.  On  balance

V-3

banks  reported  the demand  for  consumer and  commercial  loans was  stable.

Respondents stated  that  interest rates  on  commercial  loans  at  their

institutions  were steady,  but  rates  on  consumer loans were lower.  Respondents

said  that  demand for  home mortgage refinancing  trailed  off over  the  last  eight

weeks  as  mortgage  interest rates  rose.  They noted,  however, that  the  home

mortgage  sector  continues to  be  the  strongest  single  source of loan  activity.

Real  Estate

A telephone survey  of real  estate  analysts  and  mortgage  bankers

indicated  increased  activity  in the  residential  market  since mid-January.

Home  sales  and  customer traffic  increased  and  many  respondents  suggested that

these  increases  were due  to  lower mortgage rates  coupled with  higher  consumer

confidence.  Home  prices  remained  mostly steady,  although  some  respondents

suggested that  prices  for  upscale  homes  weakened  in their  areas.  Commercial

real  estate  activity  remained  flat  in most  of  the  District, although  increased

leasing  activity was  reported  in the Carolinas.

Agriculture

Agricultural  analysts  across  the  District  reported  that  farm conditions

remained  strong  in January  and  early  February.  Mild  winter temperatures  and

abundant  precipitation  had left  small  grain  crops  in generally good  condition.

Winter  planting  preparation was  on  schedule, and  the  seeding of tobacco  and

the planting  of  potatoes was  underway.  In the  livestock sector, feed  and  hay

supplies were expected to  be  adequate  for the  remainder of winter  and  through

the  spring.

VI-1

SIXTH  DISTRICT  - ATLANTA

Overview:  According  to  Sixth District contacts,  economic  conditions  have  improved

somewhat  since  January.  Retailers  generally  report  modest  sales  increases,  especially  for

nondurables.  Auto  dealers  reported increased  showroom  traffic but  relatively  small gains in  car

sales.  Most  manufacturers  reported  steady  or higher  new  orders  and production.  Bankers  saw

a  firming  in  demand  for  business  loans  and  continued  improvement  in  loan  portfolio  quality.

Home  sales  increased  again,  although  some  realtors  noted  that  the recent  rise  in mortgage  rates

has  dampened  activity.  Single-family  home  building  gathered  momentum,  and  if sales  remain

at  higher  levels,  contractors  and  suppliers  expect  further acceleration  during  the  spring.  Aside

from rising  lumber prices,  input and output  prices  have remained  steady  under very  competitive

conditions.

Consumer  Spending:  Over  half  the  retail  contacts  reported  higher  sales  from  weak

year-ago  levels;  the  remainder  reporting  flat  consumer  spending.  Gains  were  still  concentrated

in nondurable  items  such  as  apparel.  However,  sales  of some  types of  durables  began  to  show

signs  of life  in  February.  Several  contacts  reported  significantly  improved  furniture  sales,  the

first  positive  news  for  that  product  line  in  several  months.  Auto  dealers  said  that  while

showroom  traffic increased,  sales gains were only  modest.  Most retail  contacts  remain  cautiously

optimistic,  expecting  a  pickup  in  sales  during  the  second  half  of  the  year.  This  caution  is

reflected  in lean  inventories  and conservative  placement  of new orders.  Contacts  in the region's

tourism  and  convention  industries  expect  increased  activity.  Convention  bureaus  in  New

Orleans,  Orlando,  and  Atlanta report  that  advance  bookings  continue  to exceed  year-ago  levels.

Manufacturing:  Most  factory  contacts  reported  steady or  higher levels  of new orders

and  production  from  early  in  the  year.  Nearly  three-quarters  of the  contacts  expect  business

activity  to  strengthen  over  the  next  six  months.  Brisk  sportswear  demand  has  stimulated

VI-2

production  for  some  apparel  producers. 

Producers  of  construction-related  materials  are

expanding  employment  in response to improved orders.  An industrial equipment  producer  noted

recent  improvement  in  business  activity  and  a  coincident  upturn  in production.

However,  carpet  mill  contacts  characterize  current  demand  as  flat,  although

improvement  originating  from  new  home  construction  is  expected.  Several  consumer  durable

producers  remain  concerned  about  conservative  consumer  spending.  Generally,  profit  margins

remain thin  because  of keen  competition.  Consumer  electronics  producers  noted  that  continued

declines  in  finished  goods  prices  are  encouraging  increased  levels  of offshore  production.

Financial  Services:  Loan  demand  in  the  region  was  mixed  through  February.

Mortgage  refinancing  continues  at  a  record  pace,  but the  flood  of applicants  is abating.  Other

types  of consumer  lending  remain  sluggish.  Bankers  report that business  loan  demand  is flat  or

slightly  higher  in  recent  weeks  but  is  still  generally  below  year-ago  levels.  Most  banking

contacts  report  improvement-in  loan  portfolio  quality.  However,  the  size  of  existing  loan

portfolios  in  most  banks  contacted  continued  to  contract  in  early  1992.

Construction:  Most realtors report increasing  home sales in January  and February,  and

newspapers  are  selling  more  real  estate  ad  lineage.  However,  several  realtors  noted  some

slowing  in  purchases  coincident  with  the  recent  rise  in  mortgage  rates.  Homes  sales  remain

strongest  in the lower  price range,  but some  contacts  are now  seeing  improved  sales  in the trade-

up  market.  Although  home  inventories  are  being  absorbed,  realtors  suggest  that  an  adequate

supply  is  on  the  market,  especially  of luxury  homes.

According to contractors,  single-family  home building accelerated  more than seasonally

through  February.  Builders  are  relatively  optimistic  but  fear  an  increase  in  mortgage  rates.

Multifamily  activity  remains  moribund.

VI-3

Commercial  construction  remained  dormant.  However,  several  commercial  realtors

reported  that the  office  leasing  market  is  in  the  early  stages  of recovery,  aided  by  the  reduced

new  supply  of office  space  coming  to  the  market.

Wages  and  Prices:  Retail and factory  contacts  report that  input and output prices  have

remained  relatively constant  under intense competitive pressure.  However,  manufacturers  expect

higher  input prices in the  second  half of the year.  Home builders  have  seen  lumber prices jump

and some  expect price increases in other construction  materials  during  the spring as  more activity

pushes  product  demand  higher.  Ample  natural  gas  inventories  have  been  swollen  by  the  mild

winter,  forcing  prices  lower  and  initiating  cutbacks  in  domestic  exploration  and production.  No

general  acceleration  of wage  pressures  has  been  reported.

VII-1

SEVENTH  DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.  The  Seventh  District has experienced  a slow  but increasingly widespread

advance  in economic  activity  since the end of January.  Recent indicators  of regional economic

activity  generally signalled expansion in February.  Most manufacturers  reported  flat to modest

improvement in activity  and expect production to  improve  in the  months ahead.  Auto dealers'  orders

over the last month have been better than the industry expected, but auto suppliers  have  seen only

limited improvements  in their orders.  Several retailers have  also indicated  "surprisingly  strong" sales

in February, even though part of the improvement over year-ago  levels still reflects  weak  sales last

year.  Housing  activity in the District picked up markedly in February,  aided in part by unseasonably

warm  weather.  Business lending activity  has  changed  little in recent months, but an increase in loan

demand was noted in selected markets.

Regional  Indicators.  Indicators  of District economic activity  for the  month of February

were  generally positive.  Purchasing managers'  surveys  for Chicago  and Milwaukee  showed solid

gains in orders  and production,  although their employment indexes  remained  relatively  weak.  The

Detroit index switched  from signalling  widespread  contraction  to modest expansion in both non-auto

and  auto-related businesses,  led again by increases in production,  orders, and--for nonauto-related

businesses--vender  performance.  Purchasing  managers'  reports taken  over the second half of January

for Western Michigan, which is more dependent  on office  furniture  and  appliances  than autos,

indicated  some  slowing in the overall  rate  of decline in that area's  activity, although several  survey

participants  stated that business was picking up or was expected to pick up by the end of the first

quarter.  Help-wanted  advertising in the  Midwest region declined  slightly in January,  although  in

recent months it has been holding up somewhat better than  in other regions.  A survey  of hiring

activity  in the region expects hiring to be  down this quarter, but to  rebound  in the second  quarter.

Manufacturing.  Reports  on manufacturing  activity in the District have turned increasingly

positive  since the last report, although some producers  were  still reporting  that activity has remained

depressed  since the  end of last year.  Several auto producers  report a marked  improvement  in dealer

orders  for light vehicles,  especially minivans, since  the end of January,  and  one producer has begun to

VII-2

revise  production schedules  upward.  Car orders  remain  weak relative to light truck orders, but car

production this quarter is still expected  to be slightly higher than in the  fourth quarter on a seasonally

adjusted basis.  With sales  rates running  above production rates,  several sources  expect that dealers

will have to increase  car orders  soon.

While  several auto  suppliers  are anticipating  an increase in auto  production, improvements  in

their auto-related  activity  has  not yet appeared.  One supplier noted that delivery  schedules  to auto

producers  have stabilized in recent weeks, suggesting that auto production plans  are firming.  A

supplier of transmissions  stated that sales were down in January,  although spot improvements  were

noted, particularly  in 5-speed transmissions.  A steel producer reported  that first quarter  bookings

show a seasonally  adjusted  improvement  over the fourth quarter.  However, gains were  not attributed

to autos, but rather to an increase  in orders  from steel service  centers, which generally derive  their

demand  from small industrial  customers.

Consumer Spending.  Several District retailers  reported  solid  year-over-year  gains in same-

store sales  during January  and February,  even when considering the weakness in sales a year ago.  A

large  discount chain reported  improved  sales, particularly  in home products, despite  intense

competitive  pressure  on prices.  Nondurable-goods producers  are offering attractive bulk deals to

large  retailers,  apparently to  reduce inventory,  and  retailers are  running special  promotions to take

advantage  of the deals.  A major department  store chain, which recorded  double-digit  sales  growth in

January,  continued  to post equivalent year-over-year gains  in February,  led by furniture  and  appliance

sales.  A survey of retailers  in the Northern  Illinois and Indiana area  suggests that recent sales  gains

are concentrated  among department stores,  while sales  at speciality  stores  continue to  be weak.

However, one retailer noted  that department stores  suffered greater weakness  a year ago  than the

specialty  stores,  which may  account for the current difference  in performance.

Several auto dealers  were upbeat  about February  auto sales.  Traffic has been improving

since the end of last year, according to several  contacts.  One  Michigan dealer recorded the best

February  in the franchises'  ten-year history.  According  to  another dealer, "nearly new" program cars

VII-3

are still an important source  of dealership  sales,  but reduced  availability  of program  cars  over the next

few months  should  shift the mix of sales toward  new cars.

Housing  Activity.  Gains  in housing starts for the  Midwest in January  were followed  by a

surge  in new home sales  in February.  A larger realty  firm noted  that existing home sales in the

Chicago  area began to  strengthen in January,  and  sales for the  firm continue  to run about 25-30%

above  "normal" levels  for this time of year.  Gains  are  attributed to  lower interest  rates, a mild winter,

and stable house prices.  Home  builders  are  reporting  an upward trend  in sales, and  one developer has

started planning two new  projects  in the Chicago  area.  A supplier of building materials  sees  an

unmistakable  uptick in sales, with sales to  professional home builders  in the  Chicago  area up 40%

from  a weak  year-ago  period.

Banking.  Business loan  activity  in the District has  changed little since the end of last year,

but several large  banks  in the  District cited signs  of improvement  in loan demand  from  middle-market

businesses.  With credit standards  unchanged,  several banks  cited weak loan demand,  rather than

credit  availability,  as the reason  for the  lack of improvement  in lending.  However,  a  bank economist

reported  a few  cases of customers seeking  financing  to  activate capital spending  programs  that had

been postponed  in the  fourth quarter.  One bank reported  some increase in loans to  small businesses

for the purpose  of financing  inventory.  Mortgage  demand was moderately  stronger at some large

banks, but unchanged at others.  An auto dealer noted that effective  interest rates  on new  auto loans

declined  in recent months,  as local banks  have  become  more aggressive  in their lending  than at the

end  of last year.  However,  several large banks reported  little change  in demand for consumer

installment  loans.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT  - ST.  LOUIS

Summary

Most  sectors 

in 

the  Eighth  District 

are  reporting  growth.

Increasing  demand  for  goods  and  services  and  outside  firms  relocating  to

the  District  are  stimulating  economic  activity.  Construction  activity

has  picked  up  in  recent  weeks.  Business  and  consumer  loan  demand  are

showing  signs  of  increasing.  Transportation  companies  report  a  pick-up

in  demand.

Manufacturing

Since  our  last  report,  both  employment  increases  and  plans  for

employment 

increases  have  multiplied. 

For  example, 

a  major 

tire

manufacturer  in  Memphis  recalled  100  workers  because  of  rising  sales  and

greater-than-expected demand.  A  major  household  appliance  producer  in

southwest  Indiana  will 

increase  employment  by  200 

after 

a  previous

increase  of  900  employees.  An electrical  equipment  company  announced  the

consolidation  of  its  North  Carolina  plant  at  its  Tennessee  plant,  which

will  add  150  workers  over  the  coming  year.  A  barge  builder  in  southeast

Indiana  recalled  200  workers.  Both  an  aerospace  company  and  a  plastics

company  chose  northeast  Mississippi  for  their  new  plants.  The  aerospace

plant,  which  will 

produce  engines  for  the  space  shuttle 

program,  will

open  in  1994  with  1,000 workers;  the  plastics  firm  will  begin hiring  this

spring. 

An Arkansas  electric  motors  company  is  expanding  its  facilities

because  of  increases 

in 

demand  and 

technological  advances.  Also 

in

Arkansas, 

a 

jet 

engine  producer 

is  building  a  new  plant,  and  a  steel

company  is  building  a  new  mill.  A  California  piping  company  will  close

its 

four  plants  and  move 

to  Little 

Rock,  bringing  400 

to  500  jobs.

VIII-2

Another  California  transplant,  a  medical  equipment  maker,  will  arrive  in

St.  Louis by  April, bringing  400 jobs.

Companies 

in 

some  sectors,  especially  defense-related  firms,

continue  to  lay  off  workers.  An ammunition  equipment  maker  released  130

employees  at  two  St.  Louis  plants.  In  addition,  a plastics  molding  firm

laid  off  100  when  restructuring  plans  closed  the  Louisville  plant.  A

major  St.  Louis  defense  contractor  laid  off  an  additional 420  workers  in

January  and  February;  however,  the  firm  also  announced  that  it  will  hire

500  engineers by  year's  end because  of  new  contracts.

Nonmanufacturing

Positive  news 

from  nonmanufacturing 

firms  also  dominated 

the

negative  news.  Strong  sales  spurred  a  national  discount  retailer  to

recall  employees  laid  off  after  Christmas. 

Patronage  at  St.  Louis

restaurants  was  reportedly  up 

in  January  and  February  over  the  previous

months.  Health  services  continue  to  grow with 500  new positions  added  in

St.  Louis  over 

the  past  month. 

In  addition, 

a  recent 

temporary

employment  agency's  report  revealed  that  25  percent  of  the  surveyed  St.

Louis  firms  plan  to  increase  their  employment  during  the  second  quarter

of  1992,  with  most  new jobs  anticipated  in  the  public  sector  and  service-

related industries.

Construction  and Real  Estate

Residential  construction  activity  is  up  substantially  from  its

year-ago  level.  Although  much  of  the  increase  can  be  attributed  to  the

low  levels  of  activity  during  with  the  Gulf  War,  contacts  say  favorable

interest  rates  and  potential 

tax 

incentives  are  spurring  both  new

construction  and  sales. 

A 

first-quarter 

1992 

survey  of 

small

construction 

firms 

indicated 

that  almost  half  believed  business

conditions  would  improve  during  the  next  six  months.

Banking  and  Finance

VIII-3

Total 

loans  outstanding 

at 

large  District 

banks  declined

slightly  over  the  past  few months.  The  downturn was  concentrated  in  real

estate,  where  loans  declined  almost  1  percent  in  January  and  February,

compared with  2.3  percent  growth during  the  prior  two  months.  Commercial

and  industrial  loans  outstanding  continue  to  grow,  rising  1.2  percent  so

far 

in 

1992. 

Consumer 

loans  were 

flat 

over 

the 

two-month  period,

compared with  a  0.5  percent  decline  during  the  prior  two  months.

Agriculture  and  Natural  Resources

Delta  catfish 

producers  report 

increased  production  and  higher

prices  because  of  the  Lenten  season.  Mississippi  cotton producers  intend

to  increase  planted  acreage 

this 

spring,  while  Arkansas,  Missouri  and

Tennessee  cotton  producers  plan 

slight 

decreases. 

Arkansas  oil 

and

natural  gas  producers  report  low  prices,  but  lumber  producers  report

relatively  high  prices.  District  coal  production  is  off  about  6  percent

from a  year  earlier.

Transportation

Because  of  financial  and  legal  difficulties,  an Arkansas  trucking

firm  recently  closed,  releasing  400  employees.  Meanwhile, 

two  major

Louisville  freight  and  parcel  carriers  announced plans  to  expand  their

facilities 

because  of 

increased  demand. 

Barge  movement  of  nonfarm

commodities 

in 

the  St.  Louis  area  has  increased  recently;  for  example, 

a

significant  amount  of  cement  is  reported  to  be  moving  from  a  Missouri

cement  maker  into  the  Chicago  area.  Barge  tonnage  through  Little  Rock  is

up  substantially  from  last  year.  Passenger  movements  through  the  St.

Louis  and  Little  Rock  airports  have  increased  recently,  while  freight

operations  are  up  modestly  in Memphis.

IX-1

NINTH  DISTRICT-MINNEAPOLIS

Economic  conditions  in the  District  appear  to be  strengthening  somewhat.  Retail,  housing,

and automotive  sales  have  all  improved.  Agriculture  seems  on net to be doing  reasonably  well,  and

tourism remains  strong.  Labor market  conditions remain weak,  while  conditions  in construction  and

manufacturing  appear  mixed.

Employment,  Wages,  and  Prices

Minnesota's  December  unemployment  at  5.3 percent  was  0.3  percent  above both  its  month-

and  year-ago  levels.  Minnesota's  nonagricultural  employment  was  up  0.76  percent  in  December

relative  to  a  year-ago. 

Job  growth  during  this  period  occurred  primarily  in  services  (up  2.75

percent),  government  (up  1.15  percent),  transportation  (up 0.55  percent),  and  wholesale  and  retail

trade  (up 0.32 percent),  while  employment  in  manufacturing  (down  1.12  percent),  and  construction

(down 3.79  percent) declined substantially.  Montana's  December unemployment  rate of 7.3  percent

was  0.1  percent below its  month-ago  level,  but substantially  above  its year-ago  level  of 6.7  percent.

On  the bright side,  the  December  level  of Montana's  nonagricultural  employment  was  1.10 percent

above  its  year-ago  level,  with  substantial  gains  being  posted  in  construction  (up  11.58  percent),

finance,  insurance  and  real  estate  (up  1.50  percent),  and  government  (up  1.13  percent).  North

Dakota's  December  unemployment  rate  at  4.1  percent  was  slightly  above  its  year-  and  month-ago

levels  of  3.8  and  4.0  percent  respectively.  However,  North  Dakota's  December 

level  of

nonagricultural  employment  was up  a robust  1.56 percent  relative  to  its year-ago  level,  with  mining

and  construction  employment  leading  the way  (each up  4.65 percent).  December's  unemployment

rate  in the  Upper Peninsula  of Michigan  of 11.1 percent was  above its year-ago  level  of 9.3  percent.

Consumer  Spending

Major  District  retailers  have  reported  February  sales  increases,  in  comparable  stores,  of  6

to  35  percent,  relative  to  a  year  ago.  The  strong  Canadian  demand  in border  areas  appears  to  be

IX-2

continuing,  despite  recent  Canadian  government  attempts  to  impose  higher  taxes  on  U.S.  goods.

Motel  occupancy  rates  in towns  like  Fargo,  North  Dakota,  are  at  close  to  full  capacity,  and  new

motels  are  being  constructed  to  accommodate  more  Canadian  visitors.

Auto  sales  have  also  revived,  apparently  bucking  the  national  trend.  Dealers  are  reporting

new car  sales  increases  of up to  10  percent and year-to-date  sales  increases  of as  much as  11  percent

relative  to  a year ago.  New truck  sales were  reported to be up to  17  percent higher  in February  and

over  20 percent  higher  for the year-to-date  relative  to  a  year  ago.

Home  sales  have  recently  improved  in  the  District.  February  sales  of  single-family  homes

in the  Minneapolis-St.  Paul  area were  up  49 percent  relative  to  a  year  ago.  The  median  February

sales price  is not yet available,  but in January  it was  up 4 percent.  Fargo-Moorhead  had  record real

estate  sales  in 1991,  with sales of existing  single-family  homes up  3.4 percent over the previous year.

Tourist  activity  has  been  generally  good  throughout  the  District.  Crossings  over  the

Mackinac  Bridge  onto  the  Upper  Peninsula  rose  9.6  percent  in  January,  setting  a  record  for  the

month.  The  total  number  of bridge  crossings  in  1991  was  4.9  percent  above  the  previous  year's

record  level.  Heavy  early  snowfall  got  winter  recreation  off to  a  good  start,  but  lack of  consistent

snowfall  has  hurt  many  areas.  Late  snowfalls  in  northern  and  western  sections  of  the  Upper

Peninsula  have greatly  improved  conditions  there.  Both Yellowstone  and  Glacier  Parks had  record

years  for tourism.  The  recent  running  of the  20th  American  Birkebeiner  cross-country  ski  race  is

estimated  to  have  brought  $4.5  to  $6.5  million in  tourist  spending  to  western  Wisconsin.

Construction  and  Manufacturing

Conditions  in the  District's  construction  industry  have  been mixed.  January's  level  of new

housing permits  in Minnesota  was up 34.8 percent relative  to a year ago,  but still 36.6 percent below

that  of two  years  ago.  Commercial  construction  in  the  state  has  also  slowed,  and  there  remains  a

large  overhang  in  office  space.  Montana,  and  North  and  South  Dakota  reported  generally  strong

construction  activity.

IX-3

Conditions were  mixed  in the  District's  manufacturing  industries.  In Minnesota there  were

continuing  reports  of  layoffs.  Average  weekly  hours  in  the  state  were  at  40.5  in  January,  down

relative  to  the  41.0  level  of the  previous  month,  but above  the 40.2  level  of a  year  ago.  In  South

Dakota  manufacturing  was  reported  to  be  doing  quite  well.

Resource-Related  Industries

Conditions  in  the  District's  agricultural  sector  have  been  fairly  good,  with  price  declines

offset  by  good  crop  yields.  Total  crop  output  in  North  Dakota  in  1991  was  2  percent  above  the

previous  year's record level.  South Dakota had a record soybean crop  in 1991.  Minnesota had near-

record  corn  and soybean  crops.  However,  January's  Minnesota Index  of Prices Received  was  at  its

lowest  level  since  April  of  1988.  The  all-farm-products  subcategory  was  down  2.29  percent  from

a  year  ago.  Substantial  price  declines  occurred  for  livestock  (down  19.0  percent),  and  poultry

products  (down  8.7  percent).  Minnesota's  average  of crop  prices  received  was  up  3.6 percent  in

January  relative  to  a year  ago,  while  the  average  of dairy  product prices  received  was  up  19.4  over

the  same period.  Unseasonably warm  weather damaged the  sugar beet crops  in Minnesota and  North

Dakota,  where  beets  are  stored  outdoors  during  the winter.

The  lumber  industry  in the District  continues  to  experience  difficulties  due to  environmental

issues,  and in particular  the as-yet-to-be-determined  set aside for wilderness  areas.  Conditions in the

District's mining  industry appear  to be mixed.  Exploration expenditures  in Montana  were  $5  million

in  1991,  down  from $35  million in  1990.  Copper producers  appear to  be doing well,  however,  with

smelters  running  at  capacity.

X-1

TENTH DISTRICT  - KANSAS  CITY

Overview.  The  Tenth District economy continues  to  grow slowly,  despite

some  weakening  in  the  farm  and energy sectors.  Housing  starts  are  still

increasing, new car  sales  are  picking up,  and retail  sales  continue  to

improve.  Retailers  are satisfied with their  inventory levels,  but

manufacturers  continue  to  trim  inventories  of materials  and other  inputs.

Prices  for  retail  goods  and manufacturers'  inputs  generally remain steady.

Retail  Sales.  Retail  sales  improved  slightly over  the  last month, with

demand for housewares  especially  strong.  Most retailers  expect  sales  to  climb

steadily over  the  rest  of  the year.  Prices  are  expected  to  remain steady,  or

perhaps  inch  up,  over  the  next  few months.  Most retailers are  satisfied with

current  inventory  levels  and expect  little change  in  the  coming months.

Auto  sales  in most district  states  were  up  slightly over  the  past month.

Most dealers  expect  further  increases  in  sales  during the  next  few months,

although  some  potential buyers  are  facing difficulty  obtaining loans.  With a

brighter  outlook for  auto  sales,  most  dealers  are expanding  inventories

slightly.

Manufacturing.  Purchasing agents  generally reported only small  price

increases  for  their  inputs  over  the  past year, and virtually no  increases  over

the  past month.  Prices  are  expected  to  remain stable  during coming months.

Materials  are  readily available  and agents  expect no problems  in  acquiring

materials  for  the  remainder of  the  year.  Most  firms  expect  to  keep  trimming

inventories until  they  see  signs  of economic  improvement.  Export  sales  have

risen and  further  gains  are  expected.

Energy.  Slumping  oil and natural  gas  prices have  dampened already weak

energy activity  in  the  district.  The average  number  of operating drilling

X-2

rigs  in  district states  slipped from 200  in January  to  198  in  February.  While

the monthly  decline was  modest,  the  February rig count was  nearly  25  percent

below  its  year-ago  level.

Housing Activity and Finance.  Housing  starts  across  the  district  are

much higher  than  a year  ago,  continuing  the  improvement observed  last month.

Builders  expect  further  increases  in  the  rest  of the  first quarter  and  in  the

year as  a whole.  New homes  sales  are  up  from  a year  ago,  and inventories  are

dropping.  While  the  price  of  lumber has  risen sharply, the  prices  of  other

building materials have  risen only  slightly.  There  is  little  difficulty  in

obtaining materials, but  builders  in  some  areas  anticipate shortages  of

lumber.

Most district  savings  and  loan respondents  reported net deposit  outflows

last month.  Mortgage  demand  is  very strong,  largely due  to  refinancing.

Demand is  expected  to  remain strong,  even though mortgage  rates  have risen

recently.  Respondents  expect  little  change  in  rates  in  the near  term and  over

the  rest  of the  year.

Banking.  Loan-deposit  ratios  at most  reporting banks  were  lower or  the

same  as  last  month, as  bankers  reported generally constant  loan demand.

Nearly  all bankers  reported  greater demand  for home  mortgages,  and  greater  or

constant demand for  consumer loans  and agricultural  loans.  Demand for

construction loans  and commercial and  industrial  loans  was  constant or  down at

most banks,  while commercial  real estate  loan demand was  mostly down.

Deposit behavior  across  reporting banks  was  mixed.  NOW, super-NOW, and

money market deposit accounts  were  mostly up, while  demand deposits  were

mostly down.  Large  CDs  at  nearly all  banks  were down.

Most reporting banks  lowered consumer  lending  rates  during  the  last

month, and a few bankers  expect  further  declines  in  the  near term.  Prime

X-3

rates,  however, were unchanged at  nearly all  reporting banks, with no  change

expected.  Lending  standards  at  all  reporting banks were unchanged  from last

month.  Bankers  generally  said  the  recent  lowering of reserve  requirements on

transaction  deposits would have  little or  no  effect  on  their  financial

condition or  on their  lending.

Agriculture.  Credit  reviews  at  district  agricultural  banks  reflect  the

recent  downturn  in district farm  incomes.  Farm lenders note a slight  rise  in

the  number of problem  loans  and a slight drop  in repayment  rates.  Last year's

plunge  in  livestock prices  hurt  livestock producers,  and drought  in  some parts

of the  district hurt  crop  producers.  Financial reserves  built up  in recent

years  cushioned the  recent  drop  in  livestock profits,  however.  And higher

grain prices  brighten prospects  for  district grain producers  in  the  year

ahead.

Recent rainfall  has  eased the  drought  that  threatened the  district's -

winter wheat crop,  although  the  crop  remains vulnerable to  a sudden cold snap.

With average  temperatures  and  timely  rainfall  during the  remainder  of  the

growing season, normal  to  above  normal yields  are  attainable  in  most of  the

district.

Despite  the  sluggishness  in the  national  economy, mainstreet businesses

in  the  district's rural  communities have performed well  in  recent years.  The

recent  drop  in  farm  income,  however, has  dampened business  activity  in many

rural communities  and trimmed profits  for  some  rural businesses.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

Economic  activity in the  District has  improved slightly  since  the  last

survey.  The  improvement generally has  been broad-based, with  the  exception of

the  energy extraction and agricultural  sectors.  Manufacturing  and business

service  companies report a modest increase  in  demand.  Retailers  say  that  they

are seeing visible  signs  of recovery.  The  strongest sector  in  the  District is

residential construction which has  increased significantly.  The  improvement

in residential building has  boosted demand for  construction-related products

such as  lumber,  cement  and brick.  Continued weakness  in oil and natural  gas

prices has  reduced exploration  and development and led  to  related declines  in

the production of oil  field equipment and fabricated metals.  Farm and ranch

conditions have  deteriorated in recent months due  to  above  average rainfall

and declines  in  livestock commodity prices.

Manufacturing  activity has  improved  in  recent months.  A  strong  increase

in  residential  construction has  boosted orders  for  lumber,  cement and brick.

Producers  of primary metals and electrical machinery note  slight  to  moderate

increases  in  orders.  Orders  for  apparel have  increased moderately  to

strongly.  Respondents  in  the  paper  industry say  that  increased capacity in

their  industry has  resulted in  reduced orders  for many producers  of business

paper.  The  demand for corrugated boxes  remains  stable.  Refining and

petrochemical  producers  say that orders  are  flat  to  slightly down.  Declines

in domestic  oil and gas  drilling have reduced the  demand  for oil  field

equipment.  Fabricated metal producers who  manufacture  products  for energy  and

commercial  construction companies note  recent  declines  in  orders.

XI-2

Demand  for services has  increased.  Law firm respondents  say that  for

the  first  time  in many months  they are experiencing  a rise  in  the  demand for

services  dealing with business  formation and expansion.  One  legal respondent

says  that,  in order  to  cut costs,  companies are  switching from out of  state

legal  firms  to  local firms.  Respondents  in  the  accounting  industry note  that,

aside  from seasonal  activity,  demand is  flat  to  slightly up.  One  accounting

firm, however, has  noticed a recent weakening  in  demand in  Houston.

Engineering firms  report  a modest increase  in demand due  to  growth  in housing

developments and proposed highway  projects.  Respondents  in  advertising

agencies  and airlines  say that business has  improved.

Construction  activity has  picked up  due  to  a significant rise  in home

building.  New home  sales  generally have  risen faster  than home  construction,

so  that new home  inventories  have  fallen to very  low levels.  Single  family

home  prices  are rising  in most markets.  Infrastructure construction  (roads,

highways,  sewer  systems,  etc.)  has  not changed,  although the  Highway Bill

should cause highway construction to  increase beginning in  the  third quarter.

Commercial  construction remains  at  low  levels.

Oil  and gas producers  say  that conditions  continue  to  deteriorate  and

that  1992 will mark historic  lows  for  domestic oil  and gas  drilling.  As  a

result  of  low prices for  oil and natural  gas,  exploration  and production

activity in the  District  continues  to  decline  and respondents say  that  they

are  shifting more of their  exploration activities  overseas.  Energy companies

continue  to  cut  domestic jobs  and drilling budgets.  While the  rig  count

increased slightly in  early March,  it  has  declined over  36  percent  since  its

recent  peak in  February  1991.

XI-3

Most retailers  say  that sales  have  increased across  a broad spectrum of

products.  While  sales  gains have been modest,  retailers say  that  the pickup

generally was not expected.  Retailers  continue  to  keep inventories  lean.

Sales  have  improved in most metropolitan areas.  Sales  growth is  strong  along

the  Mexican border.  Auto sales  have  declined.  Sales  of  imports  and

transplants have been particularly weak.

Financial  industry respondents  continue  to  report weak loan  demand.

Banks  report that they  are  having  trouble finding quality credits  and that

they have plenty of  liquidity.  Some  respondents are  expecting a modest

increase  in  loan demand in  the  second quarter.  Mortgage  refinancing has  been

strong and mortgage originations have  increased moderately.

Agricultural conditions have worsened in  recent months.  Livestock

prices declined in January and are  well below  last year's averages.  Large

supplies  of meat and poultry, high competition  among meats,  and a weak economy

are  putting downward pressure  on livestock prices.  Above normal rainfall  is

delaying planting  of many crops  such as  corn and  rice  and may soon affect  the

planting of grain sorghum and cotton.  Severe weather damaged a significant

part of  the  cotton crop  in  the  last quarter of  1991.  Cotton prices have

declined  recently.

XII-  1

TWELFTH  DISTRICT  -- SAN  FRANCISCO

Summary

Economic  conditions  in the Twelfth  District range  from persistent  weakness  in  California  to

moderate  growth  in  intermountain  regions.  Sales  of homes  and  autos  are responding  positively  to

recent  interest  rate  reductions.  Continued  employment  declines,  however,  are  reported  in the

defense-related  manufacturing,  banking,  legal,  and  government  sectors.  Wage  and  price  increases  are

modest,  with the  exception  of health  care.  Mortgage  refinancing  activity  appears  to have  peaked,  and

overall  loan  demand  remains  weak.  Recent  rains  have  improved  agricultural  prospects.

Business  Sentiment

Economic  expectations  of Twelfth  District  business  leaders  improved  modestly  since  our  last

report.  Only  12  percent  of respondents  now  expect  output  to decline  in  at  least  two of  the next  four

quarters,  compared  to  32  percent  in  January  and  25 percent  in  November.  Most  respondents  (70

percent)  expect  the  economy  to  expand,  but  at  a rate  below 2.5  percent.  The proportion  of business

leaders  expecting  improved  business  investment,  consumer  spending,  and  housing  starts  continues  to

increase.  Expectations  regarding  housing  starts  were  particularly  optimistic,  with  79  percent  of the

respondents  projecting  some  improvement  in  the next  four  quarters,  up  from  40  percent  in November.

Ninety-one  percent  expect  inflation  to  decline  or remain  stable.

Wages  and  Prices

Upward  pressures  on  wages  and  prices  remain  minimal  throughout  most of the  Twelfth

District.  Most  wage  increases  in  the Twelfth  District are  reported  in  the 3 to  4 percent  range.

Smaller  increases  are projected  for state  workers.  Employee  benefits,  however,  continue  to  rise  due

to  health  costs,  which  continue  to  increase  at  double-digit  rates.  Lumber  prices  are  rising,  due  to

decreased  supply  and  rising demand.  Outside  of these  sectors,  inflationary  pressures  are  hard  to  find.

XII  - 2

Contacts  in  retail  establishments  report  continued  discounting  and  flat  wholesale  prices.  Materials

prices  are  reported  down  for  several  industries,  with  paint  materials  prices  down  2 to  3 percent,  and

discounting  of newsprint expected  to  continue.

Retail  Trade  and  Services

Retail  sales  remain  soft  in most  of the Twelfth  District.  A  major  retailer  reports  inventories

are  at their  planned  levels,  and  that no  shortages  exist.  Another  retailer  reports  they  continue  to

reduce  staff  size,  and  that  all  retailers  are  emphasizing  cost  control.  One  bright  spot is  auto  sales,

however,  with  dealers  in  several  markets  reporting  increased  activity  since  January.

Professional  firms  in  Washington  expect  flat to  modest growth,  with  some  increased

competition  in  the  legal  field  reported.  Print  media  contacts  in  California  report that  circulation  and

advertising  volume  remain  below their  year-earlier  levels.  Classified  ads  in  employment,  real  estate,

and  autos  are  down.  Conditions  in  California  public  education  remain  uncertain,  with  hiring  plans

being delayed  due  to  possible budget  cutbacks.

Manufacturing

Manufacturing  activity  in  the Twelfth  District remains  sluggish,  with  layoffs  continuing in

aerospace,  electronics,  and  defense-related  industries.  Orders  for  helicopters  and  transport  aircraft

have  fallen  in  Oregon.  Boeing's  Washington  payroll  has  dropped  about  2,700  since  its  1989  peak,

with  600  lost since October,  mostly  in  defense  and  without direct  layoffs.  Another  6,500  reduction

has  been  announced  for  1992  with  a  layoff of 2,400  by  May.  Boeing  projects  its  long-term  prospects

as  strong,  however,  forecasting  a 5.2  percent  annual  increase  in passenger  traffic  through  2010.

Their  expansion  plans  appear  firm.  The overall  outlook  for business  investment  has  improved,  but

contacts  report  little immediate  impact  of  interest rate  reductions  on  capital  spending.

Agriculture  and  Resource-Related  Industries

The  agricultural  outlook  in the  Twelfth  District has  improved  somewhat  due to  recent  rains.

XII  - 3

Farmers  in  California  are now  hoping  for  increased  allocations  of water,  though  the  lingering  effects

of the  drought will  limit  deliveries  and  keep  pumping  costs higher.  Timber  sales  for this  fiscal  year

are  severely  restricted.  Ponderosa  pine  and  Douglas  fir  lumber  prices  are up  dramatically  due to

scarce  supply,  with prices  in  many  grades  at historic  levels.  Spot  natural  gas prices  are  down  6

percent  from  last year's  already  low  levels.

Construction  and Real  Estate

Residential  real  estate  markets  show  signs  of improvement.  Sales  activity  has  increased  in

several  District markets,  and  housing  starts  are  up  in  Idaho,  Utah,  and  eastern  Washington.  Renewed

investor  interest  in  housing  developments  is reported,  though  financing  remains  tight.  Conditions  in

the  nonresidential  construction  industry,  however,  continue  to  weaken  in  several  states,  with  a  contact

in  Oregon  expecting  weak  conditions  for  1 to  2  years.  Median  sales  prices  for single-family  homes

are  stable  or  increasing  slightly  in  most  District markets,  and  the drop  in  prices  of the  upper-end

residential  market  in California  appears  to  have  slowed.  Some  decline,  however,  is  reported  in

commercial  building  sales  prices.

Financial  Institutions

Twelfth  District financial  institutions  report continued  but moderating  interest  in  home

mortgage  refinancings,  but otherwise  flat demand  for  loans.  Commercial  and  construction  loans

continue  to  decline,  and  consumer  loan  categories  are  weak  with  the  exception  of home  equity  credit

lines.  Some  deposit outflow  is  reported,  as  interest  rate  reductions  are  inducing  investors  to  seek

higher  returns.  Banks  in  California  appear  to  remain  cautious  in  making  loans,  and  contacts  outside

the  financial  industries  report  problems  in  finding  credit  for  real  estate  development  and  small

business.  Small  business  loan  demand  is strong  and  usage  of Small  Business  Administration

guarantees  is  reported  up  both  locally  and  nationwide.

