FEDERAL  RESERVE  press  release

For Use  at  4:30  p.m. 

May  22,  1992

The Federal  Reserve Board  and the Federal Open Market

Committee  today  released the attached  record  of policy  actions

taken by the Federal  Open Market  Committee at  its meeting on

March 31,  1992.

The record  for  each meeting  of  the Committee  is  made

available  a few days after  the next  regularly  scheduled meeting

and  subsequently is  published in  the  Federal  Reserve Bulletin

and the Board's  Annual  Report.  The  summary  description  of

economic  and financial  conditions  contained  in  each  record  is

based  solely on the  information that was  available to the

Committee  at  the time of the meeting.

Attachment

RECORD  OF  POLICY ACTIONS  OF THE
FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE

Meeting Held  on March  31,  1992

Domestic  policy directive

The information reviewed  at  this meeting  suggested that

domestic  final  demand,  especially in  the  consumer  sector, had

strengthened  somewhat  in  recent  months.  Production and  employment

had  not  picked  up  commensurately because  businesses  apparently were

meeting  much of  their  increased  sales  by drawing down inventories.

Wage  and  price increases  had  continued  to trend  downward.

Total  nonfarm payroll  employment  rebounded in  February from

a large  drop  in  January.  The  February  gain was  concentrated  in  retail

trade,  but  employment  in  services  also  rose moderately  further  and

manufacturing payrolls,  after  five months  of  decline, were  lifted

somewhat  by the  return  of  auto  workers  from temporary layoffs.  The

average  workweek  increased  substantially  in manufacturing  and  in  some

service-producing industries.  Although employment  picked up  in

February, appreciable  expansion  of the  labor  force  brought a rise  in

the  civilian unemployment  rate  to  7.3  percent,  and  initial claims  for

unemployment  insurance  remained  elevated.

Industrial  production rose  considerably in  February but  was

little  changed  on  balance  over the  first  two months  of  the  year.  Part

of  the  increase  reflected  an  upturn  in motor  vehicle  assemblies,  with

the  remainder  being spread  across  a broad  range  of  other  goods.  Among

final  products,  gains  were  posted  in  both business  products,  notably

office  and  computing equipment,  and  consumer  goods.  By  contrast,

utility  output  again was held  down by  unseasonably warm winter

weather,  and  the production  of  defense  and space  equipment  continued

to  ebb.  Total  industrial  capacity utilization moved higher  in

February but  remained well below  its  pre-recession high.

Retail  sales  registered  large  gains  in  January and February

after  edging down  in  the fourth  quarter  of  1991.  The stronger  sales

were associated with  sizable  increases  for most  types  of  durable  and

nondurable  goods.  Single-family  housing  starts  rose  substantially

further  in  January  and  February,  reaching their  highest  level  since

the  first  quarter  of  1990,  and  sales  of  both  new  and  existing homes

were  up  considerably on  balance  over  the  two  months.  With vacancy

rates  persisting at  historically high  levels,  starts  in  the

multifamily  sector  remained  depressed.

Shipments  of  nondefense  capital  goods  increased  sharply  in

January  and  February, reflecting  strength  in  office  and  computing

equipment  and  in  business  purchases  of  motor  vehicles;  in  addition,

shipments  of  aircraft  rebounded  in  January from  a very  low level  in

the  fourth quarter.  Recent data  on  orders  pointed  to  further

increases  over  coming months  in  outlays  for  business  equipment  other

than  aircraft.  Nonresidential construction  activity  edged up  in

January  but  remained  below its  fourth-quarter average.  Further

declines  were recorded  in  the  construction  of  office buildings  and

hotels  in January,  and  persisting weakness  in  commercial  construction

was  signalled by  continued  decreases  in  appraised values  of  office

properties  in  late  1991.

Business  inventories  registered  steep  declines  in  January

after  rising substantially  in  previous  months.  Stocks  at  wholesale

and  retail trade  establishments  reversed  a sizable  portion  of  the

accumulation that  occurred  in  the  fourth quarter;  even  so,  for  many

types  of  businesses  in  the  trade sector,  inventory-to-sales  ratios

remained  at  elevated  levels.  In  manufacturing, inventories were

reduced  further  in January, with much  of the  drawdown occurring in

defense aircraft  and parts,  food  products,  and  petroleum.  Inventory-

to-shipments  ratios  in most  manufacturing industries  remained well

below the cyclical  peaks  reached  in  early 1991.

The nominal  U.S.  merchandise  trade  deficit narrowed  slightly

in  January  and was  essentially unchanged  from its  average  rate in  the

fourth  quarter.  A decline  in  exports was  concentrated  in  aircraft  and

automotive products.  A slightly  larger  drop  in  the  value of  imports

reflected weakness  in  both  oil  and  consumer  goods.  The available  data

on  fourth-quarter  economic activity in  the major  foreign  industrial

countries  indicated that  real  output  declined  in  Canada,  Germany,

Japan,  and  the United Kingdom, while  data  for  France pointed  to  little

change.  For  the  first  quarter  of  this  year,  the  limited data

available  showed  some  signs  of  recovery in  continental Europe but

suggested  continued  sluggishness  in the  other major  industrial

countries.

Producer  prices  of  finished  goods  edged  down  on  balance  in

January  and  February, as  a reduction  in  energy prices  more  than  offset

an  increase  in  food  and  other  prices.  Excluding the  food  and  energy

components,  producer  prices  rose  over  the January-February period  at

about  the  1991  pace.  At  the  consumer  level,  food  prices changed

little  over  the two months while  energy prices  fell;  prices  of

nonfood, non-energy items  increased  at about  the  same  rate  as  last

year  but  significantly below  that  of  1990.  Average hourly  earnings  of

production  or  nonsupervisory workers  in  February more  than reversed a

small  decline in  January.  However,  over  the twelve-month  period

ending  in  February, this  measure of  worker earnings  increased more

slowly than  in  the twelve months ending in  February  1991.

At  its meeting on  February  4-5,  1992,  the Committee adopted

a directive that  called  for maintaining the  existing degree  of

pressure on  reserve positions  but  that  included  a bias  toward possible

easing  during the  intermeeting period.  Accordingly, the directive

indicated that  in the  context  of  the  Committee's  long-run  objectives

for  price stability and  sustainable  economic  growth,  and  giving

careful  consideration to  economic,  financial,  and monetary

developments,  slightly  greater  reserve  restraint  might  be  acceptable

or  slightly  lesser  reserve  restraint  would be  acceptable  in  the

intermeeting  period.  The  reserve  conditions  contemplated  under this

directive were  expected to  be  consistent  with  growth of  M2  and M3  at

annual  rates  of  around  3 percent  and  1-1/2  percent  respectively  over

the  three-month period  from December  through  March.

Open market  operations  during  the  intermeeting period  were

directed  toward  maintaining the  existing  degree  of  pressure  on  reserve

positions.  Expected  levels  of  adjustment plus  seasonal  borrowing  were

raised  modestly immediately after  the  Committee meeting in  antici-

pation  of  a slight  rise  in  seasonal  borrowing.  In  the  event,  adjust-

ment  plus  seasonal  borrowing remained  quite  low, averaging  a little

less  than  $70  million over  most  of  the  intermeeting  period;  seasonal

borrowing,  newly subject  to  a market-based  discount  rate,  increased

relatively little  and  adjustment  credit  remained  at  depressed  levels.

The  federal  funds  rate  averaged  around 4 percent  over most  of  the

intermeeting  period,  although  late  in the period  the  rate averaged  a

little  lower.

Many  other market  interest  rates  rose  appreciably over  the

intermeeting  period,  as  market  participants  interpreted  incoming data

as  indicating that  the  economic  recovery was  regaining  some  momentum.

The most  pronounced  increases  occurred  at  intermediate maturities,

perhaps reflecting the  improved cyclical  outlook  for business

activity.  Although  yields on  investment-grade corporate debt  rose  in

tandem with rates  on  U.S.  Treasury  securities,  yields  on  lesser-rated

securities  were unchanged to  somewhat  lower.  Most broad  indexes of

stock prices  declined  somewhat  over  the  intermeeting period.

In foreign  exchange markets,  the trade-weighted  value of  the

dollar  in  terms  of  the  other  G-10  currencies  increased  substantially

over  the  period.  The  dollar  declined  initially  on  market  expecta-

tions  of  additional monetary easing in the United  States, but  it

subsequently appreciated  in  response  to  indications  of  a strengthening

of  the  recovery.  Late  in the  intermeeting period,  a tightening  of

money market conditions  in  Germany, where monetary  growth  continued  to

be  quite  rapid  and  concerns over  wage pressures  were mounting,

contributed  to  a retreat  in  the  dollar.  The yen  weakened  on  balance

in  relation  to  the  dollar  and  other major  currencies  in  response to

indications  of  further  declines  in  economic  growth  and  resultant

expectations  of  another monetary  easing  action  in  Japan.

Growth of  M2  and M3  accelerated  sharply  in  February, but  M2

apparently leveled  off  or  even declined  slightly  in March  and M3

contracted  somewhat.  Growth  of  M2  and M3  from December through March

appeared  to  have  been,  respectively,  somewhat  above and  close to  the

Committee's  expectations.  Much  of  the growth  in  both aggregates  over

recent  months reflected  a surge  in  transactions  balances that,  in

turn,  resulted to  an  important extent  from narrow opportunity costs

relative  to  market  interest  rates  and  from a bulge  in  demand deposits

associated with mortgage  refinancings and  other  financial market

activity.

The staff  projection prepared for  this  meeting pointed  to  a

continuing  recovery in  economic activity.  In the near  term,  growth  in

consumer  spending was  expected to  moderate after  the first-quarter

spurt,  but  residential  construction was  likely to  record  further

substantial  gains,  and  the  pace  of  nonfarm inventory liquidation

should  slow.  Over  time,  the  cumulative  effects  of  earlier  declines  in

interest  rates,  the  progress  achieved  in  strengthening  household and

business  balance  sheets,  and  some  diminution  of  credit  supply

restraints would  provide continuing impetus  to  economic  activity.

Moreover,  the  retarding  effects  of  depressed  nonresidential  construc-

tion  activity were  expected to  lessen  as  the  expansion  progressed.

The  projection did  not  incorporate  any major  new fiscal  initiatives  at

the  federal  level,  and  it  anticipated that  spending  for  goods  and

services  at  all  levels  of  government would  be restrained  somewhat.

The  substantial, though  diminishing, margin  of  slack  in  resource

utilization was  projected  to  be  associated with  appreciable further

slowing  in  the underlying  rate  of  inflation.

In  the Committee's  discussion,  the  members  generally viewed

the  incoming  information,  including anecdotal  reports  from  around  the

country,  as  providing  substantial  evidence  of  some  quickening  in the

pace  of overall  economic  activity.  Final demands  appeared  to  be

strengthening  in  the context  of  improving business  and  consumer

confidence.  Nonetheless,  key sectors  of  the  economy,  such  as  defense

spending  and commercial  real  estate,  remained weak and  a back-up  in

long-term interest  rates,  owing  in  part  to  lagging  savings  and  strong

demand for  credit by the  Treasury, threatened to  limit  gains  in

housing  and  business  investment.  With these  cross-currents  and

sources  of uncertainty raising at  least  some  questions  about  the

sustainability of the  expansion,  careful,  ongoing evaluation  was

warranted.  On  balance, however,  relatively moderate but  sustained

growth was  seen  as  the  most  probable  outcome.  The members  generally

regarded  the prospects  for  some  continuing slack in  labor  and  product

markets  as  consistent  with their  projections of  a downtrend  in  the

core  rate  of inflation.

With  regard  to  financial  developments  bearing  on  the

economic  outlook, members  stressed, as  they had  at  earlier meetings,

that  considerable  progress  had been made  in  strengthening  business  and

consumer  balance  sheets.  While media  attention  continued  to be

focused  on  some  large  financial and  nonfinancial  firms  that  were

experiencing  difficulties,  most businesses  now appeared  to  be  much

more  favorably positioned  to  weather  adverse  developments  and  to

finance  spending that would  support an  expanding  economy.  The

improvement  stemmed  from ongoing  efforts to  streamline operations  and

enhance  productivity and  to  reduce balance-sheet  leverage and  interest

costs.  For  some business  firms  and many financial  institutions,

recent  reports  of  a tendency for  commercial real  estate values  to

stabilize was  a particularly  favorable  omen.  Consumer  balance  sheets

also were benefiting from lower  interest  rates  that  tended  to  lessen

debt  loads  in  relation to  income  and  from the  appreciated value  of

stock  portfolios.  On  the negative  side,  the  restructuring  of  business

operations  and  balance  sheets  was  still  exerting considerable

constraints  on  spending and  lending  activities,  and  it  was unclear  how

much  longer  or  to  what  extent  those constraints  would  last.  A number

of members  also expressed  concern that the  relatively slow  growth  of

the  broader  monetary aggregates, were  it  to persist,  might  prove to  be

a harbinger  of  continued  restraint  in  lending  and  of underlying

weakness  in  the economy.

In their  review of  business  conditions  in  different  regions,

members  indicated that  overall  economic  activity  appeared to be  rising

in  many parts  of  the nation while  some  signs  of  an  emerging upturn

could be  discerned  in most  other  areas.  Improving business  conditions

generally were  associated with better  retail  sales  since the start  of

the  year  and  with the  further  recovery  in housing demand.  Indeed,  the

growing  demands  for  consumer  goods  stemmed  to  an  extent  from the

strengthening  of  housing markets.  These  developments were  accompanied

and  bolstered  by widespread indications  of  some  improvement  in

business  and  consumer  confidence,  and  some members  commented  that

pent-up  demands  for  many  consumer  durables might  well materialize  in

the  context  of  further  gains  in  overall  consumer  confidence.  However,

most  business  executives  were  still  very cautious  despite  increasing

sales  and  a more  favorable  outlook for  corporate  profits,  and  consumer

confidence  remained well below earlier  levels,  apparently reflecting

to  a major  extent  the  persistence  of  anxieties  about  job  security  and

employment  opportunities.  Retail contacts  and  available statistical

reports  suggested  that  an  important part  of  the  spurt  in  retail  sales

in  January  and  February was  met  out  of  inventories.  Further  growth in

such  sales  would  lead  to  efforts  to  rebuild  inventories  and  induce

related  gains  in  production and  incomes.

Sales  of  residential  real  estate  and  the  construction of  new

homes,  principally  single-family  dwellings,  were  displaying consider-

able  strength  across  the  country.  In  a number  of  areas  the increases

were  appreciably  greater  than  expected,  though the  gains  appeared  to

be  due at  least  in  part  to  favorable weather  conditions  and  thus  might

represent  some  borrowing  from the future.  Even  so,  and  despite  the

inhibiting  effects  of  recent  increases  in mortgage  interest  rates,  the

construction  of single-family homes  and  its  spillover  effects  in

related  industries  were believed  likely to  make  an  important  contri-

bution  to the  overall  expansion  of  economic  activity over  the  next

several  quarters.

Construction  of  nonresidential structures  continued  to

decline  in  many  areas  as work on  existing buildings  was  completed  and

few new  projects were started.  Vacancy  rates for  office  buildings

remained  high across  the  country, but  there were  indications  in  at

least  some major  cities that  prices  and  rental  rates  for  commercial

real  estate might  be  stabilizing  or  even  tending to  firm.  However,

the  better  tone  in  those markets  had  not  translated  itself  into new

building  activity.  Indeed,  commercial  construction was  likely  to

remain  depressed  for  an  extended  period  and  to hold  down the  growth in

overall  business  investment  at  a time when  spending  for  business

equipment might  be  trending  appreciably higher.

The  outlook for  exports  to  a number  of major  foreign  indus-

trial  countries  was  less  encouraging than  earlier,  given  financial  and

other  difficulties  that  would tend  to  inhibit  economic  growth  in those

countries.  On  the  favorable  side,  U.  S. businesses had  significantly

enhanced their  ability to  compete  in  international markets  over  the

course of  recent years,  partly  through gains  in  productivity,  and they

were now in  a better  position  both to  sustain  the  nation's  exports  and

to  meet  competition from  foreign products  in  domestic markets.

Moreover,  the  improved  health  of  many Latin  American economies  was

being  reflected  in  higher  export  sales  to  such countries.  Some parts

of  the  country  also were benefiting  from large  increases  in the number

of foreign  visitors.  Nevertheless,  members  suggested  that  the  export

sector was  vulnerable to  weakness  from abroad,  and  reports  from some

business  contacts  tended to  reinforce  those  concerns.

Turning  to  the  outlook for  fiscal  policy, members  noted  that

market  concerns  about  possible  legislation  that  would  substantially

increase  an  already massive  federal  deficit  appeared  to have  subsided.

Nonetheless, an  important  reason for  the  rise  in  intermediate-  and

-10-

long-term interest  rates  since  early January had  been the apparently

worsening  outlook  for  federal  deficit  financing over  the  course  of the

next  several years.  Such  deficits  would  tend to  keep  long-term

interest  rates  fairly high,  and  in association with  the nation's

relatively  low  savings,  they  implied  a financial  constraint  on  the

ability  of  the  U. S. economy to  generate  robust  increases  in

investment.  Because  the volume  of  savings  available  for  investment

was  limited,  interest  rates had  tended to  react  fairly  strongly to

indications  of  sizable  gains  in  private  spending.

The  outlook  for  moderate economic  growth  and  the  associated,

if  diminishing, slack  in  labor  and product markets  were  likely to

prove  consistent  in  the view of  many members with further  progress  in

reducing  the  core  rate  of  inflation.  Competitive price  pressures

remained strong  in many local  markets,  and efforts  to  raise prices

very  often  did not  succeed.  In  this  competitive  environment,  business

firms  seeking  to maintain  or  increase  profits  were forced  to  concen-

trate  on measures  to  curb  costs  rather than  to  raise prices.  Labor

markets  were described  as  generally soft,  and  most wage  settlements

continued  to  have  favorable  implications  for  future  costs  and

inflation.  The  outlook  for  energy  costs,  while  always  subject  to

unanticipated  developments,  nonetheless  seemed  favorable at  this

point.

In the Committee's  discussion  of policy,  all  of  the members

indicated  that  they were in  favor  of  maintaining unchanged  conditions

in  reserve  markets  for the  period  immediately ahead.  A majority also

indicated  a preference  for  retaining the  current  bias  in  the  directive

toward  possible  easing  during the  intermeeting period,  while the

remaining members  were  in  favor  of moving  to  a symmetrical  directive.

A steady  policy  course,  at  least  for  now, was viewed  as  desirable in

-11-

the  context  of  encouraging  evidence  of  a strengthening  economy and  the

outlook for  continuing  expansion at  a pace that  was  deemed  likely to

be  consistent with  further  progress toward  price  stability.  The

members  acknowledged that  the  uncertainties  in  the  economic  outlook

were  considerable, but  given the  ongoing  stimulus  stemming from

earlier  easing actions,  they agreed  that  for  now an unchanged  policy

represented an  appropriate  balancing  of  the  various  risks  to  a satis-

factory  economic  performance.  In  this  connection,  it  was  suggested

that  substantial  further  easing at  this  time might  well  fail  to

provide  much added  stimulus;  indeed,  it  could  prove to  be  counter-

productive  because  of  adverse  repercussions  in  financial markets.

Moreover,  too much  easing  at  this  juncture  could  establish  the basis

for  unduly  rapid  growth  of  money and  credit  when  the economic

expansion gathered  momentum.

With regard  to  possible  adjustments  to  the degree  of  reserve

pressure during the  intermeeting period,  many  of  the members  endorsed

the  view that  it  would be  premature to move  away  from a directive  that

was  biased toward  ease to  a symmetrical  directive.  While  the members

generally anticipated  that  economic  and  financial  developments  during

the  intermeeting period would  not  call  for  an  adjustment to  policy,

many  remained  concerned about  the vulnerability of  the expansion  to  a

variety  of  risks.  In  the  circumstances,  any policy adjustments  in  the

weeks  ahead were  more likely to be  in  the direction  of  some  easing

than  toward  restraint.  A number  of  these members  also  commented  that

even though  the  risks  of  a deviation from the projected  path  of the

economy now seemed  to  be  in better  balance than  earlier,  the conse-

quences  of  a substantial  shortfall  from  expectations would  be  much

more  severe than the effects  of  a comparable  overshoot.  Other members

did  not  rule  out  the possible need  for  an easing move in  the period

-12-

ahead, but  they believed that  the more  balanced  risks that were now

perceived to  surround  the  economic  outlook warranted a symmetric

directive.  Some  observed  that such  a directive  did  not  preclude  an

easing  action  that might  be  triggered  by economic  or  financial

developments,  including  the behavior  of  the  monetary  aggregates,  in

the weeks  ahead.  Moreover,  in  the view  of  some  of  these  members,  a

directive that  remained  tilted toward  ease  under  prevailing  circum-

stances  could  be misread  by domestic  and  international  observers as

evidence  of  greater  concern  about  the economic  outlook  than many

members  currently  felt,  or  as  an  indication of  a bias  on  the  part  of

the  Committee toward  bolstering the  real  economy  rather  than  securing

further  progress  toward price  stability.

In  the  course  of  the  discussion,  members  expressed  varying

degrees  of  concern  about  the  behavior  of  the monetary  aggregates.

According  to  the most  recently available  data  for  March, M2  apparently

leveled  off  or  declined  slightly and  M3  contracted  somewhat.  More-

over,  the weekly pattern  toward the  end  of  March  suggested  the

possibility  of  sluggish  growth on  average  in  April.  While this

development  needed to  be  assessed in  the  context  of  emerging

information  on  the  economy  and financial  markets,  it  was  suggested

that  a persisting  shortfall in  the  growth of  M2  and M3  could signal

that  monetary policy was  not  positioned to  support  a satisfactory

expansion.  For  the year  through  March,  growth of M2  had  fallen

somewhat  short  of the midpoint  of  the Committee's  range  for  1992,  and

in  the view of  some members  growth near  the midpoint  or  somewhat

higher  in  the range  might  be more  consistent with a desirable  economic

performance  for  the year.  On  the  other  hand,  expansion  of  narrow

money and reserves  had been  quite  robust  for  some time.  In  the view

of  at  least  one  member, the  possibility could  not be  ruled  out  that

-13-

this  rapid  growth  could  be signalling an  overly accommodative monetary

policy which, if  continued,  could boost  inflation pressures  at  some

point.  Conclusions  could  not  be  drawn  on  the basis  of  short-term

movements  in the narrow or  broad monetary  aggregates, and  in any event

the  implications  for the economy  of  specific  monetary growth rates

were  clouded by  a variety of  developments  that the  members  had

discussed at  length at  the  February meeting.  Nonetheless,  against the

background  of  relatively sluggish  growth  in  the  broader aggregates  for

an  extended  period, many members  agreed that  the  ongoing  performance

of  those  aggregates should be  monitored  closely.  Indeed,  some

observed that  concerns  about  the  behavior  of  the broader  aggregates,

rather  than the  currently  available information  on  economic  activity,

persuaded them that  a directive that  was  tilted toward  ease was

preferable to  a symmetrical  directive  at  this  time.

At this  meeting, the  Committee reviewed  its practices  with

regard to  the maturity composition  of  its  portfolio  of  Treasury

obligations.  The  overall approach  in  recent  years had  been to meet

the  long-term need  for  growth  in  the  System's  portfolio through

purchases  in  all maturity  sectors  of  the market  for  Treasury

obligations, with a major  emphasis  on  ensuring substantial  liquidity

in the  System's  portfolio.  With  regard  to the Treasury's  quarterly

financings,  the  Manager  had  followed  the practice  over  the  past

several  years  of  exchanging the  bulk  of  the maturing securities  held

in the  System account  into  the shortest  issue  offered by  the Treasury,

while placing relatively  small amounts  in the  longer-term Treasury

offerings.  This  approach had  replaced the  earlier  practice of  rolling

over  maturing System holdings  into the  refinancing issues  in  roughly

proportionate amounts  to  the  size  of  those  issues  being offered  to the

public.  The System's  participation in  Treasury  financings  had

-14-

contributed  importantly to  the reduction in  the average maturity of

the  System portfolio  in  recent  years;  however,  given Treasury

techniques with  regard  to  accommodating System rollovers,  the System's

actions  did  not  have any effect  on the  amounts  or  the maturity

composition  of  the  securities  being acquired  by the  public.  The

members  generally  agreed  that  current  practices  for  managing the

composition  of  the  System's  portfolio  remained  appropriate.  Rollovers

in  Treasury  financings  would  continue  to  be  tilted  toward the  shorter-

maturity  offerings,  and net  additions  to  System holdings  would  be made

in  all  maturity  areas,  taking account  of  the  progress already  made  in

enhancing the  liquidity of  the  System's  portfolio.

At  the  conclusion of  the  Committee's  discussion, all  of  the

members  indicated  that  they favored  a directive  that  called  for

maintaining the  existing degree  of pressure  on  reserve  positions.  The

members  also noted  their  preference  for  or  acceptance  of  a directive

that  included  some  bias  toward  easing  during the  intermeeting  period.

Accordingly, in  the context  of  the  Committee's  long-run  objectives  for

price  stability  and  sustainable  economic  growth,  and  giving  careful

consideration  to  economic,  financial,  and monetary developments,

slightly greater  reserve  restraint might  be  acceptable or  slightly

lesser  reserve  restraint would be  acceptable during  the  intermeeting

period.  The  reserve  conditions  contemplated  at  this  meeting were

expected  to  be  consistent with growth  of M2  and M3  at  annual  rates  of

around  3-1/2  percent  and  1-1/2  percent  respectively  over  the  three-

month period  from March through June.

At  the  conclusion  of the meeting the  following domestic

policy  directive was issued to  the  Federal Reserve  Bank  of  New York:

The  information  reviewed  at  this  meeting  suggests

a strengthening in  domestic  final  spending,  although
industrial production  and  overall  employment do  not
appear  to have  picked up  correspondingly.  Retail  sales

-15-

registered  large  gains  in  January and February, with
data  on  inventories, which  are available  through
January, showing  some offsetting decline  in  that month.
Single-family housing starts  increased  substantially
further  in  January  and  February.  Recent  data on orders
and  shipments  of  nondefense capital  goods  indicate an
increase in  outlays  for  business  equipment,  but  non-
residential  construction has  remained  in  a steep
decline.  The nominal  U.S.  merchandise  trade  deficit
narrowed  slightly in  January  and  was  essentially
unchanged  from its  average  rate  in  the fourth quarter
Industrial  production rose  considerably  in February,
partly reflecting an  upturn in  motor  vehicle
assemblies,  but was  little  changed  on  balance  over  the
first  two months  of  the year.  Total  nonfarm payroll
employment  rebounded  in  February from a large  decline
in  January.  With  the  labor  force  growing appreciably
in  recent  months,  the  civilian unemployment  rate  has
risen  to  7.3  percent.  Wage and  price  increases  have
continued to  trend  downward.

Most  interest  rates  have risen  appreciably  since

the  Committee meeting  on  February  4-5.  In  foreign
exchange markets,  the  trade-weighted  value  of  the
dollar  in terms  of  the  other  G-10  currencies  increased
substantially over  the  intermeeting  period.

Growth  of M2  and  M3  accelerated  in  February, but

M2  appears  to  have  leveled  off  and M3  to  have declined
in  March.  Much of  the  growth  in  the  broader  aggregates
over  recent  months  has  been accounted  for  by a surge  in
transactions  balances.

The Federal Open  Market  Committee seeks  monetary

and  financial  conditions  that will  foster  price  sta-
bility and  promote  sustainable growth  in  output.  In
furtherance  of  these  objectives,  the  Committee at  its
meeting  in  February established  ranges  for  growth  of M2
and  M3  of  2-1/2  to  6-1/2  percent  and  1 to  5 percent,
respectively, measured  from the  fourth  quarter of  1991
to  the  fourth  quarter  of  1992.  The  monitoring  range
for  growth  of  total  domestic nonfinancial  debt was  set
at  4-1/2  to  8-1/2  percent  for  the  year.  With  regard  to
M3,  the Committee  anticipated  that  the  ongoing
restructuring of  depository institutions  would  continue
to  depress  the  growth  of  this  aggregate relative  to
spending  and total  credit.  The behavior  of  the
monetary aggregates  will  continue to  be evaluated  in
the  light  of  progress  toward  price  level  stability,
movements in  their  velocities,  and  developments in  the
economy and  financial  markets.

-16-

In  the  implementation of  policy for  the  immediate

future,  the Committee  seeks  to  maintain  the  existing
degree  of  pressure  on  reserve  positions.  In the
context  of the  Committee's  long-run objectives  for
price  stability  and  sustainable  economic  growth,  and
giving  careful  consideration to  economic,  financial,
and monetary developments,  slightly  greater  reserve
restraint might  or  slightly  lesser  reserve  restraint
would  be  acceptable  in the  intermeeting period.  The
contemplated  reserve  conditions  are  expected  to  be
consistent  with  growth  of  M2  and M3  over  the  period
from March  through  June  at  annual  rates  of  about  3-1/2
and  1-1/2  percent,  respectively.

Votes  for  this  action:  Messrs.  Greenspan,

Corrigan, Angell,  Hoenig, Jordan,  Kelley,  LaWare,
Lindsey,  Melzer,  Mullins,  Ms.  Phillips,  and
Mr.  Syron.

Votes  against  this  action:  None.

