TABLE  OF  CONTENTS

SU M M A RY  ..............  ................... 

... 

................ ...... 

..........  i

First  D istrict  --  Boston............................................... 

............ 1-1

Second  District  --  New  York  .................................... 

.. II-1

Third  District  --  Philadelphia  .................................... 

..........  III-1

Fourth  District  --  Cleveland ..............................................

IV-1

Fifth  District  --  Richmond  ............... 

................. 

....  ........ V-1

Sixth  D istrict  --  Atlanta  .......... 

................................  .......  .VI-1

.

Seventh  District  --  Chicago..................................  ...........  VII-1

Eighth  D istrict  --  St.  Louis  .........  .

.................. 

...... 

..............  V III-1

N inth  District  --  M inneapolis  ................ 

........ 

....... 

.............  .IX-1

Tenth  District  --  Kansas  City  .......................... 

...........  ............... X-

Eleventh  District  --  Dallas  ... 

............. .......... .

...... 

...... 

......  XI-1

Twelfth  District  --  San  Francisco......................... 

.................  XII-1

SUMMARY*

Reports  from the  twelve Federal Reserve  districts indicate  generally  modest

improvement  in economic  conditions  across much of the  nation.  Shopper traffic  and retail

sales  were reported  to have  rebounded  modestly in April,  following general  declines  in

March  resulting  in part from severe  weather.  Manufacturers  in most districts report

increases  in  shipments and  orders, with  near-capacity production  at  some automotive  and

steel  facilities.  Higher production  schedules  are  being  met through productivity  gains  and

overtime,  although some  districts have reported  new hires.  Residential  real  estate activity

in  most districts  is strong  or on the  rise, and pockets  of improvement  in commercial  office

markets  are  noted  by some districts.  The general  increase in lending  continues  to be

concentrated  in  consumer  loans and mortgage  refinancing,  with  some  reports of pickup  in

small  business borrowing.  District reports  show generally  stable  prices, except for

increases  in  steel  and energy.

Consumer Spending.  Most districts report modest  increases  in retail sales  during  April,

after  widespread  declines  in March.  Many  contacts are  encouraged  by  recent  signs of

improvement, but the net performance  for  March  and  April clearly  will  be much  lower

than for the  first  two months  of the  year.  Respondents  in the  eastern  third  of the nation

blame the  mid-March  blizzard  for  the net softening  in sales.  Retailers in  the  Boston

district remark  that,  without the  storm,  sales would have  been  above the  levels  a year ago.

Relative  weakness  in  March  merchandise  sales is also noted  in parts of the country  not

affected  by the  storm.  Retailers in  Chicago  cite renewed  consumer uncertainty  and

contacts  in  San  Francisco  point to  concern  about job security  as reasons  for lower-than-

expected  sales  in  parts of their regions.  However,  retailers  in  most districts report a  rise in

Prepared  at the Federal  Reserve  Bank  of Cleveland  based  on information  gathered  before  April  23,  1993.

This document  summarizes comments  received  from businesses  and other contacts outside  the Federal
Reserve  and  is not a commentary  on the  views of Federal  Reserve  officials.

shopper traffic  and  sales in April,  apparently led  by big-ticket  items,  such as furniture and

home appliances.

A  general  pickup  in  the sale of autos  and light trucks  in the  first half of April is  also

reported  in  most districts.  Dealers  in the  Cleveland,  Dallas,  and Philadelphia  districts  note

that domestically  produced  models  are  selling at a faster pace  than foreign-produced  ones.

Also,  most dealers remain optimistic  that the improved  trend will  continue in the  near

term,  and they are  satisfied that inventories are  at manageable  levels.

Retailers  generally  report stable prices  on most items,  citing stiff competition,

consumer  sensitivity  to price  hikes,  and  slower sales growth.  Merchants  contacted  by

Dallas  and  Kansas  City indicate  that prices are  stable or slightly lower  compared  to  a year

ago,  and  that they  expect  prices to remain  stable over  the  near term.  Richmond  contacts,

on  the other  hand, cite  an  upward  trend  in  retail prices.

Several  districts,  including  Richmond  and  San Francisco,  note  a decline  in  tourism

compared  to  a year ago.  Resorts and  hotels  surveyed  by  Richmond indicate  that  the

number  of visitors  is down  from  last year and that  tourists  are  spending  less.  Hotel  and

convention  industry representatives  contacted  by San Francisco  characterize  the Southern

California  visitor industry  as depressed.  At the  same  time, Atlanta  reports  a  strong  spring

tourism  season,  with  air passenger traffic,  convention  attendance,  and  the number  of

spring-break  visitors  to  Florida higher  than  a  year ago.

Manufacturing.  Most districts,  except  Dallas,  Kansas  City, and  San  Francisco,  report

general  increases  in  shipments  and  orders,  which have  pushed  some facilities  to  operate  at

near  capacity.  Cleveland  notes  tight conditions  in  some  segments  of the  steel  industry,

where  capacity-level  production  and  full order  books  have  sustained  general  price

increases.  Higher production  levels  in the  steel  industry  are reportedly  linked  to  increased

activity  in  the  motor  vehicle and  consumer  appliance  industries.  One  motor vehicle

producer  in the  Chicago district indicates  that production  of light trucks  has  been  bumping

up  against capacity  limits.  Increased  demand  has  also created  bottlenecks  at a few

iii

domestic  motor vehicle parts and assembly  plants  surveyed  by Cleveland.  Boston  and

Chicago  cite strong  increases in automotive parts  production,  and Cleveland reports near-

capacity  production  of heavy-duty  trucks.  Electronics  manufacturers  surveyed  in  the

Boston  and  Chicago  districts indicate  strong  demand,  with some  respondents  citing  the

highest  level of orders in  the  past five years.  Contacts  in Boston attribute  part of the

higher production  levels to  expanding Latin  American  and Far Eastern  markets,  which

have partially  offset weak  demand in European  markets.  Factory officials  in Atlanta and

Minneapolis  note some  growth, primarily in the consumer durables, food processing,  and

industrial machinery  industries.

With  the exception  of steel price increases  noted by Cleveland  and  Kansas  City,

most districts  report  constant  or only slightly higher input prices compared  to a year ago.

Manufacturers  surveyed  by Atlanta  comment  that competition  continues to  hold prices of

intermediate  materials and final goods  stable.  Dallas respondents  indicate  flat to slightly

falling prices  in chemicals,  plastics, petrochemicals,  and electrical  and electronic

machinery,  and San Francisco  contacts  add that aluminum prices are  also soft.  However,

purchasing  managers  surveyed  by Chicago  note  a somewhat faster rate of price  increases

as  demand  improves in  that region.

Atlanta  and  San  Francisco  report that cutbacks  in the  aerospace  and  defense

industries  continue  to  dampen  manufacturing  activity.  San  Francisco respondents  indicate

that Boeing  continues  to  lay off workers,  although  they  anticipate  that increased  orders

from foreign carriers  may partially offset  the weak demand  from domestic  airlines.  Dallas

notes that low levels  of nonresidential  construction  and oil  and  gas drilling  have

contributed  to  lower production  among  the firms  they contacted.  Firms contacted  by

Kansas City report operating  below capacity,  in  part because  of decreased  foreign  sales.

Employment.  Job  conditions  are  mixed in most regions.  Boston, Cleveland,

Minneapolis,  Philadelphia,  and  St. Louis  report that some firms  are  hiring  modestly,

particularly  in automotive  products and  capital goods  industries.  However,  no district

anticipates  a flurry  of new  hiring  in the  near  term,  even  though  several industries  are

reportedly  producing  near  capacity.  Employers  surveyed  in the Atlanta,  Cleveland,  Dallas,

and  Kansas  City districts  report that they  are  avoiding new hires  by extending  hours, using

temporary  workers,  or increasing  productivity.  Atlanta adds that wage  pressures  are

generally  absent  among  their contacts.  Job losses  continue for defense-related  and

computer  companies  in the Minneapolis  district,  for apparel  makers  and food  processors  in

the  St.  Louis district, and for  a few insurance  and pension firms  in  the Boston district.

Real  Estate/Construction.  Most district reports  indicate strong  or improving residential

real  estate  markets.  Contacts in  Boston  and New  York note recent improvement  in low-

priced  and mid-priced  home  sales.  A respondent  in Boston  expresses encouragement  that

condominium  sales volume  is up  significantly,  which  he believes  may  mark an  end to  the

slump in  this market.  Prolonged  wet weather has reportedly  dampened  homebuilding  in

the  Kansas  City  and  St. Louis  districts, but builders  in  both  areas expect  starts  to pick up

as the weather improves.  San  Francisco  notes that homebuilding  is strong only  in areas

outside  of Southern  California.  Homebuilders  surveyed  by most districts  indicate that the

sharp  increase in lumber  prices in recent months  has added  to  the cost of new  homes.

However,  lumber industry  representatives  contacted  by the San  Francisco  bank  report a

20  percent decline  in  lumber  and plywood  prices from the March peak.

The commercial  real  estate  market  remains weak  in  most districts, except for

isolated pockets  of increased  activity.  Contacts  in Minneapolis  report that commercial

contract awards  are  up  significantly  from a year ago.  Realtors  in  New  York note brisk

leasing of commercial  office  space in midtown  Manhattan  but subdued  activity  in

downtown  Manhattan  and  in a few  immediate  suburbs.  Richmond's  survey  finds  strong

commercial  activity  in  the Carolinas  and in  Richmond,  but weak conditions in  Maryland

and  in  the District of Columbia.

Financial  Institutions.  District reports  of lending  activity  range from little change  to

moderate  growth.  Surveys  of bankers  generally  reveal  that most of the increase  is

concentrated  in consumer  loans  and residential  mortgage  refinancing.  Several  lenders in

Cleveland  report that the  volume of mortgage  refinancing  is virtually  at capacity,  and

respondents  in Atlanta  note  that mortgage refinancing  accounts for nearly two-thirds  of

the brisk pace in current  originations.  Philadelphia,  on the  other  hand, indicates  flat

consumer  and mortgage  lending, as  households reportedly  continue  to consolidate  and

reduce  debt.

A  few districts,  including  Atlanta, Kansas City,  and  St. Louis, note a pickup  in

commercial  loans, particularly  to small businesses.  Some bankers surveyed  by Cleveland

cite a strong demand  by businesses  to refinance  existing  loans.  Many  respondents  across

the country  report that deposit growth  is steady,  attributable  in part to  aggressive pricing

and  marketing  programs.  Bankers  from  several districts  describe loan markets  as very

competitive  and  state that more aggressive  pricing  has  decreased  net interest margins.  A

few  bankers contacted  by St. Louis have expressed  concern  that narrow  margins have

contributed  to slow  deposit  growth in  their region.

Agriculture/Resources.  An  unseasonably  cool and wet spring  has delayed fieldwork and

planting for  a  wide variety of crops  in the Chicago,  Kansas  City, Minneapolis,  Richmond,

and  St. Louis  districts.  This damage is reportedly  not irreparable,  provided  the weather

improves  in the coming  months.  Winter  wheat crops  are  said to  be in good shape  in the

Kansas  City and  St.  Louis districts.  Richmond  and  St. Louis report recent  improvements

in  the condition  of their peach  and apple  crops.  Livestock  prices are  high,  benefiting

producers  in  the Chicago, Kansas  City,  and Minneapolis  districts.  San  Francisco  indicates

strong prices for  several other  agricultural  products.

Minneapolis  reports  increased  shipments  of iron  ore and stable conditions  in

copper mining  despite low  copper prices.  Dallas and  Kansas  City report  seasonally low

domestic  oil drilling.  OPEC production cutbacks and  blizzard-related  consumption  hikes

are  expected  to keep  oil and natural  gas  storage levels  low and  prices  on  the  high  side  for

several  months.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Economic  conditions continue to  improve modestly  in  the First

District.  Although New England  retailers experienced  sales  declines

that they attribute to late winter  storms, they nevertheless observe a

minor  improvement  in  consumers' willingness to spend.  In  the

manufacturing sector, the recovery generally strengthened in  the  first

quarter.  While  improved business is  causing  an expansion in employment

for  ome suppliers  of  automotive  parts, most manufacturers expect  to

hold employment  steady or to  implement  small reductions in  1993.  Some

pickup is  evident  in  the  residential real  estate and  insurance markets.

Retail

First District retail  contacts report  that sales  declined slightly

during March, largely because of  snowstorms coinciding with weekend

promotions.  Had weather not prevented consumers  from reaching  stores,

retailers estimate  that  sales would have been  above year-ago  levels.

The  sales  decline caused some  deterioration  in gross  margins and

an  increase  in  inventories.  Only one contact  plans to  increase

employment;  others  continue to  shrink by  attrition.  Wage gains  are

reportedly  limited to  4 percent.

Capital spending is  mixed, with some  firms  adding  stores  and

others  conducting  only minor remodelling.  Retail  contacts think that

the  New England economy has  bottomed  out and that  the degree of  consumer

caution  has  lessened somewhat.

Manufacturing

On balance, First District  manufacturing reports  are more positive

than they have been for many months.  Three-fourths of  the  sample  report

that  recent  sales  have been  flat  or  improved compared  to year-earlier

I-2

figures.  About one-third of  the contacts  indicate double-digit

increases.

Manufacturers  report  strong  increases in  demand for  automotive

parts,  semiconductors, defense  exports,  and engineering services.

Domestic consumer goods  sales also  are increasing.  On the other  hand,

aircraft  and  aerospace markets remain very weak.  A variety of  other

capital goods,  including items  related to  pharmaceuticals  and

environmental  applications, also exhibited some  falloff.

Contacts are mixed  in their assessment of  export markets.  For

example, one contact  notes  that the  U.K. market  is  recovering, but

another terms Europe a "disaster."  Markets  in  Latin America  and the Far

East  excluding Japan are  reported to be  expanding handsomely.

The majority of  respondents  report that  employment is  flat to down

8 percent  from 1992  levels.  At  a minority of  contacts, higher demand

for automotive products has or  is  expected to  lead to  new hiring  and

added  investment.  Most  other contacts plan either to  hold employment

steady or  to  implement  small  reductions.

Several  contacts note either  a deflationary environment  or  a

resistance to price increases.  However, a couple of  manufacturers

predict  that  consumer goods prices  will firm up,  thereby  allowing  for

higher profit margins.

All  of  this month's manufacturing contacts  project that their

business will  show  improvement in  1993,  although  some add that the rate

of  recovery will  remain weak, or  that  foreign markets continue to be  a

source of  concern.

Residential  Real Estate

Although the market for  residential  real estate  is  showing signs

of  picking up, most  contacts express  frustration about the  slowness of

I-3

the pace  of  improvement.  Several contacts  see a firming of  vacant  land

prices as  a positive  sign and consistent with the  recent increase in

building permits.  Brokers  stated that  their biggest problem was many

buyers' difficulty  in  obtaining financing, with closings  now taking at

least  8 weeks.  These financing problems  are attributed to weak credit

histories  (with buyers  holding  several  jobs  in  the  last two years

because of  layoffs)  and the lack of a down payment because the value of

a buyer's current  property has  fallen.

Despite comments  from contacts over  the  last  six months that  the

mid-priced trade-up market  is  improving, average  sales  price statistics

are still  significantly below year-ago levels;  this  trend suggests  that

most  activity is  in  low-priced homes.  Values  are steady  in most

geographic areas  except Connecticut, where an  appraiser said that values

are  still  falling as  a result  of  poor economic  news.  One  contact noted

that the  decline  in the  condominium market may be ending,  with sales

volume up significantly, but that many banks  are  still  leery  of

financing condominiums in  complexes with a low percentage  of  owner-

occupants.

Nonbank Financial  Services

On  the whole, insurance  companies  report  an  increase  in  sales,

though a few respondents continue  to  lag because of  concerns  about

credit  quality.  The  strongest  sellers were  among traditional  life

insurance products,  annuities and  mutual  funds.  Trends were mixed in

health  insurance, pensions,  and property/casualty  lines.  Most

respondents have kept  their employment  steady, but  a few have either

reduced employment in  the  last  quarter or  foresee a reduction  later  in

the year.

SECOND  DISTRICT--NEW  YORK

Economic  developments  in  the  Second  District  were  mixed  in  recent  weeks,  but  on

balance  tended  toward  improvement 

Plagued  by  severe  snowstorms,  most  retail  contacts

reported  sales  results  below  plan  during  February  and  March,  though  some  were  able  to  recoup

much  of  their  shortfall  during  the  final  weeks  of  March.  New  York's  unemployment  rate

declined  in  February  and  March  while  New  Jersey's  rate  rose.  Office  leasing  activity  varied

widely  with  some  vacancy  rates  declining  and  others  increasing.  Homebuilders  in  most  of  the

District  reported  some recent  improvement  and anticipate  that home sales  will  surpass  last year's

level.  In  its  first  assessment  of the  local  economic  impact  of  the  World Trade  Center  bombing,

the  Port Authority  of New  York  and  New  Jersey  estimated  that  the  net  short-term  effect  would

be  a small,  positive  one  due  to  the  increase  in jobs  for reconstruction  and  cleanup  work  financed

by  national  insurers.  Personal  income  tax  receipts  in  both New  York and  New  Jersey  continued

to  show  sizable  over-the-year  gains.  The  latest survey  of small  and  midsized  banks  showed  an

increase  in  their  willingness  to  make  loans.

Consumer  Spending

Plagued  by  severe  snowstorms  in  February  and  March,  most  District  retail  contacts

reported  sales  results  that were  less-than-targeted  during  both  months.  Some,  however, were  able

to  recoup  much  of  their  shortfall  in  the  final  weeks  of  March.  Due  in  part  to  the  earlier

occurrence  of Easter  this  year,  some  improvement  was  also  noted  during  the  first half of April.

Over-the-year  sales  changes  ranged  from  -7  percent  to  +6  1/2  percent  in  February  with  all

retailers  except  one  posting  results  that were  below  projections.  A  few more  retailers  had  results

that were  on  or better  than  plan during  March  when  year-to-year  changes  ranged from  -5  percent

to  +12  percent.

The  cold  and  stormy  weather  reportedly  put  a damper  on sales  of adult spring  apparel  at

several  stores,  but  sales  of children's  clothes  for Easter  did well.  Furniture  and  home  appliances

sold  well  at  some  chains  and  retailers  are  hopeful  that  warmer  weather  will  spur  apparel  sales

in  the weeks  ahead.  Despite  some  recent  inventory  buildup  resulting  from  below-plan  sales,  the

majority  of  contacts  reported  no  significant  inventory  problems.  However,  a  few  stated  that

II-2

additional  promotional  efforts  may  be  needed  to pare  stocks.

Residential  Construction  and  Real  Estate

Homebuilders  in most of the  District  reported  some recent improvement  in  the  residential

construction  market  and  most  anticipate  that  home  sales  this year  will  surpass  last  year's  level.

The  continued  low  level  of  mortgage  rates  and  somewhat  more  enthusiasm  on  the  part  of

potential  buyers  at  home  shows  were  cited  for  this  optimism. 

In  addition,  in  New  York  City

several  well-known  developers  are  reportedly  planning  to  build  new  rental  apartment  buildings

for  the  first  time  in  several  years.  Apparently,  these  are  now  feasible  because  of  a  declining

vacancy  rate for market-priced  rental  units and  because  of recent  changes  in  local  and  federal  tax

laws.  No  one  is anticipating  boom  conditions,  however,  given the continuing  concerns  about job

security  in  various  parts  of  the  District  and  general  uncertainty  about  the  impact  of  proposed

changes  in  federal  tax policy.  Lumber prices  remain  quite high and  some newly  written  contracts

are  guaranteeing  home prices  for only  30  days  to  safeguard  builders  against further escalation  of

lumber  costs. Financing  remains  a widespread  problem for construction  as well  as  acquisition  and

development loans  in  some areas.  However,  a recent easing of bank construction  loans  was noted

in  western  New  York.

Developments  in  the  District's  office  market  have  been  mixed.  Leasing  activity  was

reportedly  brisk  in  midtown  Manhattan  where,  despite  some  additions  to  space,  the vacancy  rate

edged  down.  While  activity  in  downtown  Manhattan  remained  subdued,  the  area  has  managed

to  absorb  some  of its  vacant  space  in  recent  months  and  the  primary  vacancy  rate  has  begun  to

decline.  The  vacancy  rate  has  risen  sharply  in  Westchester  County,  however,  due  in  part  to  the

addition  of large  blocks  of space  created  by  IBM's  downsizing.

Other  Business  Activity

New York's  unemployment  rate  declined  in  both  February  and  March  and  now  stands at

7.3  percent.  However,  New  Jersey's  rate  rose  in  both  months,  reaching  8.3  percent  in  March.

Personal  income  tax  receipts  in  both  states  continue  to  show  sizable  over-the-year  increases

implying  moderate  gains  in  personal  income.  Layoffs  have  started  at  the  IBM  plants  in  New

York State where  some 6000 positions  are to  be eliminated.  With  the Justice  Department's  recent

II-3

approval  of  Martin  Marietta's  purchase  of G.E.'s  aerospace  division,  many  additional  workers

could  be  laid  off in  the  District  as  the  division  is absorbed.  A  recent  report  by  the  Business

Council  of New  York  State  noted  that  a sizable  majority  of 800 surveyed  businesses  believe the

State's  recovery  will  lag  behind  the  rest  of  the  nation  and  that  this  will  continue  in  1994.

In  its  first  assessment  of the  local  economic  impact  of the World  Trade  Center  bombing,

the  Port Authority  of New  York  and  New  Jersey estimated  that the  net  short-term  effect would

be  a  small,  positive  one.  Since  almost  all  of  the  damage  to  businesses  was  insured,  the

reconstruction  and  cleanup  effort was largely  financed from  outside  the region  but provided  jobs

for  people  living  here.  The  long-term  effect  could  be  different,  however,  if insurance  premiums

rise,  revenue  is  lost  because  the  Center  decides  to  restrict  public  access  to  certain  facilities,

and/or  the  prestige  of the Center  is  reduced  as  a  result  of the  bombing.

Financial  Developments

The  latest  survey  of small  and  midsized  banks  in  the  Second  District  continued  to show

an  increase  in  banks'  willingness  to  make  loans.  The  percentage  of loan  officers  more  willing

to  make  nonresidential  mortgages  was  the  highest  since  1991.  Willingness  to  make  all  other

types  of loans was steady  or higher than two  months ago.  Consumer  loan  demand  and  residential

mortgage  demand  strengthened,  with  the  latter  generally  attributed  to  increased  refinancing

activity.  Demand  for business  loans  was  unchanged.

Surveyed  bankers  indicated that  the recent  policy  change requiring  less  documentation  on
"character"  loans  by  healthy  banks has  not affected  their  lending to  small  businesses.  Moreover,

their  reactions  to  proposals  to create  a secondary  market for business  loans  were  mixed.  Several

officers  mentioned  that  securitization  often  results 

in 

the  loss  of  relationships  with 

the

community,  which  are  essential  to  small  business  lending.  Also  cited  as  a  potential  hindrance

was  the  customized  and  unique  nature  of  small  business  loans,  which  renders  them  difficult  to

securitize.  However,  increased  liquidity  and  reduced  risk might  encourage  more  small  business

lending.  Several  officers  suggested  that  the  expansion  of  Small  Business  Administration

programs  would  be  the  best  vehicle  for  stimulating  small  business  loans.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT - PHILADELPHIA

Reports  from  Third  District  business  contacts  in  April  suggest  that

economic  activity in the  region was continuing to move up at a very modest pace.

Manufacturers generally indicated that shipments and orders were increasing while

inventories  remained steady.  Retailers were posting  slight gains,  on balance,

for  April compared to  the  same  month a year ago.  Auto  and truck dealers  also

reported year-over-year  increases.  Most bankers,  however,  indicated that  loan

volume was  flat.

The consensus forecast among those contacted for this report calls for slow

growth.  Manufacturers believe that business will continue to move up, but their

level of optimism has declined since the beginning of the year.  Retailers expect

consumer spending to gain slowly during the rest of the year.  Bankers anticipate

that business  lending may pick up  soon, amid strong competition among banks  for

commercial loans.  They have mixed views on the course of personal lending in the

near  future:  some  foresee  a  slight  increase  but  others  expect  loan volume  to

remain flat.

MANUFACTURING

Reports from Third District manufacturers  indicated that activity remained

on an upward trend, on balance.  While just under half said business was steady,

firms  making  gains  outnumbered  those  experiencing  decreases  by  two-to-one.

Overall, both new orders and shipments were rising, and inventories were holding

steady.  Business continued to improve for nearly all major manufacturing sectors

in the District;  the exceptions were furniture and lumber--where conditions were

III-2

steady--and food processors, whose business had slipped from March.  Employment

appeared  to be steady,  on the whole.

The  outlook among Third District manufacturers remains  positive although

the  level  of  optimism  has  declined  from  the  first  months  of  the  year.

Nonetheless, around half of those contacted in April  said they expect business

to continue moving up while fewer than one-in-five expect a decline.  On balance,

the  view  is  that  orders  and shipments  will  rise  in  tandem over  the  next  six

months,  keeping  inventories  under  control. 

The  outlook  for  employment  is

modestly  positive:  one-fourth of the  firms  polled for  this  report plan to  add

workers  over the  next  six months  while,  twice  the number who plan cuts.

RETAIL

Third District  retailers  surveyed  in  the  second half  of April  generally

indicated  that sales  were  increasing although the  rate  of  gain was  slow.  Many

said that the March snowstorm had significantly curtailed results for  the month

but  consumer  spending had  rebounded  since.  Still,  according  to  most  of  the

merchants queried, the April  sales rate was not exceeding expectations they had

formed prior to  the  March storm.

For  the  most  part, forecasts  by Third District  merchants  are  that  sales

will continue to move up during the year.  Bad weather in both February and March

is blamed  for  a poor  start  and  store  executives  said  that,  consequently,  the

fourth  quarter will have  more  than its  usual  significance for  their  full-year

results.  Most expect continuing improvement  in overall  economic activity,  and

they  expect retail  sales  to  share  in  that  improvement.

Third  District  auto  dealers  lost  sales  in  March  due  to  the  storm, but

reports in April indicated that sales were on the rise.  Dealers selling domestic

cars  appeared  to  be  making  greater  gains  than  foreign  auto  dealers.  Truck

III-3

dealers said sales  of both light and heavy-duty  trucks were  on an upward path,

and  several  reported  substantial  increases  over  the  year-ago  sales  rate.  In

general, Third District auto dealers expressed optimism that sales will continue

to  improve  through  the  spring.

FINANCE

Comments from Third District bankers indicated that loan activity had been

flat  in  recent  weeks.  While  some  banks  reported  increases  in  consumer  and

mortgage lending,  these gains appeared to  have been offset by declines at  other

banks, leaving loan volume for these credit categories in the District virtually

unchanged.  Most  of  the  bankers  contacted for  this  report  said commercial  and

industrial  lending was steady although there were  a few reports  that lending to

small businesses had picked up recently.  All bankers described loan markets as

very competitive  and  said net  interest  margins were  decreasing  as  a result  of

more  aggressive loan pricing.

Despite the  slackness in  lending in April,  several bankers said they were

receiving  an  increasing  number  of  inquiries  and  applications  from  potential

business borrowers.  In general, bankers who reported this  interest expected to

see  growth  in  commercial  and  industrial  loans booked in  the  near  future.  The

outlook for consumer lending is not as  clear.  Some bankers said consumers would

continue  to  consolidate  and  reduce  debt,  but  others  indicated  that  personal

lending at  their institutions  appeared to  be taking a slight upward  trend.

IV-1

Fourth District - Cleveland

Summary.  District business activity  continues  to expand, but with apparently

greater  growth in production  than  in consumption.  Retail sales  increased  at a  much

slower pace in March and April than in the previous two months,  particularly for

automobiles  and apparel.  Severe  weather in mid-March  contributed  to the mediocre

performance,  but retailers  also point to  consumer caution  about the future course  of the

economy as an  underlying factor.  Manufacturers  continue  to report strength in  orders,

backlogs,  and production.  Producers of steel, heavy truck components,  and  many  types of

capital  goods  indicate near-capacity  operations.  Most of the higher production  schedules

are being  met  through productivity  gains and  overtime, but a few respondents  report

hiring a  limited  number of additional  workers in order to accommodate  a rising backlog.

Financial  institutions cite  a moderate  increase in overall  loan activity,  mostly  as a result of

refinancing  both home mortgages  and existing  business loans.

Consumer Spending.  Fourth District  retailers report that sales  growth has fallen

off the pace  set during  the first two months of the year.  Traffic  in March  and  April has

been  relatively  slow  for this time of year,  and  sales have  been flat.  Many  respondents

blame  unseasonable  weather, pointing  specifically  to the  mid-March  blizzard.  Even the

positive influence  of an  early Easter could  not offset the storm's devastating  effects on

consumer  spending.  While most retailers  agree that  better weather  will revive  consumer

activity,  they  still express concern  that consumer  confidence  may remain  subdued  by the

slow  pace  of the area's economic recovery.  The  lackluster  sale of big-ticket  items, such  as

motor vehicles, reflects  consumers' caution.  Even  with low  interest rates  and ample  credit

available,  dealers  expect a modest  5  percent  year-over-year  improvement  during  the

remainder  of the all-important  spring  selling season.  Apparel retailers  mention  that they

may  discount spring/summer  seasonal items a  little earlier  than  usual, but most

respondents  are comfortable  with  their current  inventory  levels.

IV-2

Manufacturing.  A  growing number of manufacturers  report new  orders and

backlogs.  They  uniformly  estimate further  increases  in production  this quarter over  last

and  believe  that they have ample capacity to  accommodate higher production  schedules.

Some  of the  tightest conditions  are reported  by the steel industry:  Operating  rates range

between  the low  80s for some  specialty producers  and near capacity for producers  of flat

rolled  steel.  The  high operating rates  and full order books have sustained a general  price

increase for  many  steel  items.  However,  some producers  report  that orders  for future

delivery  have  slowed in recent weeks,  making  further price increases  less likely.

Producers  of truck components  also  report near-capacity  operations,  as  new

orders in March  again  exceeded  expectations.  Backlogs continue  to climb rapidly, and

heavy-duty  truck production  for 1993  now  appears  to be running  at a rate close  to the

previous peak year  in 1988.  Stronger-than-expected  demand  for some  automobile  and

light truck models and  options has  strained capacity and created  bottlenecks  at  a few Big

Three parts and assembly plants.

Producers  of capital  goods  and special industrial  and telecommunications

equipment  also cite better-than-expected  orders and backlogs last quarter.  For example,  a

manufacturer  of equipment for depository  institutions reports  sizable  increases in  orders  so

far this year relative to  last year, resulting in  an additional  shift at one plant.  Some

consumer goods producers  also  note a  step-up  in sales  and production  since late 1992.

Sales  of vacuum cleaners  rose  at a  double-digit  rate last quarter, and  output of major

household  appliances  held  at about the  previous quarter's  level.  For machine  tools,

however,  orders continue  on an irregularly  rising  trend because  of further  weakness  in the

aerospace  and commercial  aircraft  industries.

Employment.  Manufacturers  in the District continue  to  stress that they can  meet

rising production  schedules  over the  next several  months  without resorting to  significant

employment increases.  Despite  higher backlogs  and  operating rates at the end  of last

quarter, producers  of truck  components, depository  institution  equipment,  industrial

IV-3

supplies,  and  steel expect  few,  if any,  new  hires or employee recalls.  Some believe  that

their higher production  schedules  can  be met through  productivity  gains and  overtime, and

a few are relying  on  outside contractors.  Several  producers  emphasize  that their  long-

term  goal continues  to  be greater  productivity per unit of sales  and output  and are

cautious  about hiring  in response  to  short-run rises in  demand,  in light of high  employee

benefits costs.  Yet, some respondents  report limited  gains in payrolls.  A  capital  goods

producer,  now  operating  some of its  lines at capacity,  plans to  hire in order  to

accommodate  a rising  backlog.  In addition,  selected auto  assembly  and parts facilities

report  hiring  additional workers,  although  they  stress that new employment  is the  last

resort after  overtime  has  been  exhausted.

Retailers  expect  only replacement  hiring  at this  time, as they  anticipate increased

productivity  and  overtime  hours  to  accommodate  sales growth  in the  near term.

Financial Developments.  Rising  loan  activity continues  to be  concentrated  in  home

equity  and mortgage  loans.  Several  lenders report  that the volume  of mortgage

refinancing  is still virtually  at capacity,  although  the pace  of increase  has leveled  off at

some banks.  A  large  thrift, however, has  experienced  what may be another  record  month

for refinancing.  For new mortgage  loans,  a few depositories  note  a somewhat  more  than

seasonal  pickup  in  April,  but most thrifts  and banks indicate  less than  usual strength.

Some banks,  particularly  larger ones,  report a  slight increase in  business loans,  which  is

aided  primarily by a  strong demand  to  refinance  existing  loans.

Several  large banks  state that  savings deposits, especially  certificates  of deposit,

fell  sharply again  in  April, with  some indicating  a bigger decline  than  in March.  A  few

large and mid-sized  thrift institutions,  however,  report that aggressive  pricing  and

marketing programs  have  generated  growth  in  their deposits in  April.

FIFTH DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview

On  balance, the  Fifth  District  economy continued to  improve  in recent

weeks.  Retailing  strengthened and,  although manufacturing was generally

steady, the  furniture market  was the  strongest  in several  years.  The

residential  real  estate market  improved,  particularly for houses  in the  mid-

price  range.  Commercial  real  estate  activity  strengthened in the Carolinas

and  in the  Richmond  area, but  remained weak  in Maryland  and  the  D.C.  area.

Residential  mortgage demand  rose, while  commercial  loan  demand was  unchanged.

Activity  at  Fifth  District ports  increased.  Bad  weather led  to  a

deterioration  in some  agricultural  crops  and  also  contributed to  a decline  in

tourism.

Manufacturing

Our  survey of manufacturers  indicated  that  District  activity generally

held  steady during the past month.  Respondents  noted little  change  in most

indicators,  although they  reported  increases  in shipments,  capital

expenditures,  and  prices.  Virginia manufacturers, however,  reported  increased

activity, especially  in shipments,  new  orders,  and  capital  expenditures.

Manufacturers were  optimistic  about  their prospects  for  the  next six

months.  Increases  were  expected  in almost  all  indicators  except  inventories

and  the number  of employees,  which were  both  expected  to be  steady.

Lumber  and  Furniture

Producers  at  the  International  Furniture  Market  in High  Point,  North

Carolina,  indicated  that the  '93  market  was  the  strongest  since  before  the

industry slump  of  1988-91.  Buyers  were more  confident than  in the  past  few

years  and  were trying  to rebuild their  inventories  as  quickly as  possible.  In

addition,  furniture analysts  suggested that  many  retailers would  be

refurbishing  their stores  in  order  to  better display new products.

Cost-conscious  consumers  and  high  lumber prices were squeezing

manufacturers' profit  margins.  Three  reasons  were  cited for  high  lumber

prices:  (1) recent weather has  hindered timbering;  (2) competition  in the

lumber  industry has  lessened  as  regulations  have  forced small  mills  out  of

business;  and  (3) environmental  restrictions have  reduced the  availability of

timber,  despite  increases  in  forest  areas  and volume.

Tourism

Hotels,  motels,  and  resorts  throughout  the  District  indicated  that

tourist  activity  for March  and  the  first  two weeks  of April  declined when

compared  to  February  and to  a year  ago.  The  respondents  attributed the

declines  to  the  "Blizzard of  '93"  and weak consumer confidence.  Respondents

also  indicated  that  tourists were  not  spending as  much  per person.  Spring

bookings were unchanged when  compared  to a year ago,  and  all  of  the

respondents  expected  tourist  activity to  improve during  the  next  six months.

Consumer  Spending

Our regular mail  survey  indicated  that retail  activity  strengthened

during  late  March  and  early April.  Retailers  reported  increases  in shopper

traffic  and  sales,  including  sales  of  big-ticket  items.  Wages  and  prices

rose, while employment  and  capital  expenditures  remained  unchanged.

Retailers  were  optimistic  about  their  prospects  for  the  next  six months.

They expected  sales,  shopper traffic, wages,  prices,  and  inventories to

increase.  They  foresaw no  change  in employment or capital  expenditures.

Ports

Representatives  at  District ports--Baltimore, Charleston,  and Hampton

Roads  (Norfolk)--indicated that both  imports  and exports were generally higher

in March  than  in February.  Compared with  a year  ago,  both  imports  and exports

were  about  the  same  at  Baltimore  and Hampton Roads  but  were higher  at

Charleston.  Exports were  expected  to  continue  increasing  at  Charleston  and

Hampton  Roads but  to  remain unchanged  at  Baltimore during  the next  six weeks.

Finance

District  financial  institutions  contacted by  telephone indicated  that

credit  conditions improved during  the last  six weeks.  Respondents  stated that

commercial  and  consumer loan  demand was  steady,  while  commercial  and  consumer

loan  rates  were down  slightly.

Residential  mortgage demand  strengthened during  the last  six weeks.

Application volume was  at  a record-high  level  in March, but  fell  off  in April.

Home mortgage  loan  rates  were,  on  net,  little  changed during  the period.

Rates  bottomed  out  in early March,  rose during  the next  few weeks,  and began

to  decline  again  in April.  Activity was  about  evenly divided  between

originations  and  refinancings.

Residential  Real  Estate

Real  estate  analysts  surveyed by  telephone reported  that  residential

activity  remained  relatively strong,  although adverse weather  conditions

delayed  housing  starts  in some  parts  of the District.  Residential  sales

varied  across  the  District but were,  on  net,  higher;  sales  remained  strongest

for  homes  in the  mid-price  range.

Prices  of  existing  homes  remained mostly steady,  but  prices of  new homes

rose because  of higher lumber costs.  In areas where the  residential  market

was  strongest,  higher  costs were  almost entirely  borne by  homebuyers.  In

other areas,  however,  the  result  was  lower profit  margins  for builders.

Nonresidential  Real  Estate

Commercial  real  estate  activity remained strong  in the Carolinas  and

Richmond  but  was weak  in Maryland  and  the  D.C.  area  during the  past  six weeks.

Analysts  noted  that  vacancy  rates  fell  faster  in the suburbs than  in the

downtown  areas.  Leasing  activity was  particularly strong  in  the retail  sector

because  of a shift towards  large,  value-oriented stores.  Analysts  also

reported  an  increase  in industrial  and  warehouse leasing  activity.

Some new construction was  underway, particularly for  large,  anchored

shopping centers  and  government buildings.  Little speculative construction

was  underway,  but some  analysts noted that  a few builders were beginning

construction with  only 80  to  90 percent of  the  building  preleased.  Other

analysts  reported that  a shortage of  large blocks  of  office  space would

stimulate  construction  demand  in the  future.

Agriculture

Above-normal  rainfall  and below-normal  temperatures across  most  of the

District delayed  spring  planting  activity and  led  to  the deterioration of  some

crops.  Corn  and  tobacco plantings  were  only  5 to  8 percent  complete, compared

to  25  percent or more  normally.  Vegetable crop  plantings were  also  behind

schedule.  Almost  half  of the District's  small  grains--planted  last  fall--were

rated  in fair or  poor condition,  either  because they were drowned, were

suffering  from disease and  powdery mildew, or were  growing  at  below-normal

rates  on  account of cold weather.  On  a more  positive  note, the  condition of

peach  and  apple trees  improved during  the  last  several  weeks.

VI-1

SIXTH  DISTRICT  - ATLANTA

Overview:  According  to  Sixth  District  contacts,  the  Southeast  economy  grew  at  a

moderate pace through mid-April,  despite minor disruptions caused  by unseasonably bad weather.

Retailers  reported  year-over-year  increases  in  consumer  spending.  Factory  activity  improved

moderately  with  increased  production  noted  particularly  in  consumer  goods  and  home  building

materials.  Realtors and home builders continued to see a favorable  single-family  housing market,

and  contractors  noted  some  new  multifamily  projects  but  said  commercial  construction  is  still

weak.  According to banking  contacts,  lending activity  was up modestly,  driven by  increases  in

commercial  loans  and  another  wave  of home  mortgage  refinancings.  Competition  continues  to

hold prices of intermediate materials and final goods steady,  while wage pressures were generally

absent.

Consumer  Spending:  Despite  unseasonably  poor  weather,  retailers  in  the  District

generally  reported  increases  in consumer  spending through March  and  into  mid-April  compared

with  year-ago  levels.  Nondurable  goods  sold  well  because  of Easter  holiday  shopping,  while

durable  goods sales  received a boost from home improvement  purchases that rebounded  with the

better  weather  in  early-April.  Auto  sales  picked  up  modestly  during  the  last  month,  and  most

dealers  said  they  were optimistic  about  the  prospects  for  continued  increases  in  sales  this  year.

Tourism  and  business  travel  continued  to strengthen,  and  early  reports  indicate  that  the number

of  spring  break  visitors  to Florida  surpassed  year-ago  levels.  Most  contacts  in  the  hospitality

industry expect  further improvement  through  the summer as air passenger traffic and  convention

attendance  continue  to  outpace  year-ago  levels.

VI-2

Manufacturing:  District factory activity improved moderately  through  early-April,  led

by  appliance,  furniture,  carpet,  and  building  materials  manufacturers  who  continue  to  benefit

from  regional  and  national  increases  in home  building  and  renovation.  Increasing  backlogs  of

orders  were  reported  by  producers  of plywood  and  textiles,  with  some  plants  running  at  full

capacity.  Utilities around the District  saw modest gains in new  residential customers  and higher

sales  to  existing  industrial  users.  Although  production  levels  generally  have  been  increasing,

relatively  few  firms  have  reported  hiring  new  employees,  instead  choosing  to extend  the hours

worked  by  current  staffs.  While  increases  in  manufacturers'  shipments  and  new  orders  were

reported  across  a broad  range of industries,  many  defense-related  contractors  are  still  faced  with

declining  backlogs  of  orders  and  few  new prospects.

Construction:  Real  estate agents  across  the District  noted  that  home  sales  were at  or

above  strong  year-ago  levels.  Improved  sales  were  observed  in  all  price  ranges,  including  the

luxury  market  which  previously  had  been  very  slow.  Contacts  expressed  optimism  about  the

remaining  spring  sales  period,  but  were  more  cautious  in  their  assessment  of  longer  term

prospects.  According  to builders,  single-family  home construction  is gaining,  although  activity

was  slowed  in  some  areas  by  the  severe  March  weather. 

In  contrast,  multifamily  construction

continues  to  be  generally  slow,  but plans  for  several  large  new  apartment  developments  were

announced  in  the  last  month.

Despite  isolated  reports  of  improved  absorption  and  leasing  activity,  the  commercial  real

estate  market  remains  weak.  No  new  speculative  construction  has  been  announced  recently,

although  several  large built-to-suit  projects  are  underway.  Commercial  builders  generally  were

pessimistic  about  their  prospects  for  the  rest of  this  year.

VI-3

Financial  Services:  Bankers  in  most  parts  of the District  reported  that overall  loan

demand  was  up  slightly  in March  and early-April.  Commercial  lending  has  increased  in recent

weeks. 

Although  contacts  report  that  home  mortgage  lending  continues  at  a  brisk  pace,

refinancing  accounts  for nearly two-thirds of current originations.  This new wave of refinancings

is  approaching  the  record  volumes  recorded  during  1992.  Bankers  report  that  some  consumers

who  refinanced  mortgages  in late  1991  or early  1992  are taking  advantage  of lower  rates  for a

second  time.  Other  types  of consumer  lending  were  said  to  be  flat  or  up  slightly  in  the  last

month.

Wages  and  Prices:  Few  factory  contacts  reported  increases  in  prices  of  either

intermediate  materials or finished products.  There were no reports of increasing wage pressures.

VII-1

SEVENTH  DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.  Recent  reports from  businesses,  trade associations  and  the results  of a variety  of

surveys  indicate  that economic expansion slowed in the Seventh District  in March  and early April,  but

contacts' expectations  for renewed growth in coming weeks  were guardedly  optimistic.  Most retail and

housing  industry contacts  stated that  bad  weather curtailed  sales growth in recent  weeks.  Little change

could  be detected  in  the pace  of expansion in manufacturing  activity,  and  manufacturers  seemed

comfortable  with modestly  rising inventory levels.  Price increases  proceeded  at a somewhat  faster pace

in recent months, due at least in part to improvement  in demand.  Weather conditions  have  delayed  spring

plantings.

Business  Activity Indicators.  An underlying upward trend in purchasing  managers' surveys

around  the  District generally  remained intact in recent  months, although  results were  increasingly  mixed.

The overall  index  for the  Chicago survey  slipped  slightly in March, but remained  at a  level consistent

with  expansion  in manufacturing  activity.  The production  components  of the  Milwaukee  and Detroit

surveys continued  to climb  in March, and  these indicators have  reached  and exceeded  pre-recession

levels.  Purchasing managers'  surveys in Western  Michigan  signalled  modest to moderate  improvement  in

March,  in line  with  results for the first two months  of the  quarter.  Led  by the  auto sector, an index of

business activity  in  the Detroit area  rose to  a  record  high in March,  and the  unemployment  rate  for the

Detroit area has  fallen significantly over the  last year.  An index of business  conditions in a  purchasing

managers'  survey  in Iowa also continued  to  climb in the first quarter, reaching  its highest level in five

years.  An informal  survey of a variety  of small manufacturing,  construction,  and  service firms  in the

District indicated that  respondents  were  largely upbeat  with respect to  appraisals  of current conditions  as

well as expectations  for future activity,  although  several firms expressed  concern  about the  recent  slump

in measures  of consumer confidence.

Consumption and Housing.  Most retail and  housing  industry contacts  reported that unrelenting

poor weather joined  with  renewed  consumer uncertainty,  especially  about taxes, to dampen  sales  in

March  and  early  April.  Continued gains in  retail sales of nonseasonal merchandise  and  increased  activity

during  breaks in the  weather supported  their expectations  for renewed  growth in  coming months,

however.  A  large  retailer stated  that  sales growth was  held back by concern  over potential tax increases,

uncertainty  about the  impact of withholding changes,  a payback  following  aggressive promotion  of credit

sales  in the previous quarter, and  "some of the  soggiest weather in our history."  Sales reportedly  surged,

VII-2

however, on several  days when the  weather broke.  This contact  also noted that sales of nonseasonal

items  continued  to strengthen  in recent  months,  helping to offset weakness in spring apparel,  and  sales of

furniture  and  housewares  posted  a double-digit increase  in the first quarter on a same-store  basis,  reaching

a  record level.  Another large  retailer reported that credit utilization continued  to rise even though sales

slowed  in March  (on a  seasonally  adjusted basis),  and sales  rebounded  in April, led  by durable  goods  and

apparel.  A large  shopping center reported  that total  sales increased  (on a year-over-year  basis) in March

and early  April.  After a lengthy  dormant  period for sales of spring merchandise,  this contact  expected  a

burst in sales  with the first sustained  period of nice  weather, but noted that  it hadn't occurred  yet.

Reports from  bankers indicated that residential mortgage  loan demand  remained  fairly  strong,

with continued  relative  strength in  refinancing.  A large homebuilder, however, expressed  some

frustration  about a  loss of momentum in traffic  and sales in March, citing a  reemergence  of political

uncertainty  in addition  to the  bad weather.  A  report from  an association of realtors  indicated that closings

slowed in the  first quarter  of 1993  on a seasonally  adjusted basis,  after a large increase  in the fourth

quarter last year.  A  report from a large  realtor  also indicated that transaction volume slowed  in March,

but  activity seemed  to pick up some momentum  in April.  This realtor stated  that "the market is still pretty

active,"  citing continued  optimistic  attitudes  among  salespeople.

Manufacturing.  Reports  from manufacturers  and industrial  trade  associations  indicated  little

change  in the  steady upward trend in District manufacturing  activity,  although pockets  of weakness

remained.  Sales of electricity  to  industrial customers  in March  were  significantly above  the  year-earlier

period,  according  to one  utility, largely due  to strength in  sales to the  auto industry.  One automaker

reported  that production of light trucks has  been bumping  up against capacity limits.  Two producers of

molds used in  automobile  production  were experiencing  a marked upturn in demand,  which was

attributed  to increased  optimism  about sales prospects  in  future model  years.  An automaker  reported  that

car sales strengthened  significantly  in the  first twenty days of April,  after  some loss  of momentum  in

March.  A  bank reported that auto loan volume  rose in April,  after softening in  the first quarter.  Among

respondents  to  the purchasing  managers'  surveys  in Western  Michigan,  above-average  strength was

reported  for producers  of capital equipment,  and  auto parts manufacturers  are still doing  somewhat better

than firms  in most other industries.  An association  of electronics  manufacturers  reported  that orders  in

the first quarter ran at the highest level in the past five years, and  an association  of home appliance

producers reported  a record level of domestic  shipments for a variety  of products in March.  One

VII-3

appliance  producer expected  a record year for retail sales of appliances  (in units) in  1993.  Weakness  has

lingered  in several  manufacturing  sectors in  the District, however.  A  large diversified manufacturer

reported  that orders for oilfield and  airline equipment, which had been weak  for some time,  fell off

significantly  further in March.  Retail  sales of farm  equipment  in the first quarter were  slightly below soft

year-earlier  levels.  New  strengthening  was evident in one  previously weak sector, however, as a large

manufacturer  of construction  equipment reported that sales  into commercial  construction  markets  have

been  rising  rapidly  in  recent months.

Prices.  Prices  of a variety  of commodities and  final products  have  been increasing  at higher rates

in recent months,  due  at least in part to increased  demand.  The price components of several  District

purchasing  managers'  surveys  rose in recent months.  The  director of two purchasing managers'  surveys in

Western Michigan noted that more commodities were  being reported  in short supply and  rising in price.

On the other hand, a  large retailer  reported that consumer sensitivity  to  price remains  high.  A banker

stated that inflationary expectations  may remain  relatively  muted, noting  that the upturn  in plant and

equipment spending  among  borrowers  has not been generalized, but specific  by industry sector, by

companies  within industries, and  projects  within companies.

Agriculture.  A  recent  survey found  that farmers  in this  District and  elsewhere  intend  to reduce

corn  acreage  moderately  this year while holding  soybean  seedings close  to last  year's level.  The

combination  of a  late harvest  last fall  and the wet and cool  weather conditions of this spring  has

significantly  reduced the  amount of fieldwork  completed  so far for this year's  plantings.  Developments  in

the  next couple of weeks will be  important as  the first  10 days of May  are  generally  considered  the

optimum  planting  time for most of the  District's corn farmers.  The delays experienced  so far could be

quickly  overcome with  the right  weather conditions.  Alternatively,  continued delays  could trigger a  shift

toward quicker-maturing  (but lower-yielding)  seeds and/or encourage  a shift from  corn to  soybean

acreage.  Livestock  producers  have enjoyed  unexpectedly  high prices  so far this year.  In contrast to  the

continued  year-over-year  gains expected  in red  meat production,  pork production  was down nearly  3

percent  in the  first quarter while  beef production  was  down nearly 4 percent.  The unexpected  declines

stem partly  from  slower  weight gains  due  to the  poor quality of last  year's corn crop  and the  harsh  weather

conditions confronting  feedlot operators.  With USDA  reports  continuing  to show larger inventories  of

hogs  and cattle,  most analysts  are expecting  red meat  production will  move  above  year-earlier levels  again

this  spring.

VIII-1

EIGHTH  DISTRICT  - ST.  LOUIS

Summary

District firms continue to report growth in both sales and employment.  Unexpected

increases  in  demand  have  spurred  some  companies  to  hire  additional  workers  or  cancel

planned  layoffs.  Wet  weather has  slowed District homebuilding,  although  many  areas  still

report  permits and  sales  at or above  last  year's levels.  Consumer and  small  business  loan

demand  continues  to increase  at area  banks;  some  bankers  are concerned,  however,  that

slow  deposit  growth  could  hamper  their efforts  to fund  further  increases  in  loan  demand.

Excessive  moisture  and  unseasonably  cool  temperatures  have  delayed  spring  planting

throughout  the  District.

Manufacturing

Reports  from  District  manufacturers  continue  to  be  upbeat,  as  both  sales  and

employment  are  increasing.  Sales  increases  in  the range  of 4 percent  to  10  percent  over

last  year are  not  uncommon.  One  contact  reports  a steadier  stream  of revenues  this  year

relative  to  last,  citing  the  customers'  use  of just-in-time  inventory  as  the  cause.  Many

firms  report  employment  increases  because  of  expansions  and  increased  demand. 

In

particular,  Arkansas  is  witnessing  spurts  of  growth  from  various  industries.  A  steel

processor  will  open  a plant  in  the  northeast  part of the  state,  which brings  the  total to  six

steel-related  plant  openings  in  this  area  over  the  past  year. 

In  western  Arkansas,  the

expansions  of  a  wheel  manufacturer  and  two  apparel  manufacturers  will  add  about  250

jobs,  while  a  maker  of  major  household  appliances  is  adding  400  workers  because  of

unexpectedly  strong  demand.

Reports  from  other  areas  of  the  District  are  also  positive.  For  example,  a

Tennessee  plant  producing  shoes  with  a workforce  of 260,  originally  slated  to  close,  will

remain  open  indefinitely  because  of unexpected  increases  in  demand.  This  is  the  second

time  this  year  the  company  has  reversed  its  plans  to  close  one  of  its  plants  because  of

VIII-2

unexpected  growth  in  demand. 

In  March,  a  steel  foundry  in  Illinois  reopened  after  18

months  with  330  recalled  employees.  The  firm  also  reports  that  up  to  1,000  additional

workers  may be hired  soon  to meet  the expected  demand.  A poultry processor  in western

Kentucky  is  undergoing  a  major expansion  that  will  lead  to  300  new jobs.

Some  employment  reductions  did  occur,  however.  A  Tennessee  producer  of

children's  clothing  reports  that  reduced  sales  and  internal  efficiency  concerns  will  cause

it  to  close  a plant  by  June,  eliminating  about  300  jobs.  In  Memphis,  a  maker  of  food

products  will  release  up  to two-thirds  of its current  350  employees  as  it  stops  production

of  bulk  products  for  other  food  companies.  Because  of  a  reorganization,  a  national

computer  company  will  lay  off about 200  of its  550  workers  in St.  Louis.

Nonmanufacturing

Reports  from  District  nonmanufacturing  firms  also  continue  to  be  positive.  For

example,  an  Arkansas  building  supplies  company  reports  that sales are  up  11  percent over

last  year  because  of strong  growth  in  housing  starts.  The relocation  of a  nursing  homes

operator  from  Virginia  to Arkansas  will  bring  between  300 and  400 jobs into  the  area  by

next year,  completing  this firm's consolidation  in Arkansas.  A retail  holding company  that

is  moving  its  headquarters  to  St.  Louis  reports  that  100  new jobs,  in  addition  to  the  430

jobs  coming  from  New  York,  will be added.  An athletic  apparel  maker,  consolidating  its

national  distribution  in  Memphis,  is bringing  100 jobs.  In  addition,  a retailer  in  southern

Illinois  reports  that  when  its  remodeling  is  complete  by  year-end,  it  will  need  300  new

employees.  The  District's  mining  industry,  though,  contracted  further  when  an  Illinois

coal company  announced  that  it will close  two mines  this month,  laying  off more than  370

workers.

Construction  and Real  Estate

Wet  weather  in  much  of the  District  has  dampened  homebuilding,  although  many

areas still  report  construction  activity at  or above last  year's pace.  Rain  and  mud  have put

many  District  homebuilders  30  to 60  days  behind  schedule.  Despite  the  weather,  traffic

VIII-3

and sales  activity  is reportedly  moderate to  strong  throughout  the District.  Sales  of houses

priced  in  the  $100,000-to-$150,000  range  are  especially  strong  in  Louisville.  New  home

prices  have risen  slightly because of the pickup in  demand and increases  in materials  costs,

especially  lumber.

Banking  and Finance

Loan  demand  appears  to  be  on  the  upswing  in  many  parts  of  the  District.

Consumers  continue to refinance variable-rate  debt with fixed-rate instruments;  at the same

time,  consumers  and small  businesses  have increased  their demand  for new loans,  bankers

report. 

Several contacts  are  concerned  about slow deposit growth,  believing  that  the low

rates  being  paid  on  deposits  have  led  many  customers  to  move  funds  out  of the  banking

system.  They  also  worry  that,  should  a  sharp  upturn  in  loan  demand  occur,  it  will  be

difficult  to  fund  without  significant  increases  in  deposit  rates  or purchased  funds.

Agriculture  and Natural Resources

Surplus  soil  moisture  and  unseasonably  cool  spring  temperatures  are  reported  in

most  District  states.  Consequently,  spring  tillage  and planting  operations  have proceeded

at  an  unusually  slow pace:  corn,  cotton and  rice planting  are well  behind  normal  in  most

areas.  Two large fertilizer producers  and  distributors  report that  sales  have been adversely

affected  by  the  weather,  but  should  pick  up  if the  weather  improves  soon.  Although  the

cool  weather  has  significantly  damaged  the  blueberry  and  strawberry  crops  in  parts  of

Arkansas,  Mississippi  and  Tennessee,  the  peach  and  apple  crops  in  some  areas  have

benefited.  The  winter  wheat  crop  in  most  states  is generally  in  good  condition,  although

some  concerns  about  moisture-related  diseases  have  been  expressed. 

Initial  estimates

suggest  that  District  farmers  intend  to  plant  less  corn  and  rice  this  year,  but  more

soybeans.  Cotton  acreage  should  be  near  last  year's  level.  Flooding  along  many  of  the

major  rivers  in  the District  has  barge  activity  hamstrung  recently.

IX-1

NINTH  DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

The economy  of the Ninth District is growing moderately.  Consumer spending  on  merchandise,

automobiles and  new homes  continues to grow and provide  impetus  for the economy.  Moreover,  other

indicators signal  that the  recovery is firming.  Commercial  and heavy construction  is reviving, with

substantial  state  and local  government projects  slated  for some areas.  Recent indicators  suggest  some

growth  in manufacturing.  In agriculture,  cattle and hog  numbers continue to rise in response  to very

favorable feed  and  slaughter prices.  While  current  mining output is unchanged,  industry officials predict  an

improved  year for iron mining and  profitability has improved  for gold producers.  Oil industry prospects  are

positive  for the first time in years.  Cold, wet weather is severely  delaying grain planting  but has helped

ensure  that soil  moisture  levels are adequate  across  virtually all of the Ninth District.  However,  labor

markets show  slight  growth in total  employment  coupled with  steady to slightly higher unemployment  rates.

Consumer Spending

Automobiles  constitute  one strong area  of consumer spending.  In March, new registrations  of

passenger  autos  and pickups  in Minnesota  were 6 percent  above year-earlier  levels.  North  and South

Dakota also report strong  auto sales.  "The first quarter has been  very good,"  said  a South Dakota  auto

dealers association  spokesperson.

Spending  on general merchandise  apparently  continued  at levels 3 to  5 percent above year  earlier levels

for the month  of March  and  for the first  quarter of 1993.  A major Minneapolis-based  general retailer

characterized  its March  same-store sales, up 3.6 percent from  a year earlier,  as  "disappointing" in

comparison  to increases  achieved  in  January and February.  However,  such levels seem  typical  for much  of

the district.  Advisory council  members,  Ninth District  directors  and newspapers generally also  report good

retail  sales conditions  but no spectacular  growth.  And the  Minnesota Department  of Revenue  announced

that sales tax  receipts through the  first quarter  were  above projections.

Construction  and  Housing

Heavy  and  commercial  construction  is strong.  A trade publication  that  tabulates construction  industry

data for all publicly-tendered  contracts  in North  Dakota, South Dakota  and Minnesota  reports that contract

awards for the  first quarter of 1993  are 45 percent  above the first  quarter of 1992.  Some local  units  of

government reportedly  will spend  substantial  amounts  on  construction  in  1993,  with $75  million  announced

IX-2

for Sioux Falls,  S.D.  Directors  and newspapers  also report substantial amounts  of small and medium-scale

commercial  construction  that is not generally awarded  through  public bids.

New  single-family  housing permits  in February  for Minneapolis-St. Paul remained below  year-earlier

levels but rose after declines  the previous two months.  And industry spokespersons  across the district

continue  to describe residential  construction  as strong.  A Minneapolis  area builder's  association

representative  characterized  sales as "very  strong" and a newspaper  noted a building  boom in the Sioux

Falls,  S.D., area.  A  district director from western  South Dakota described  the housing market  in  the Rapid

City area  as  "very tight",  noting  that  many new single-family  residences  were planned.

Manufacturing

Available  indicators point  to some growth  in the manufacturing  sector.  Minnesota's  employment  in

manufacturing 

in February  was  about 2 percent  above year-earlier levels.  Weekly hours in manufacturing

stood  at 41.0, up  slightly from  the prior month  and nearly  an hour above  February  1992  levels.  An

electrical  utility serving most  of the Ninth District manufacturing  in South Dakota, Minnesota  and

Wisconsin  reported  that weather-normalized  electrical use in industry grew  at  about  3.3 percent  in the first

quarter  of  1993  compared to  the same period  in  1992.  Food processing  and  non-electrical  machinery

manufacturing  showed the greatest  increases.  And  recent earnings reports  of publicly-traded  manufacturing

firms in the district show  a pattern of sales  and earnings  generally  well above year-earlier levels.

Mining  and  Energy

Business  conditions have improved  somewhat  in mining.  One Minnesota  iron mining industry

spokesman  estimated  that  1993  shipments  would  be 2 million tons  or 5 percent above  1992 levels.  Recent

price  increases  have  improved  profitability  in South  Dakota  and Montana gold  mining, and  output and

employment  remain steady.  Copper prices  remain low, but no new production  cuts or layoffs have  been

reported  recently.

One  high producing new  oil well was completed near Dickinson, N.D.  Ninth District directors  from

North  Dakota and  Montana report that oil companies  show  renewed  interest in leasing and exploration  and

believe that with  tight cost  control, new  production  wells can  be profitable at current  oil price  levels.

Drilling rig counts for April  are approximately  equal to the same period  in  1992.

Agriculture

IX-3

Livestock are the most positive component  in agriculture.  Slaughter cattle  and hog prices are strong.

Good  fat cattle prices combined  with low  feed costs have pushed  feeder cattle prices to historic  highs, and

earnings  by ranchers  in western  South Dakota and  Montana are reported  to be strong.  Numbers  of livestock

on farms as well as  slaughter  numbers  are high.  One problem is that cold, wet weather has  increased

newborn  calf mortality for  beef producers.

The crop sector is still emerging from  winter inactivity.  Grain prices in mid-April  are largely

unchanged  since February  with the exception  of an increase in the corn  price.  Unusually cool,  wet weather

has delayed  field preparation and  crop planting in all district states and  for all major crops.  Soil moisture

levels  are adequate  to surplus  across  virtually  all agricultural regions.

Labor  Markets

In  spite of indications  of at least moderate  growth  in the sectors reviewed  above,  labor markets  show

little significant  change in  early  spring.  Indicators  for February generally show slight increases in  total

employment compared  to month  and year-earlier  figures combined with  steady to slightly  higher

unemployment  rates.  Minnesota, with  over half of the district's  labor force, had an  unemployment  rate of

6.4 percent  for February,  one-half point higher than in January and  1.1  points higher than  a year earlier.

Unemployment  rates also  rose in South  Dakota  in spite  of modest increases in employment  levels.

Michigan's Upper Peninsula, where unemployment  rates  have  fallen 3 points in the last year to February

levels of  10 percent,  is one region  with  improvement.  In  Minnesota and the  Dakotas, March  initial claims

for unemployment  generally rose  from February  levels  but were  somewhat below  year-earlier  levels.

In  spite  of positive developments  in the general  economy  noted  above, such weakness  in labor markets

may continue  due to ongoing processes  of corporate restructuring  and military downsizing that continue  to

affect  the Ninth District.  A large computer manufacturer  announced  that  700 full-time  and  1,200 part-time

or temporary  workers  will  be laid off at its Rochester,  Minn., plant  out  of a total of some  7,600 workers.

And  the Department  of Defense  announced  that K.I. Sawyer  Air Force  Base, located  in Michigan's  Upper

Peninsula,  was  on  its list of facilities  slated for closing.  Sawyer  AFB,  with 3,300 military  and  1,000

civilian  personnel,  is a major factor  in  Upper  Peninsula employment  and  spending.

X-1

TENTH DISTRICT  - KANSAS CITY

Overview.  The Tenth District  economy  is  expanding at a moderate pace.

Retail sales  are rising, the housing  sector remains  strong, and  demand for

bank loans  is up  in most categories.  Prospects  for farm  income  are good

despite weather-related problems,  and the energy sector appears  to have

stabilized.  District manufacturers  continue  to operate below capacity.

Prices  for retail  goods and manufacturer's inputs are  stable,  but prices  for

building materials  are  increasing somewhat further.

Retail Sales.  Retailers  report moderate  improvement in  sales  relative

to  last month and a year ago,  despite poor  weather conditions.  Most  retailers

report  strength in  apparel  sales.  Prices  are  stable  or  slightly lower

compared to a year ago, as  retailers have  trimmed profit margins.  Prices  are

expected to  remain stable  over the  next year.  Most respondents  are  satisfied

with  inventory levels.  Sales are  expected to  continue  improving over  the next

several months.

Auto dealers report  sales  increases  from last month and continued

availability of  dealer financing.  Dealers are maintaining or  increasing

inventories  and remain optimistic  about sales  in  the near  future.  A few

respondents report that  some  less  credit-worthy consumers have had difficulty

getting  financing.

Manufacturing.  Purchasing agents  report  steady  to slightly higher input

prices  relative to  last  year, except  for a significant  rise  in  the  price of

steel.  Prices  are  expected to  remain stable  over  the next few  months.

Materials are  available, although lead  times  are  slightly extended.  Firms  are

operating below capacity and are  trying to cut  costs by delaying hiring

additional labor.  Firms that  export  report a decrease  in sales abroad.

X-2

Energy.  Drilling activity  in the  district is  stable  following declines

at  the  beginning of  the year.  The average number of operating  drilling rigs

in district  states fell  from 223  in  February to 191  in March.  The  rig  count

rebounded  somewhat  in the  first  three weeks  of April, however,  to an  average

of  196.  During the  recent  two-month period, drilling activity  in  the  district

was  about  even with year-ago  levels.

Housing.  Housing starts  are  generally up relative  to last month.  Most

builders  expect  starts  to pick up further in the period ahead as  the  weather

improves.  Sales of new homes  are  up, and  inventories are  low.  Home  prices

are up from  last  month.  Building materials are readily available,  but

respondents report  some  increase in  lumber prices.

Mortgage demand  is strong  in  response  to lower  interest rates,  with much

of  the  strength due  to refinancing.  Respondents expect mortgage  demand  to

remain strong and interest rates  to remain  low.

Banking.  Bankers  report  somewhat  stronger loan demand  last  month.

Demand  increased for commercial and industrial  loans,  consumer  loans,  and

residential real  estate  loans.  Demand for agricultural loans  and  commercial

real  estate  loans,  however, was unchanged.  The loan-to-deposit ratio

increased slightly over the  last month, as  did the  level  of bank  investments.

District  banks  did not  change  their prime  rate  in the  last month and

expect no  change  in  the  near future.  While most  banks  did not  change  their

consumer  loan rates,  a few respondents  report recent  reductions  in consumer

rates.  Banks also  did not  change  their  other lending  standards  in the last

month, except  that one respondent  tightened home equity lending  standards.

Deposits were  steady to  slightly higher during  the  last month.  The

deposit  growth centered in  demand  deposits,  NOW accounts, and MMDAs.  Large

X-3

CDs  declined slightly, while  small  time  deposits and  savings  deposits were

steady  to slightly lower.

Agriculture.  The  district's  important winter wheat crop is  in good

condition overall.  Although  some areas  are showing  signs  of winter kill  or

excessive moisture, most of  the  crop is making progress and  is  considered to

have  favorable prospects.

Row crop  producers have  made  little planting progress  due to an

unusually wet spring.  Muddy conditions  continue  to keep farmers  out  of their

fields as  frequent  showers and cool  temperatures have prevented adequate

drying.  Most  of the  fieldwork that has  been completed was  done  last  fall.

Feedlot  conditions have  improved since  winter  storms  pounded much of the

district.  Although feedlots are  not operating at  capacity, they are  generally

as  full as  operators want them.  With fed cattle prices  hovering around  $82,

feedlot managers are marketing  cattle as quickly as  they can.  Poor weight

gains  and  death loss  due to  the winter storms,  however,  still  hamper efforts

to maintain  steady marketings.

The volume  of farm real  estate  sales  in most  parts of  the district

remained steady over  the  past year, while  land values  edged up.  According  to

district agricultural  lenders,  farm real  estate values  have advanced  3 to  4

percent  in  the  past  year.  The  cash rental value of farmland, however, has

fluctuated  little from 1992.

ELEVENTH  DISTRICT-DALLAS

The  District  economy  is growing  slowly.  The  service  sector continues  to expand  at  a

modest  pace  but manufacturing  activity  has  weakened  since the  last survey.  Most

respondents  say  that selling  prices are  not  rising.  A few  respondents  indicate that  input costs

have  risen  slightly but they  are  not  passing  on  these  rising costs.  New  single-family

construction  and  sales continue  to dominate  the  District  real  estate  market.  Higher oil  and

natural  gas prices  are  stimulating  a  slight  pick-up  in  the  District energy  industry.  Retail  sales

growth  is  moderate.  District  financial  institutions  report  continued  slow  loan  growth.  Adverse

weather  conditions are  negatively  affecting  agricultura  production.

Manufacturing  activity has  weakened.  Demand  for fabricated  metals  has  declined

recently while  primary  metal  sales  have  been  sluggish.  Respondents  suggest that weak

demand  is  a  result  of general  caution  surrounding  the  economy,  along with  low levels  of

nonresidential  construction  and  oil  and  gas  drilling.  Primary  metal  respondents  also  suggest

that caution  surrounding  the  proposed  energy  tax  has  depressed  growth.  Steel  producers

believe  their business  has slowed  because  customers  stocked  up  prior to  an  announced

price  increase.  Slow  domestic  drilling  also  is  reported  to  have weakened  demand for  oil  field

equipment  although  international  demand  has  increased,  particularly  from  Canada.  Chemical

producers  indicate that  sales  are  unchanged  although  a  global  surplus  of  chemicals  and

plastics  are  holding  prices  and  profits  low.  Petrochemical  prices  have  declined slightly

despite  sharp  increases  in  several  feedstocks,  especially  propane.  Overcapacity  problems

and  diminished  exports  continue  to  hurt domestic  operations.  Growth  in  apparel  sales  are

reported  to  have slowed.  Electrical  and  electronic  machinery  producers  report that sales

continue  to  be  strong  but  prices  remain  flat  despite  a slight  increase  in  cost.  A  paper

producer  reports weak  export  demand.  Sales  growth  of  lumber  and  wood  products  has

XI-2

leveled off but remains  well above  last year.  Increased homebuilding construction  continues

to boost demand  for stone,  shell,  clay and  glass.

New single-family  construction  and sales continue to  dominate the District  real  estate

market. 

Inventories of  new  homes  remain  low in San Antonio,  Austin,  Dallas and  Houston.

Low inventories,  along  with higher prices for lumber and  hardboard  siding, have  raised home

prices.  Respondents report  little  resistance to rising prices,  mostly  because low interest  rates

are offsetting  rising prices.  Apartment occupancy  rates  and  rents have  risen  although there is

little construction  activity.  Office markets  remain  weak  particularly  in  Dallas and  Houston.

Construction to  rebuild from  Hurricane  Andrew  continues  in  Louisiana  and  off the Gulf Coast.

Offshore  construction  of oil and  gas platforms  is expected to  continue into the  summer.

Higher  oil and  natural  gas prices  have stimulated the  District energy industry.

Reduced OPEC  production  has  boosted the price  of West Texas  Intermediate  Crude to

around  $20  per  barrel.  The  East Coast  blizzard increased  demand  for natural  gas,

unexpectedly draining  storage facilities and  raising prices.  Storage  levels, which are at a five

year low,  are expected to keep natural  gas  prices high  for several months.  Offshore natural

gas  drilling has  increased.  Domestic  drilling remains  seasonally slow but is  expected to  pick

up soon, particularly for  natural gas.  Higher  gasoline  prices helped  boost refining  margins

from  the very low levels experienced  in  February  but proifits are  reported  to still remain weak.

Service sector activity continues to increase  slowly.  Business  service and

transportation  respondents  report that sales have  increased.  Temporary  employment  firms

report that business  has  been particularly  strong,  partly  because many  companies are  still

hesitant about hiring  permanent workers.  Selling prices remain  very competitive in  the

service sector.  Several  respondents  noted that they  must  do more work with the  same

XI-3

number  of  people because they can not increase prices.  Higher  labor  costs such as health

insurance,  unemployment  insurance, and  workers'  compensation continue to be  a problem

for many companies.

Retail  sales growth  is  moderate.  Sales  growth  is  expected to continue.  Some

retailers,  however,  express  caution that near-term  growth  may  slow slightly because  reduced

federal  income tax withholding increased  the  amount of taxes many consumers  owe now.

Respondents  report that selling  prices remain  very competitive despite  some higher  costs.

Auto  sales  have picked up  and dealers  are  optimistic that  sales gains  will continue.  Dealers

report that domestic vehicles are  outselling imports  because 

price  increases for  many

foreign  vehicles.

District financial  institutions report continued  slowdown  growth.  Loan  demand  has

increased  modestly  but remains  low.  Bankers  say that loan  customers  are  being cautious

about the business outlook.  Regulatory  burdens are  also reported  to be  slowing loan

growth.

Adverse  weather conditions  are  negatively affecting  agricutural  production.  Severe

wet weather has  delayed  planting in central  Texas.  Planting 

now  20 percent behind  the five

year average.  Dry  weather  has aided  wildfires,  and depleted  range and  pasture  conditions in

far West  Texas.  March  prices for  most crops  were  lower that last  year, while prices for most

livestock commodities  increased.  The Texas  All Crops  Price index dropped  17.1  percent

from  a  year ago.  The  Livestock  Index rose  5.0  percent  above  the  previous year.

XII  - 1

TWELFTH DISTRICT  - SAN  FRANCISCO

Summary

Weakness  in California continues  to hold down  overall  District economic  activity,  but

generally  favorable  conditions  are reported in most other District states.  In California, job cutbacks

in  aerospace  and defense-related  manufacturing  are  combining  with recently  proposed  military base

closings  to  hurt consumer confidence  and  economic  activity  in many  areas.  Conditions  remain

sluggish  in the  state across  a broad range of  industries.  Layoffs  in aerospace  also  are slowing  growth

in western  Washington.  Outside of these  regions,  growth  is  reported in  several  sectors,  with the

strongest  conditions  reported in eastern Washington,  Utah,  and Idaho.  Overall  business  sentiment

was  little changed  from our last report but remains generally  favorable,  and recent rains have

improved  District agricultural prospects.

Business Sentiment

Sentiment  among  Twelfth  District business  leaders,  which had  improved  steadily since the  last

half of  1992,  is showing  some signs  of leveling  off.  Two-thirds  of our respondents  now  expect  the

real economy  to  expand  during the next  four quarters  at a  rate cf at  least  2.5 percent.  This

proportion  is down  from  three-quarters  in  March  but up  from one-half  in January  and  one-third in

November.  In general,  contacts  from Idaho,  Oregon,  and  Utah  expect  their  regions to  perform

slightly better  than the national  average.  Most  contacts  in  California and  Washington,  however,

expect  their  regions to  underperform  the  national  average.

Retail Trade  and  Services

Consumer sentiment remains weak  in California,  with several  contacts  reporting that concern

over job security  is  negatively  affecting  consumer  spending.  One  national  retailer reports that retail

sales  are continuing soft;  April  looks  slightly  better than March,  but the West  Coast trend is  definitely

XII  -2

softer than  in the Midwest  or East Coast.  Contacts  in  California report that small  retail and  service

establishments  near military  bases  are nervous  about  their long-term  prospects.  The visitor  industry

in  southern  California  is reported  to  be depressed.  In northern  California,  a contact  reports that

layoffs  are  continuing  in the legal  services  industry.

Somewhat  stronger conditions  are  reported  in most other  District markets,  with consumer

confidence  noticeably  more robust than  in California.  Contacts  report stable or strengthening

conditions in Idaho,  Utah,  and  Oregon.  In  Idaho,  for example,  new vehicle registrations  during

March  were up  26 percent  over  a  year  earlier.  In Washington,  however,  consumer  confidence  is

reported  down due to aerospace  cutbacks,  adversely  affecting  retail  trade  and sales.  A  contact  in  the

Washington  legal  industry also  reports weak  conditions.  A  contact in  eastern Washington,  however,

reports that the  region  is benefiting  from  increased  federal  spending  on nuclear  cleanup  projects.

Manufacturing

Cutbacks  in  aerospace  and defense  continue to dampen  District manufacturing  activity-

particularly  in  California and  Washington.  Most recently,  a major  defense manufacturer  announced

the  further  consolidation  of production  activity from several  sites in  southern  California  to Tucson.

The  move  will  result in the transfer  of 2,000 workers  by the end  of next  year and  ultimately  eliminate

more  than 6,000 jobs company-wide.  In  Washington,  cutbacks  at Boeing are proceeding.  Newly

announced  airplane  orders from  China,  however,  are partially  offsetting  weak  demand  from domestic

airlines.  A  contact  in the aluminum  industry reports  high  inventories and  soft prices  of aluminum,

due  to both weak demand  and  increased  supply  from  Russia.

Stronger  conditions  exist in other sectors.  A contact  from  Silicon Valley  reports that  orders

are strong  in several  segments  of the electronics  industry,  although  there are  signs that the peak  in

growth  rates may  be past.  Contacts from  Idaho and  Utah  report both  strong demand  and  tightening

inventories  for heavy  and  construction  equipment.  No major delivery  problems  are reported,  however.

Agriculture and  Resource-Related  Industries

XII-3

Recent  precipitation has  improved prospects  for irrigation water  in several  states.  Grazing

conditions  are reported excellent,  and  livestock  conditions  are good.  Prices  are reported strong for

cattle  and several  other agricultural products.  Capacity constraints have  eased  in  lumber and

plywood,  with  lumber prices  dropping 20  percent from the March  peak.

Construction and  Real  Estate

District nonresidential  real  estate and  construction  shows some signs  of bottoming out,

although  activity  remains depressed  in  several  markets.  A  contact  in  southern California  reports little

change  in  conditions,  with commercial  construction  activity  down nearly  50 percent  from three  years

ago.  In northern  California,  a contact  reports that  rents have stabilized,  and that commercial  real

estate  prices  should be  at or near  the bottom.  In  Utah,  the overall  office vacancy  dropped  from 21

percent  to  16 percent  in the Salt Lake  City market,  showing  considerable  absorption  over the  past

year.

The residential  sector  is showing  more  strength.  Home  building in southern  Arizona  is

reported very  strong,  in part due to the  shift of  aerospace jobs  from southern  California to Tucson.

Contacts  also  report that Utah  and Idaho  are  experiencing  a continued  boom  in  residential  construction

and  sales.  Some  shortage  of lumber  and construction  labor  is noted.  In California, contacts  report

some  pick up  in real  estate  activity due to  lower  interest rates and decreased  home  prices.

Financial  Institutions

Mixed  conditions  are reported across  District financial  markets. 

In California,  contacts  report

continued  weak  loan demand.  A  contact  in  Washington reports  a sharp drop in commercial  and

agricultural loan  requests  in the last two  quarters.  In contrast,  contacts  report that the banking

industry in Arizona continues  to  show  significant  improvement  and that conditions  in Utah  remain

strong.  In  Oregon,  a contact  reports increased  demand  for credit during March  and  strong profits.

