Summary  of Commentary  on

For use at  Noon,  E.S.T.
Wednesday
December  7, 1994

Current
Economic
Conditions

by Federal  Reserve  District

November  1994

SUMMARY  OF  COMMENTARY  ON  CURRENT  ECONOMIC  CONDITIONS

NOVEMBER  1994

TABLE  OF CONTENTS

SU M M A R Y 

............................................ 

First  D istrict  - Boston 

..................................... 

Second  District  - New  York 

................................. 

Third  District  - Philadelphia 

................................ 

Fourth  District  - Cleveland 

................................. 

Fifth  District  - Richmond 

.................................. 

Sixth  District  - Atlanta 

..................................... 

Seventh  District  - Chicago 

.................................. 

Eighth  District  - St.  Louis 

.................................. 

Ninth  District  - Minneapolis 

................................ 

Tenth  District  - Kansas  City 

................................ 

Eleventh  District  - Dallas 

.................................. 

Twelfth  District  - San  Francisco

i

I-1

II-1

III-1

IV-1

V-1

VI-1

VII-1

VIII-1

IX-1

X-1

XI-1

. XII-1

i

SUMMARY¹

Reports  from  the twelve  Federal  Reserve  Districts  suggest  economic  activity  generally

is continuing  to  expand  at  about  the  same  pace  as  in  recent  months.  Retail  sales  in  most

districts  have  improved,  with  nearly  all  districts  reporting  strong  sales  early  in the  holiday

season.  Manufacturing  activity  is  increasing  further  in  most  districts,  especially  in  durable

goods  industries,  and  the  service  sector  is  continuing  to  show  strength.  While  single-family

homebuilding  continues  to  slow  across  most  districts,  commercial  real  estate  markets  and

nonresidential  construction  have  picked  up  in  many  districts.  Loan  demand  is  up  in  most

districts,  led  by  consumer  loans  and  commercial  and  industrial  lending.  Farmers  have

harvested  large  crops  in most parts  of  the  nation but  face  generally  low  prices,  as  do  cattle

and  hog  producers.  Energy  activity  in  regions  producing  oil  and natural  gas  has picked  up

somewhat.  Prices  of raw  and intermediate  materials  continue  to  advance,  with  reports  of

some  increases  being  passed  through to  final product  prices.  Labor  markets  in  most districts

have  tightened  further  and  more  districts  are  reporting  increasing  wages  in  selected

occupations.

Retail

Retail  sales  have  strengthened  in  most  districts.  While  sales  reports  for  October  and

early  November  were  mixed  due  to unseasonably  warm  weather  in  some  regions,

Thanksgiving  weekend  sales  were  robust  and  year-over-year  sales  during  the  holiday  season

¹Prepared  at  the Federal  Reserve  Bank  of Kansas  City  based  on  information  collected
before  November  29,  1994.  This  document  summarizes  comments  received  from  businesses
and  other  contacts  outside  the  Federal  Reserve  and  is  not  a commentary  on the  views  of
Federal  Reserve  officials.

ii

generally  are  expected  to  be  strong.  Retailers  in  the Boston  district  are  the  least  optimistic,

expecting  moderate  holiday  sales  growth.  Retailers  in the  Chicago,  St.  Louis,  and  Kansas

City  districts  report  strong  activity  recently  and  high  expectations  for  holiday  sales.

A  wide  range  of  merchandise  apparently  has been  selling  well,  with  some  regional

variation.  Retailers  in  the  New  York,  Philadelphia,  Richmond,  Atlanta,  Chicago,  and

Kansas  City districts  report  either recently  improving  sales  of apparel  or expectations  of

improving  sales  during  the  holidays.  In some  of these  districts  the  improvement  is  a  rebound

from  soft  sales  of  seasonal  apparel  during  warm-weather  spells  in  October.  Furniture  in the

Atlanta,  Cleveland,  and  Kansas  City  districts  has  been  selling  well.  Seasonal  items  such  as

snowblowers  and car  batteries  have  been  selling  well  in the  Chicago  district.  Retailers  in  the

Philadelphia  and Richmond  districts  expect  strong  sales  of consumer  electronic  goods  during

the  holidays.  Auto  sales  have  held  up  well  in  most  regions,  except  where  dealers  continue  to

have  difficulties  obtaining  popular  models.

Manufacturing

Manufacturing  activity  continues  to  increase  in  almost  all  regions.  Many  districts

report  growing  shipments  and  high  levels  of capacity  use.  One  exception  is  the  Richmond

district,  where  indicators  of factory  activity  remained  unchanged  in  October  from  September.

Nonetheless,  manufacturers  there  expect  shipments  and  employment  levels  to increase  in  the

months  ahead.

Durable  goods  industries  over  the past  month have  been  the  strongest  performers.

The  strongest  industries  in the  Boston  district were  consumer  durables  and  new  types  of

computer  equipment.  The  electronic  components  industry  has  been  strong  in  the  Dallas  and

iii

San  Francisco  districts.  Factory  activity  in  the Philadelphia  and  Cleveland  districts  has  been

boosted  by  increased  production  of durable  goods  such  as  steel,  other  metal products,  and

machinery.  The  Cleveland,  Atlanta,  Chicago,  St.  Louis,  and  Minneapolis  districts  report

strength  in  the  production  of  automobiles  and  related  products.  While  the  Atlanta  and  Dallas

districts  note  some  slowing  of  orders  for  building  materials,  this  industry  remains  robust  in

the  San  Francisco,  Boston,  Chicago,  St.  Louis,  and  Minneapolis  districts.

Examples  of weak  industries  are  much  less  common.  The  aerospace  industry

continues  to  damp  manufacturing  gains  in  the Boston  and  San  Francisco  districts.  And,  the

apparel  industry  remains  weak  in  the  Boston,  Philadelphia,  and  Atlanta  districts.

Services

Service  activity  continues  to  expand  in  all  districts  that  report  on  this  sector.

Business  services  such  as  accounting,  legal,  computer,  and  temporary-help  firms  have  seen

their business  grow  in  the  Chicago,  Dallas,  and  San  Francisco  districts.  Temporary-help

firms  in  the  Chicago  district  report  labor  shortages  across  a  wide  range  of  service  businesses.

Tourism  is  generally  operating  at  high  levels  of  capacity  and  expanding  in  the  Atlanta  and

San  Francisco  districts.  Even  the  sluggish  Florida  tourism  market  appears  to  be  improving.

The  San  Francisco  district,  however,  reports  that  the  health  care  industry  has  been  restrained

by  uncertainty  about  industry  restructuring.

Construction  and  Real  Estate

Single-family  homebuilding  continues  to  cool  across  most  districts.  The  Richmond,

Atlanta,  Kansas  City,  and  San  Francisco  districts  report  decreases  in  homebuilding  or  sales

activity.  Homebuilding  is  mixed  across  parts  of the  St.  Louis  district  and  appears  to  be

iv

leveling  off in  the  New  York  and  Minneapolis  districts.  Homebuilding  in  the  Dallas  district

remains  strong,  although  builders  expressed  concern  about  higher  interest  rates.  Multifamily

housing  markets  have  tightened  in  the  Atlanta  and  St.  Louis  districts.

Commercial  real  estate  markets  have  picked  up  in many  districts.  The  Boston,  New

York,  Atlanta,  St.  Louis,  Minneapolis,  and  Dallas  districts  all  report  robust  commercial  real

estate  activity  with  a  surge  in  sales  and  construction  in  most markets.  In  the  Richmond

district,  activity  was  steady  but commercial  vacancy  rates  declined.  In  the New  York,

Atlanta,  and  Dallas  districts,  commercial  real  estate  activity  has  been  boosted  by  tightening

markets  for  office  space.  Retail  and  industrial  leasing  was  cited  as  an  additional  factor

contributing  to  the  strength  in the  Atlanta  and  Dallas  districts.

Banking  and  Finance

Loan demand  is  up  across  most  districts.  Commercial  and  industrial  loan  demand  has

been  rising  in  most  districts,  although  the New  York and  Richmond  districts  are  notable

exceptions.  Consumer  lending  continues  to grow  in  many  regions,  led  by  new  automobile

loans.  However,  the  Atlanta  district  reports  steady  overall  consumer  lending  with a  decline

in  auto  loans,  and  the  Richmond  district  reports  a  sharp  drop  in  consumer  lending.

Residential  mortgage  lending  and  refinancing  activity  remained  flat or  declined  in many

districts.  Lenders  in  several  districts  report  intensifying  competition,  which  has  reduced

interest  rate  margins.  The Boston  district  notes  an outflow  from  bond  funds,  although

employment  levels  at  asset  management  firms in the  region  remain  stable.

Agriculture  and  Resource-related  Industries

The  fall  harvest  of most  crops  is  complete  except  in parts  of the  Richmond  and  Dallas

v

districts  where  wet  weather  slowed  the  harvest.  Grain  crops  are  reported  to be  large  across

most  regions  and  are  pushing  prices  to  low  levels.  The Minneapolis  and  Kansas  City

districts  report  less  favorable  conditions  for  livestock  producers  due  to  low  prices  for cattle

and  hogs.  The  San  Francisco  district  reports  some  improvement  in  agricultural  conditions

due  to relatively  strong  prices  for wheat  and  cotton  and an  uptick  in prices  of fresh  fruit.

The Dallas,  Kansas  City,  and  Minneapolis  districts  report  stronger  energy  activity,

despite  weak  oil and  natural  gas  prices.  In  the Minneapolis  district,  mining  and forestry

industries  continue  to boost  output  in  response  to  strong  demand.

Prices  and  Wages

Most  districts  continue  to  report  rising  prices  of raw  and  intermediate  materials,

especially  paper products,  plastics,  chemicals,  steel,  and  building  materials.  Evidence  of

increasing  prices  of finished  goods  remains  much  less  widespread.  The  Boston,

Philadelphia,  and  Richmond  districts  report  rising  prices  of finished  goods. 

In  the  San

Francisco  district,  one large  grocery  chain  reports  pressures  on  prices  from  higher  food-

packaging  costs.  In  the  Cleveland  district,  furniture  and  petrochemical  manufacturers  have

been  pressing  for price  increases,  but competition  at the  retail  level  continues  to  keep  those

prices  in check.  A  recent  survey  of business  people  in the  Minneapolis  district  shows

heightened  expectations  that rising  business  costs  will be passed  along  to  consumers. 

In the

Dallas  district,  retail  prices  continue  to  fall.

Most  districts  report  further tightening  of  labor  markets,  but the  tightening  remains

confined  to  certain  sectors. 

In  the  Cleveland  district,  labor  shortages  are  limited  to  specific

technical  occupations.  Markets  for construction  workers  have  been  tighter  in the  Chicago,

vi

St.  Louis,  and Kansas  City  districts.  In  the  Atlanta,  Minneapolis  and  St.  Louis  districts,

retail  and  food  service  firms  report  difficulty  in  hiring  temporary  workers  for the  holiday

season  due to tight  labor markets. 

In  the  Dallas  district,  labor  market  tightness  has  surfaced

in  technical  and  professional  fields.

Labor  market  tightness  has  led  to  rising  wages  in  more  districts  than  reported  in  the

last Beigebook.  Districts  reporting  evidence  of rising  wages  include  Boston,  Richmond,

Atlanta,  Chicago,  St.  Louis,  Minneapolis,  Kansas  City,  and  Dallas.  Wage  increases  have

generally  been  confined  to  skilled  construction  and  industrial occupations  and entry-level

service  and  retail  occupations. 

In  the Kansas  City  district,  only  a  few  contacts  report

increased  wages,  and  those  increases  were  limited  to  skilled  construction  workers  such  as

carpenters.  The Dallas  district  reports  only  scattered  evidence  of wage  increases,  mostly  in

temporary-help  services,  trucking,  accounting,  and  communications.  In  the  Richmond

district,  wages  increased  at  service-producing  firms.

related products,  and single-digit  increases  for printed matter and

paper goods.  Contacts  report  a recent  pickup  in machine tool orders,

after  several years  of weakness.  Sales  of  medical  instruments also

appear to  be  firming up.  Demand  for apparel-related textiles  has  been

erratic,  while  aerospace markets remain soft.

Contacts  note  sharp cost  increases  for paper products,

polyethylene, alcohol-based products, and wool;  costs  have also risen

noticeably for  a variety of  metals, other chemicals,  and lumber.  About

one-half  of  the manufacturing respondents have  raised or intend  to  raise

their  prices  by between 2 and  6 percent,  but makers  of machinery  and

equipment are maintaining or  reducing  selling prices.

Employment  trends over the past year  have been mixed, but

downsizing efforts appear to be nearing  completion, and about  one-half

of  the respondents anticipate making net  new hires in  the months  ahead.

Several contacts  in New Hampshire  and Vermont mention that  it  is

becoming more difficult to hire  and retain workers.  Wage  and  salary

increases  mostly hover  around 3 to  4 percent, but  are lower  for  some

companies  facing weak demand  and higher  for  some highly productive

workers.

Most  contacts  are  at  least guardedly optimistic  about  their

company's business prospects  in the next  six to  12  months,  citing

factors  such  as momentum  in the U.S.  economy, prospects  for  improved

exports to  Europe, and  successful  strategies by their  firm.  A couple

indicate that higher  interest rates  are reducing their  company's

earnings,  and some  express  longer-term worries  about  cost  pressures or  a

downturn  in consumer  spending.

Commercial  Real Estate  and Construction

The commercial  real  estate market  continues  to recover  in most

parts of  the region, but the pace  is  uneven  across  property types.

Contacts  in southern New England note that  retail  real  estate  is

particularly "hot,"  with growth  coming from large  national chains, while

the  industrial and  apartment markets  also are strong.  On the down  side,

vacancy rates  for office buildings  in  downtown Providence and Hartford

exceed 20  percent  and contacts  expect  little  change  in the near  future.

Office markets  in the  Boston and Portland areas  have recovered more

quickly, with effective downtown vacancy  rates  below 10  percent  in

Boston.  New office  construction is  expected in  the Boston and

Providence  suburbs.  Office  rents  in the  region are mostly  flat,  but

increasing  slightly in the growing markets.  Respondents note that

rising  interest rates  are having little  effect on new deals, with one

contact  seeing a surplus  of  capital  looking to invest  in real  estate.

Nonbank Financial  Services

Sixty percent of  contacted investment management companies report

small  increases  in  assets under management  since  this summer.  The

remainder have  experienced reductions  and  cite net  outflows  from bond

funds  and declines  in the market value of  their  portfolios.  Despite the

market  downturn, all  respondents report either  stable  employment  levels

or continued hiring  in the third quarter  and for  the remainder of  the

year.  However, several  contacts  have  scaled back their  hiring plans

from the beginning of  the year.

SECOND  DISTRICT--NEW  YORK

Reports  on  District  developments  were  mixed  in  recent  weeks  but  on  balance

pointed  to  slower  growth.  A  number  of retailers  reported  lower-than-expected  sales  in

October,  though  several  reported  a  strong  post-Thanksgiving  weekend.  Homebuilders

noted  a  seasonal  slowdown  in  activity  and  expressed  concern  about  future  weakness.  The

unemployment  rate  was  up  slightly  in  October  in  New  York,  with  New  Jersey  unchanged.

On  the  bright  side,  surveys  of area  businesses  show  considerable  optimism  about

conditions,  and  office  leasing  activity  improved.  Senior  loan  officers  surveyed  at  small

and  midsized  banks  reported  stable  or lower  loan  demand.

Consumer  Spending

Year-over-year  sales  results  varied  at  District  retail  stores  during  October,  with  a

majority  of contacts  reporting  that  sales  were  below  plan  but  one  reporting  exceptional

strength.  Part  of the  weakness  was  attributed  to  unseasonably  warm  weather  which

affected  purchases  of outerwear.  In  general,  retailers  are  optimistic  about  holiday  sales,

especially  of computers,  electronics,  and  goods  for  the  home.  News  reports  suggest  that

sales  during  the  post-Thanksgiving  weekend  were  quite  strong.

In addition  to  the  items  mentioned  above,  those  said  to  be  selling  well  include

men's  clothing  and  accessories,  and jewelry.  In  general,  respondents  were  comfortable

with  inventory  levels.

Residential  Construction  and  Real  Estate

District homebuilders  reported  little change  in  the  market  for  new  and  existing

homes.  Housing  starts  are  about  the  same  as  or lower  than  a  year  ago.  Most  contacts

believe  that  rising  interest  rates  have  not  yet  had  a significant  impact  on  activity,  though

several  expressed  concern  that they  will  hurt  the  market  next  spring.

Office  leasing  has  shown  some  improvement.  The primary  office  vacancy  rate  in

midtown  Manhattan  fell  by  one percentage  point  from  September  to  October.  Overall

II-2

leasing  activity  in  midtown  is  up  18  percent  over  a  year  ago.  The  downtown  vacancy  rate

was  unchanged  in  October.

Other  Business  Activity

District  unemployment  rates  were  mixed  in  October.  New  York's  rose  0.3  to  6.5

percent,  while  New  Jersey's  was  unchanged  at  6.7  percent.  New  Jersey  payroll

employment  rose  by  a  seasonally-adjusted  8000  in  October,  and  is  up  1.6  percent  so  far

this  year.  New  York  State  employment  was  up  1000  in  October.  District  employers

continue  to  announce  downsizings.  Hoffman-LaRoche  has  begun  to  lay  off hundreds  of

workers  in  Northern  New  Jersey.  Allied  Signal  will  eliminate  about  1000  jobs  at  an

engine  plant  in  Stratford,  Connecticut.  Kodak  has  announced  a reduction  of an  additional

800  workers  (on  top  of previously  announced  cutbacks)  in  Rochester  by  early  1995.

Cutbacks  and  reduced  bonuses  on  Wall  Street  are reportedly  having  a negative  impact  on

nearby  businesses.  On  a  more  positive  note,  Buffalo-American  Axle  will  be  adding  400

jobs  in  the  Buffalo  area  during  the  next  3 years.

The  National  Association  of Purchasing  Managers  - Buffalo,  Inc.  reported  that  the

business  climate  in  Western  New  York  was  the  best  in  the  last  four  months,  with

increases  in  new  orders  and  inventories.  78  percent  of respondents  reported  paying  higher

prices  for  materials--the  highest  figure  since  February  1979.

Surveys  of small  and  medium-sized  businesses  in  the  region  find  considerable

optimism about  conditions.  According  to  the  New  Jersey  Business  and  Industry

Association, 

the  outlook  for  sales,  profits,  and employment  is  the  best  in  the  last  six

years.  A  survey  by Chemical  Bank covering  the  New  York  metropolitan  area  found  that

most  businesses  expect  conditions  to  improve  or remain  the  same  during  the  next year.

Financial  Developments

Aggregate  loan  demand  is  either  steady  or lower  at  more  than  nine-tenths  of the

small  and  midsized  banks  surveyed  in  the  District.  The  largest  declines  in  activity

occurred  in  the  residential  mortgage  and  refinancing  segments.  About  three-fourths  of the

II-3

banks  experienced  less residential  mortgage  demand,  and less  or no  refinancing  activity.

The  consumer  and  commercial  and  industrial  loan  segments  are  generally  weak  as  well,

with  only  about  one-fifth  of the  banks  reporting  higher  demand.

Loan  rates  are  higher  or  the  same  across  all  categories  of lending.  Recent

increases  in  deposit  rates  have  kept  the  spread  between  the  average  lending  and  deposit

rates  unchanged  at  more  than  half of the  banks,  while  almost  one-third  reported  smaller

spreads.  More  than  half of the  senior  loan  officers  surveyed  maintained  their  willingness

to  lend;  over one-quarter  reported  increased  willingness.  Very  few  banks  changed  their

credit  standards,  and  almost  all  have  stable  or lower  delinquency  rates.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT  - PHILADELPHIA

Business  contacts  in the  Third District continued  to  report  increases  in

activity  in  November.  Manufacturers  were  posting  gains  in  new  orders  and

shipments, and they were extending hours and adding workers.  Retailers said that

store traffic had picked up and that sales  of apparel, consumer electronics, and

toys  were  on  the  rise.  Auto  dealers  continued  to  describe  the  sales  rate  as

good. 

Bankers  generally  indicated  that  business  and  personal  lending  were

growing, but most  said that residential mortgage  lending was  flat or  declining.

Looking ahead, the  consensus  in the  Third District business  community  is

that  improvement  will  continue  through  the  winter. 

Manufacturers  forecast

further  increases  in  activity during  the  next  six  months,  although  on balance

their  employment  plans  call  for  payrolls  to  remain  steady  during  the  period.

Retailers  expect the holiday shopping period to produce year-over-year gains  of

5  to  6  percent,  in  dollar  terms.  Bankers  anticipate  a  modest  upward trend  in

overall lending, led by growing demand for business and consumer credit, but they

do not  expect  a  rebound in  residential mortgage  activity.

MANUFACTURING

Third  District  manufacturers  continued  to  report  increasing business  in

November.  About one-third of those contacted said shipments and new orders were

rising at  their plants  and about one-half said  they were  steady.  Producers  of

durable goods, especially metal products  and machinery, said their business was

increasing,  but  producers  of  nondurable  goods,  especially  apparel  and  other

textile  products,  said they were  seeing declining  demand.

Manufacturers  in  the  District  said production was  keeping up  with rising

III-2

orders,  leading to  a slight drop  in order backlogs.  While employment was steady

at about three-fourths of the firms polled, nearly one-fourth were adding workers

and extending hours.

Nearly half of the manufacturers contacted for this  report expect business

to continue  on an upward trend over the next six months;  about one-third foresee

steady conditions.  On balance, manufacturers  are planning to maintain payrolls

at  current  levels  and  to  keep  working hours  steady.  Capital  spending  plans,

however, call  for  increased outlays  over  the  next six months.

Industrial  prices  continued  to  show  some  upward movement,  according  to

District manufacturers.  Just over half of those queried said they paid more for

supplies  and materials  in November than they did in October, and one-fourth said

they had raised prices  for  the products  they  make.

RETAIL

Third District retailers  interviewed  in late  November said  store  traffic

had  picked  up  prior  to  Thanksgiving  and  was  heavy  during  the  Thanksgiving

weekend.  Overall,  merchants  said  sales  for  the  weekend  were  good,  and  they

generally expected to meet their sales targets for the Christmas shopping period.

Most  forecasted  year-over-year  gains  of  5  to  6 percent,  in  current  dollars.

Retailers' expectations that apparel, consumer electronics, and toys would be the

biggest  selling  items  for  the  holidays  were  borne  out  by  the  early  sales

activity.

Auto dealers  in  the District continued to  report  a healthy rate  of sales.

There  were  scattered  reports  of  supply  shortages  for  popular  models,  but

availability appeared to  be better  than it  was earlier this  fall.  Some dealers

believe sales will slip as  a result of rising auto  loan rates, but none of those

contacted for  this  report had seen a drop yet.

FINANCE

III-3

Third District bankers  contacted in late November  reported some  growth in

business  lending,  although most  described  it  as  slight.  Bankers  continued  to

note  that  competition  among  lenders  was  keen  and  interest  rate  margins  were

tight.  Consumer  lending was  generally characterized as healthy, with growth  in

auto  loans  and home equity loans.  Most of  the bankers contacted for this  report

said residential  mortgage  lending was  flat  or  falling,  but  some  said  they were

adding mortgages  to  their loan portfolios,  resulting in an increase  in mortgage

loan volume  outstanding.

Some  bankers  said  they  had  stepped  up  promotional  efforts  to  keep

outstanding  balances  of  certificates  of  deposits  from  dropping.  Others  were

allowing deposit totals  to decline.  Several indicated that higher interest rates

on competing nonbank investments were prompting consideration of more aggressive

pricing on a variety  of deposit  accounts.

Most  of the  bankers  interviewed for  this  report were  of the  opinion  that

economic activity was  on a  firm upward trend that could carry into  and possibly

through  1995. 

They  expect  overall  loan  demand  to  continue  moving  upward

modestly,  led by  a  small  increase  in  business  lending  and relatively  stronger

gains  in consumer  lending.  They do not  foresee renewed strength in residential

mortgage  activity.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

General Business Conditions

The District  economy  continues to expand  vigorously,  with virtually  all  sectors  and

regions  reporting  favorable  trends.  Price pressures  continue  to be  felt in raw industrial

materials,  but  these  increases  are  not being reflected  at the  retail level.  Moreover, wage

pressures  seem surprisingly  light given  growing  indications of capacity  constraints,

particularly in  the  industrial  sector.  The rise in  interest  rates  has  had  little measurable

influence  on either lending  activity  or  consumer  demand.

Manufacturing

Industrial  activity  in  the District  is operating  at  a very high  level,  with steel  and  capital

goods producers,  including  auto and auto-related  output,  at virtual  capacity.  Orders

backlogs for  many capital  goods producers  in the District  extend well  into  1995,  and a

major  heavy  truck producer reports  that  its  1995  orders book  is  nearly  full.

Price  increases  continue  to be isolated  primarily  in the  materials  industries,  such  as

metals,  plastics,  chemicals,  and  paper-related  products.  Resistance to  price increases

remains  strong at the finished-goods  level,  however,  and industry  sources  are troubled

over  narrowing  margins.  Some labor  shortages  were  noted  in  specific  technical

occupations  and in  some regions,  although  there are  still  few  reports  of any  general

upward  wage  pressures.  While  many  firms cited  improved  hiring plans,  most  continue to

resist adding  permanent  staff.

Retailers

Although  retail sales in the District  have  not  been quite as  strong as in other regions  of the

country,  consumer  demand  began  picking up  in November  and  appears  to have been

stronger  than  expected  during the bellwether  Thanksgiving  weekend.  Overall  last month,

retail  spending  improved by  mid-single  digits from  this time  last year,  with high single-

IV-2

digit  increases  posted  during  the final week of the month.  Furniture  and other  home

goods continued  to lead  the market in November,  and  electronics  sales  were also

comparatively  strong.  Retailers  say that  consumer  credit is  expanding,  a trend confirmed

by  District bankers.

Mall  traffic was reported  to be exceptional  over the Thanksgiving  weekend.  Sales

were  especially  strong for discounters  and  department  stores.  Although  specialty  stores,

such  as apparel  outlets, continue  to lag the market,  their holiday weekend  sales were

significantly  improved.  Price  discounting  was  thought to be a  contributing  factor.

Retail inventories  are  reported  to be conservative,  but  satisfactory.  Shortages

were  reported  in  some  areas, but  retailers  expressed  little worry about  insufficient  stocks.

Suppliers of furniture  and  petrochemical-based  products  are  reported to be  pressing for

price  increases,  but  retailers  indicate  that  competitive pressures  are  still  restraining  force.

Prices are  apparently  falling for many  apparel  goods and  are rising  only marginally  in most

other areas.  As  in  the past  several District  reports,  profit  margins  in  the retail area are

thin.

Temporary  workers  are increasingly  hard to find this  holiday  season,  and  retailers

are  aggressively  competing  for qualified  part-time workers.  Several  respondents noted  a

large number of help-wanted  advertisements,  and  employment  of high school  students is

reportedly  on the rise.

Autos

One observer  of regional  auto  markets  described  sales in  the District  as  "humming  along,"

although  that pace  may  have  eased a  little recently.  Nevertheless,  shortages  continue  for

certain models,  particularly  minivans  and  pickup  trucks,  and  many  dealers  indicate  sales

would be  stronger  if stocks  were available.  According  to domestic  nameplate  dealers,

price  increases  on the  1995  models  range from 2  1/2%  to about  6%,  with  little apparent

detriment to  sales  activity.

IV-3

Growing parts  shortages  are being  complicated  by increasing  supplier  requests for

higher  prices.  Many parts  suppliers  have  reportedly  reached  capacity  and  are unable  to

meet  demand  without  incurring  additional  marginal  expenses,  such as overtime.  Prices  of

raw  materials,  such  as metals  and  polymers,  are  also  rising,  and profit  margins  in the

supply  network  are  compressed.

Automakers  are  employing  a variety of efforts  to increase  production  at existing

factories,  including three-shift  work  schedules,  capital equipment  additions,  and

production  shifts  between existing  assembly  lines.  Industry  sources  agree  that these

efforts  are adding  only  incrementally  to total  output, however.

Dealers  remain optimistic about  1995 model-year  sales and  model  shortages  are

expected  to ease before  spring.  Dealer  reaction  to recent  interest-rate increases  is  focused

on their  influence  on floor-plan costs,  although  continued  rate hikes  could  reportedly

hamper consumer  demand.

Banking and Credit

Despite  higher  interest  rates,  banks  around  the District  report  continuing  strength

in  loan  demand,  although  lending  activity  was clearly  mixed  by institution.  Consumer

borrowing  is active,  with new auto credit  particularly  high and  revolving  credit balances

on the rise.  Mortgage  credit  has fallen  off recently  due to the usual seasonal  slowdown in

home buying  and a further  reduction  in mortgage  refinancing.  Commercial  and industrial

loan  demand  actually  strengthened  a  bit in  October,  according  to  several  District sources.

One bank  noted  that business  borrowing  was  centered  at  medium-sized  firms;  another

source  speculated  that floor-plan  and  other inventory  financing  arrangements  were  up

sharply.

All  of the District  sources  were concerned  about  a potential  deterioration  in loan

quality  as competition  for loans continues to intensify.  A few  sources have begun to move

away  from  some  credit  areas due  to quality considerations  and  narrowing  margins.

FIFTH  DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview:  Economic  activity  in  the  Fifth  District  grew  moderately  in  late  October

and  November.  Areas  experiencing  growth  included  the  service-producing  sector,

commercial  real  estate,  ports,  and  state  revenues.  Consumer  spending  was  up  slightly,

but  very strong  holiday  sales  were  expected.  Manufacturing,  tourist,  and  agricultural

activity  were  flat,  and  housing  activity  and  loan  demand  declined.

Consumer  Spending:  Retailers,  retail  associations,  and  retail  analysts  contacted

by  telephone  reported  increased  activity  in  November,  and  they  expected  sales  during  the

upcoming  holiday  season  to  exceed  last year's  robust  level.  Contacts  indicated  that

November  retail  sales  increased  because  of weekend  promotions.  There  was

disagreement,  however,  over  whether  consumers  began  holiday  shopping  earlier  than

normal.  Looking  ahead,  retailers  expected  December  sales  of  computers  and  other

electronics  to  be  strong.  They  also  expected  good  winter  apparel  sales  in  December,

even  though  such  sales  were  weak  in  November.

Service-Producing  Firms:  Respondents  to  a  mail  survey  indicated  that  activity  in

the  service-producing  sector  increased  in  October.  Revenues  rose,  except  in  business

services,  where  they  decreased.  Wages  also  rose,  and  employment  changed  little  except

in  the  wholesale  sector,  where  it  increased.  Service  producers  indicated  that  prices  rose

0.4  percent  in  October.  They  expected  increased  demand  for  their  services  and  an

increase  of  1.1  percent  in  their  prices  during  the  next  six  months.

Manufacturing:  Indicators  of factory  activity  changed  little  in October  from  their

September  levels,  according  to  a  mail  survey  of District  manufacturers.  Capital

V-2

expenditures  were  up  compared  to  six  months  ago,  and  respondents  expected  a  further

increase  during  the  next  six  months.  Manufacturers  expected  shipments  and  employment

to  increase  during  the  next  six  months,  but they  anticipated  little  change  in  the

workweek.  Finished  goods  and  raw  materials  prices  increased  faster  in  October  than  in

September  but  at  rates  less  than  the  general  inflation  rate.

Tourism:  A  telephone  survey  of hotels,  motels,  and  resorts  throughout  the

District indicated  that  tourist  activity  experienced  its  usual  November  slowdown.

Contacts  from  mountain  areas  expected  tourist  activity  this  winter  to  exceed  last  year's

level  as  long  as  the  areas  received  normal  amounts  of snow.  Rates  for  some  rooms,

meals,  and  activities  were  expected  to  increase  more  this  winter  than  last winter.

Ports:  Representatives  at  the  District  ports  of Baltimore  and  Charleston

indicated  that  export  levels  in  October  were  higher than  those  of September  and  a  year

ago;  import  levels  remained  about  the  same.  The  port  representatives  expected  that

during  the  next  six  months  both  exports  and  imports  would  increase  and  exports  would

grow  faster  than  imports.

Finance:  District  financial  institutions  contacted  by  telephone  reported  that  loan

demand  slowed  during  late  October  and  the  first  three  weeks  of November.  Consumer

loan  demand  fell  sharply,  while  commercial  and  mortgage  loan  demand  declined  slightly.

Interest  rates  were  higher  on  consumer,  commercial,  and  mortgage  loans.  Looking

ahead,  most  lenders  contacted  were  cautious  about  future  loan  demand.  Some  consumer

and  commercial  lenders  in North  Carolina,  however,  were  confident  that loan  demand  in

their  areas  would  remain  strong.

Residential  Real  Estate:  According  to  a  telephone  survey  of District realtors  and

V-3

builders,  residential  real  estate  activity  declined  during  the  four  weeks  preceding

Thanksgiving.  Building  permits  and  buyer  traffic  decreased.  Home  sales  also  decreased,

except  in  West  Virginia, where  contacts  reported  an increase  in  sales  of lower-priced

homes  following  the  introduction  of  a  state  program  providing  low-interest  mortgages.

Builders  indicated  that  they  started  fewer  houses  after  the  recent  rise  in  mortgage  rates.

Home  prices  remained  stable,  although  subcontractor  wages  increased  in  West  Virginia,

South  Carolina,  and  North  Carolina.

Commercial  Real  Estate:  District  contacts  reported  that  commercial  real  estate

activity  in  November  grew  at  the  same  pace  as  in  October.  Real  estate  contacts  reported

little  change  in  construction,  except  in  North  Carolina,  where  speculative  construction

increased.  Commercial  vacancy  rates,  however,  declined  throughout  the  District.  Posted

commercial  rental  rates  remained  steady,  except  in  the  District  of  Columbia, where  they

rose.  Real  estate  contacts  reported  that  fewer  landlord  concessions  were  available  to

tenants,  and  they  anticipated  rental  rate  increases  soon.  Leasing  agents  reported  that  the

availability  of prime  office  space  tightened  in  the  District  of Columbia,  South  Carolina,

and  North  Carolina.  Those  in  Charlotte,  N.C.,  and  Columbia, S.C.,  said  the  shortages  in

their  areas  existed  even  for  less-than-prime  office  space.

State Revenues:  State  government  forecasters  said  that  tax  collections  grew

moderately  in October.  Real  revenue  growth  declined  in  South  Carolina  but  picked  up

significantly  in  Maryland  and  slightly  in  the  District  of Columbia.  Growth  remained

strong  in  North  Carolina,  Virginia,  and  West  Virginia.

Agriculture:  Agricultural  activity  progressed  at  the  same  rate  as  a  year  ago,

according  to  District farm  analysts.  Fall  harvesting  activity  for  most  crops  neared

V-4

completion,  but  rain  delayed  cotton  harvesting  in  some  areas  of the  District.  Crop  yields

were  strong.  Fall  small-grains  planting  activity  was  comparable  to  that  of a  year  ago,  and

the  crops'  condition  was good  in  all  District  states  except  South  Carolina,  where  crop

growth  was  off to  a  slow start.

VI-1

SIXTH  DISTRICT  - ATLANTA

Overview:  According  to  business  contacts,  the  Southeast  economy  grew  at  a healthy  pace

through  the end  of November,  although  recent  year-over-year  gains  have been  smaller  than  they  were

earlier  in the year.  The holiday  shopping  season got  off to  a good  start over the Thanksgiving  weekend,

with  most  retailers reporting  that  sales had  met or  exceeded  their optimistic  expectations.  Tourism  and

business  travel remain  above year-ago  levels  in most of the District, and  recent reports  indicate that many

Florida tourist markets  have begun to  see a rebound.  Factory  activity  in the District was  reported  to be

mixed,  with  strength  in  some  industries  offsetting  weakness  in  others.  Single-family  home  sales  and

construction slowed  on a year-over-year  basis in November,  but multifamily  and commercial  construction

continued  to  show  improvement.  Reports  of increasing  wage  pressures  have  become  more frequent  in

the  last  month,  and  firms  in  a  growing  number  of industries  say  that they  are  having  difficulty  finding

qualified workers.  Although many  contacts continue to report rising raw materials prices,  most producers

continue  to  indicate  that they  have not  raised  prices  of their own  products.

Consumer  Spending:  A  majority  of the  District  retailers  contacted  after  the  Thanksgiving

holiday  weekend  said that  sales generally  had  met  or exceeded  their expectations.  The  strongest  selling

items were reported  to be gift items and  home-related  products,  although apparel sales also  were relatively

brisk.  Retailers  generally  said  they  expect holiday  sales to exceed  last year's levels  by between  5  and  7

percent.  However,  several retailers  predicted that December  sales will be dominated by promotions  and

discounts  similar  to  those  offered  during  the  last  several  years.  Although  most  retailers  said  that

unexpectedly  pleasant  weather  put  a damper  on sales  in  early November,  the return of cooler  weather in

the second  half of the month brought  shoppers back into the  stores.  Auto sales  around  the District were

said  to  be  flat with  some dealers  noting  year-over-year  declines.

Manufacturing:  Reports  from  manufacturers  were  somewhat  mixed  in  November,  with

weakness  in a few  industries  offset  by  strength in  the majority  of others.  At the  same time,  most firms

indicated  that  they  were  optimistic  about  their  prospects  for  the next  six  months.  Firms  in  the paper,

VI-2

wood,  chemicals,  and  aluminum  industries  all  continued  to  report  increasing  levels  of  current  activity.

Auto  makers  and  auto  parts  suppliers  again  commented  on strong demand  for  their products.  Although

many District manufacturers  of lumber and  other building  materials  said  that they  were operating  at near

capacity,  several  firms  indicated  that  current  shipments  have  begun  to  slow.  Firms  producing  home

appliances,  heating  and  cooling  equipment,  and  carpeting  also  noted  a slowdown  in  current  shipments,

although  several  carpet  producers  reported  that exports  had begun to  pick  up.  Reports  from the  apparel

industry,  however,  were  much less  positive,  with  most firms  reporting declines  in  output  as well  as  the

factory  workweek  and  payrolls.

Tourism and Business Travel:  Tourist and business  travel  remain  a bright spot in the District

economy.  Hotel  occupancy  rates  were  reported  to  be  well  above  year-ago  levels  in  Atlanta,  Nashville,

and  New  Orleans,  while  tourism  along  the  Gulf coast  continues  to  flourish.  Although  tourist  travel  to

many  Florida  destinations  remains  below  year-ago  levels,  winter  bookings  were  reported  to  be  up,

particularly  from  Latin  American  and  Canadian visitors.  Several  major resort  areas  in Florida  recently

have  announced  expansion  plans  aimed  at reversing  the  attendance  slump  of the last year.

Construction:  Single-family  home  sales  and  construction  slowed  throughout  the  District  in

November; however,  real estate agents  emphasized  that the level of activity  in most market  areas  remains

near  the  strong  year-ago  performance.  Builders  reported  that  new  home  inventories  have  begun  to

increase  slightly,  and  home prices  generally  have  stabilized.  Some  realtors  have  begun  to report  price

concessions  on the part of sellers.  Looking  forward,  realtors  and  builders  generally  expect  the pace  of

home  sales and  construction  to  decline  in  1995,  although  overall  activity  is  expected  to remain  relatively

high.

In  multifamily  and  commercial  real  estate  markets  by  contrast,  real  estate  agents  continue to

report  improving  conditions.  Apartment  occupancy  levels  were  described  as  extremely  high  in  many

District market  areas.  Apartment rental rates have continued to rise,  and in recent weeks plans for several

new  multifamily developments  were  announced.  Commercial  realtors also  reported  falling vacancy  rates

VI-3

and  improved  leasing of industrial,  office,  and  retail  space.  Commercial  construction  has  accelerated  in

many  areas  of the District.  However,  shortages  of qualified  labor  continue  to  push  building  costs up.

Financial  Services:  Reports  on  loan  demand  from  bankers  in  the  District  were  mixed  in

November.  While  some  contacts  noted  that  the  demand  for  home  mortgage  lending  had  declined

substantially,  others  reported  increased  commercial  and  industrial  lending.  Consumer  loan  demand  was

generally  described  as  flat,  while  auto  lending  declined  modestly. 

Several  banks  noted  that  the

competition  for loans  remains fierce.  Both commercial  and consumer  loan default  rates remain  near lows

for the past  decade.

Wages  and  Prices:  Wage  pressures  were  again described  as  on the rise amid  tightening  labor

markets. 

In  addition  to  the  construction  sector,  food  service  and  retail  establishments  have  begun  to

report difficulty in filling available positions.  This has been particularly true of retailers who have sought

to hire temporary  employees  for the holiday  shopping  season.  As a result,  an increasing  number  of firms

report that they have had  to offer wage  increases  in order both to attract new workers,  as well  as to retain

current  employees.  According  to  manufacturers,  raw  materials  prices  also  continue  to rise.  However,

many firms  reported  that they have not  been able  to increase  their prices because  of intense  competition.

Although  most  retailers  concurred  that  competitive  pressures  have  kept a  lid  on  price  increases  to  this

point,  many  indicated  that they  expect  their  suppliers  to  increase  prices  on many  items  after  the first  of

the year.

VII-1

SEVENTH  DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.  Seventh District economic  growth remained  strong in  October and  November.  Retail

sales  seemed  to grow  at about the  same pace or slightly  higher than in previous  months  on a seasonally

adjusted basis;  durable  goods continued  to lead  overall  sales  growth,  while the tardy  arrival  of cold

weather prompted  greater  strength in seasonal  apparel  sales.  Manufacturing  activity  generally  remained

robust, although  some  durable  goods producers'  expectations  for domestic  sales gains  in  1995  have been

tempered  in recent months.  District labor markets  continued  to tighten up,  and reports  of labor shortages

remained  relatively  widespread.  Discussions  with  retailers, manufacturers  and a wide range  of staffing

services  firms revealed  a greater frequency  of reports of wage  pressures  in  permanent positions,  albeit for

a subset of occupations  and geographic  areas.  Reports  of price  increases  remained  concentrated  in crude

goods and  intermediate  materials.

Retailing.  Retail  sales growth  seemed to  strengthen further in recent  weeks,  after the underlying

trend  gathered momentum  late  in the third  quarter.  Reports  from  several large  retail chains  and  shopping

malls  suggest that the  holiday  sales season began on a vigorous  note, with  full parking lots  and  high sales

levels.  One  retail  association stated that  "things have been  going  great;"  sales  for the holiday  season were

previously forecast  to rise  6  percent, but sales gains in the membership  over the past week  seem to  have

been  significantly  above  that expectation.  A  survey by a  check processing  firm showed  a stronger year-

over-year  same-store  sales  gain in the  Midwest for the  day after Thanksgiving  than the  survey had  been

showing  in previous  months.  Several retailing  contacts reported  high  sales levels for seasonal  durable

goods like snowblowers  and car batteries,  after the  late-developing  but harsh winter last year caught  many

consumers unprepared.  One  large retail  chain noted that  apparel  sales rose  significantly in  recent  weeks;

unseasonably  warm weather  held back seasonal  apparel  sales  in October  and masked  stronger gains in

other  apparel  and home  fashions lines  within its overall  mix.  Another  large  retailer reported  that apparel

sales  remained  relatively  weak in those regions  of the country  where  warm  weather continued  to linger,

while  apparel  sales  in most District states picked  up with the belated onset  of colder weather.  Nationally,

this  contact  stated that sales  over  the past week have  been "fabulous,"  with  year-over-year growth  well in

excess  of the growth for the month of November  as  a whole.  A continuing  large  majority of Michigan

retailers  surveyed in November  reported year-over-year  sales growth, while an even  larger share  of

respondents  expected further gains  over the  next three  months.

VII-2

Manufacturing.  District industrial  activity  remained  robust.  Production readings  from the

Chicago  and Milwaukee  purchasing managers'  surveys remained  quite  vigorous during  September  and

October, while the  Detroit survey showed  new strengthening.  Surveys  conducted  in  western Michigan

have  been depicting  some  of the strongest  results in  the District, and  these  surveys showed  even  greater

momentum  in  September and  into  late  October.  In November,  the production  component  of the  Chicago

survey  showed  faster growth  than September  and October.  Large  automakers  reported  that sales  closure

rates  improved  in recent  months,  after slipping  during the  summer.  Showroom traffic  continued  to run  at

high  levels for this time of the  year, and  dealer orders  reportedly  accelerated  during  October  and early

November.  Heavy-duty  truck build plans for the  fourth quarter have been on the rise  in  recent months,

after slipping  in  the third  quarter.  A  large  steel producer shipped its  highest volume  for a third  quarter

since  1981,  and total  steel  production in the  region  showed stronger year-over-year  gains in October  and

November  than in previous  months.  This  steel  manufacturer's  materials  distribution group reported that

the Midwest and  the South  continue to  be its strongest  geographical  areas.  A large  cement producer

stated that interest rate increases  have  not yet had  a noticeable  affect  on its own market, with residential

deliveries  still "doing  very well,  and better than last year."  A  large manufacturer  of gypsum wallboard

reported that industry  shipments  have been running  at a record level  during  1994.  This company expects

housing  starts in  1995  to  run even  with  1994, but  with a  larger multifamily  component,  which use  less

wallboard  and could  dampen overall  shipments.  Several durable  goods manufacturers  expected  slower

growth  in domestic markets  during  1995.  At the same time,  a number of heavy equipment producers

noted increased  sales  to Europe,  and these  contacts  expect  greater export gains  to help offset slowing

growth in  domestic markets  during  1995.

Labor Markets.  District  labor markets  continued  to tighten,  and discussions with many  staffing

services  firms revealed  a somewhat  greater frequency  of reports  of wage pressures  for permanent

positions  than in previous  months.  Among those  staffing firms that reported  little change  in

compensation for permanent positions,  several  expected  greater pressure  in early  1995.  However, some

staffing services  stressed  that organizational  restructuring  and technological  advances  continue  to  weigh

on job opportunities  and  salaries for a  significant portion of the  overall  workforce.  Shortages  and wage

pressures  seem  to be centered  in light industrial,  construction,  and entry-level  retail occupations,  although

one  large  retail chain  stated that it hasn't been any  more difficult to  attract seasonal  labor  for the  current

holiday  season than it was  in  1992  and  1993.  Temporary  help companies  have  been  reporting  wage

VII-3

increases  for the past several  quarters,  and  one temporary  help  company  stated that "orders  we used  to  be

able  to fill  in two or three  days, now it takes  two or three  weeks."  Another staffing  services  firm  reported

that the price  of help-wanted  radio advertising  space  has  risen in recent  months.  An engineering  firm  in  a

robust area of the District  reported that  construction has  been  moving at a  very slow  pace on individual

projects,  due to  the shortage  of skilled labor.  This contact stated that  customers  of construction

contractors  are  bidding  against one  another in order to  get priority  for project  completions,  and new

contract prices  are  also moving  higher.  An  auto supplier  stated that a  scarcity  of production  workers  has

curbed  the firm's  ability  to  add a  third production  shift, and  a staffing  services  firm  believed that labor

shortages  have played a  role  in auto  component  shortages.  A number of managers  of fast-food  restaurants

located  in relatively  strong  areas  of the District  expressed  heightened  concern about  labor shortages,  with

one  busy manager  stating  "I've got to  get back to  work, we're short  two people  as  I speak."  While  a

majority  of these restaurants  reported that wages have  risen, none  of them  reported higher menu prices.

Prices.  Price  increases remained  centered  in  commodities  and industrial  materials.  A wide  range

of respondents  to  area purchasing  managers'  surveys continued  to  comment  about shortages,  capacity

constraints,  demands  for shorter lead times,  planning  difficulties for work-in-process  inventory,  and

higher input prices  generally.  In November, the  prices-paid  component of the  Chicago purchasing

managers'  survey  climbed  to its highest level  since late  1988.  A  steel  consumer expressed  concern that

faster growth  in Europe  would  reduce  supplies  of imported  steel next  year, adding  further upward

pressure to  steel prices.  A  large cement  manufacturer  stated that its baseline  cement prices  are  slated to

rise roughly  6 percent  at the beginning  of  1995,  although this represents  a smaller hike than the  last

baseline  increase  in April.  Cement  allocation  restrictions have  been shrinking in recent  months.

Evidence  of greater inflation  in retail prices  remained relatively  scarce.  Most retailing  contacts

continued to  stress that price competition  remains intense,  with  little change  in overall  prices  reported

even  among those retailers  experiencing  increased  labor shortages  and higher  wages.  One large  retail

chain  stated that  department  stores  "seem to  be running  a little more  promotional  than people might have

expected  a  few months ago."  Another large  chain concentrated  in apparel  stated  that price  increases  have

played  "no role whatsoever"  in same-store  sales gains in recent  months.  "We've  had  a lot of threats,  but

very few  suppliers have  really  had the  guts to try to put anything  through."

VIII-1

EIGHTH  DISTRICT  - ST.  LOUIS

Summary

Continued  growth  and  tightening  labor  markets  are  the  norm  in  most  areas.

Consumer  spending  is  relatively  strong  in  most  parts  of  the District,  and  retailers  expect

strong  sales  during  the  holiday  season.  Tight  labor  markets  are  making  it  increasingly

difficult  for  firms  to  find  qualified  workers,  and  many  contacts  report  increasing  wage

pressures.  Residential  construction  continues  to  slow  in  some  markets,  although

commercial  construction  is  picking  up in several  areas.  Loan demand  is  still fairly  strong

in most  parts  of the District.  Record  crops  have  created  storage  problems  in some  areas.

Consumer Spending

District  retailers  report  recent  sales  at  or  above  their  year-ago  pace,  with  sales

growth  exceeding  expectations  in  many  cases.  Strong  local  economies  are  cited  by

retailers  as  the principal  reason  for  strong  sales.  Most  retailers  say  discounting  has  not

been  a factor  in  generating  these  sales  increases;  some,  in fact,  expect  prices  to rise as  the

holidays  approach.  Most  retailers  report  that  holiday  staffing  and  inventories  are  at

desired  levels.  Contacts  at discounters,  specialty  stores  and  department  stores  around  the

District  report  brisk holiday  traffic  and  sales  during  the  weekend  after Thanksgiving.

District car  dealers report  mixed  sales  activity.  Some  dealers are  still experiencing

falling  sales  because  of lack of inventory,  while others  are experiencing  double-digit  sales

increases.  Prices  of most  1995  models  have increased  relative  to their  1994  counterparts,

although  some dealers  report  that these  increases  are being  absorbed  in  dealer costs  rather

than  being  passed  on  to consumers.

Manufacturing  and Other Business  Activity

VIII-2

A  growing  number  of  contacts  in  the  District  report  increasingly  tight  labor

markets,  making  it more difficult  for  firms  to  find qualified  workers.  In  most  parts of the

District,  construction  workers  are  increasingly  scarce. 

In  southern  Indiana  and  parts  of

Arkansas,  Kentucky  and  Tennessee,  contacts  report  increased  wage  pressures  because  of

the  tight  markets. 

In  some  instances,  fast  food  restaurants  and  entry-level  positions  at

other  firms  are  paying  up  to  $7  an  hour. 

In  many  areas,  unemployment  rates  have

recently  reached  20-year  lows.  A  quarterly  employment  outlook  survey  projects  further

employment  gains  in  the  St.  Louis  metropolitan  area  through  the  first quarter  of 1995.

Most  District  industries  surveyed  report  increased  sales  in  recent  months.  For

example,  a  maker  of  concrete  products  reports 

that  October  figures  show  sales  up

30  percent  over last  year.  In  addition,  this  contact  reports  that  demand  has  not  followed

the  normal  seasonal  pattern:  Strong  residential  housing  demand  is  keeping  demand  for

building  materials  unseasonably  high.  Similarly,  a District  brick  manufacturer  currently

has  one-third of its annual production  on  back order,  which  is more  than  usual,  especially

for this  time  of year.  A  glass  container  manufacturer  reports  that  October  sales  were  up

8 percent  over  last  year,  and  a  contact  in  the  footwear  industry  reports  a  1.5  percent

increase  during  October  but  a  15  percent  increase  year-to-date.  A  maker  of car  exhaust

systems  reports  that  automakers'  just-in-time  inventories  keep  this  company  operating

around  the clock  to  keep  up  with  demand.  In  general,  contacts  throughout  Arkansas  and

the  Louisville,  Memphis  and  St.  Louis  metropolitan  areas  all  report  healthy  economic

growth.

Some  contacts,  however,  are  not as  positive.  A  maker of corrugated  boxes reports

October  sales  were  down  6  percent,  although  year-to-date  sales  are  still  up  10  percent.

VIII-3

A  contact  in  northeast  Mississippi  reports  an  overall  softening  in  the  region's  economy;

he  cites  not-so-upbeat  reports  from  computer  and  office  suppliers,  who  expect  some

slowing  over the  next  six  months,  partly  because  of rising  interest  rates.

Construction and Real  Estate

Residential  real  estate  markets  have  changed  little since  the last report:  Some areas

are  still  experiencing  strong  growth  in permits  and  sales,  while other  areas  are  noticeably

weaker.  Most  contacts  expect  the  effects  of rising  interest  rates  on  permits  and  sales  to

be  substantial  by  mid-1995. 

Several  areas 

in  the  District  are  experiencing  new

construction  in multifamily  housing,  which  had been  dormant  since  the mid-to-late  1980s.

Commercial  construction  is  also  picking  up  strength  in  parts  of the  District.

Banking and Finance

District bankers  continue  to  report relatively  strong consumer and  commercial  loan

demand.  Strength  in  auto  sales  and  accompanying  auto  loans  is  responsible  for  much  of

the  growth  in  consumer  loans.  Several  loan  officers  from  the  District's  largest  banks

report  strengthening  in  demand  for  loans  to  small  businesses,  which  they  attribute  to

increased  plant  and  equipment  spending  needs  and  inventory  financing.

Agriculture  and Natural Resources

Despite  substantial  rainfall  that  slowed  the  pace  of the  fall harvest  in many  areas,

most  contacts  report  little  crop  damage,  with  most  still  expecting  record  or  near-record

crops.  These  large  crops  have  created  storage  problems  in  some  areas,  forcing  many

facilities  to store  crops  on  the ground or to construct  temporary  facilities.  Many  livestock

producers  report that cattle and hog prices  have fallen below  their costs,  although they note

that  low  grain prices  have  ameliorated  their losses  somewhat.

NINTH  DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

The  economy of the Ninth  District continues  to grow  briskly,  but is apparently  beginning  to

encounter  some  problems.  On the  positive side, manufacturers  report strong  orders.  Overall  mining and

forest  product  output remains  high.  Agricultural production  is  at or near record  levels. Non-residential

construction  remains robust. Retail  sales of general merchandise  are  strong  and vehicles  generally

continue  to  sell well.  Fall tourism  was  excellent  as  are  prospects  for winter  activities.

However, some problems  are emerging.  Residential  building  clearly  is slackening.  In agriculture,

unfavorable  prices are  limiting farm  household and  capital spending.  Urban labor markets  have tightened

to  a point where  many businesses encounter  difficulty  in securing  employees.  Reported wage  increases

are larger and  more widespread  than earlier in the  year.  Price hikes for raw materials  and intermediate

goods are  becoming  common,  and  a survey  shows increasing  expectations  that such increases  in business

costs  will eventually  be passed  along to  consumers.

Manufacturing

"Manufacturing  is very  good,"  reported an  advisory council member from north-central  Wisconsin,

and other sources  indicate that  this  is true across the  district.  News media report  that some firms have

such strong orders that  they have difficulty meeting  promised shipping dates.  Auto and machine

components, builders'  hardware,  and commercial  printing  businesses  are all described as having full

order books.  Publicly  traded manufacturing  firms continue to announce  strong revenue  increases  over the

previous year.  Moreover, industrial  sales of electricity  continue to grow  substantially  faster than long-

run averages.

Natural  resource industries

Mining  and forestry are  responding to  strong demand  and  favorable prices by increasing  output

wherever  possible.  A  previously  idled iron mine in Minnesota  that was  brought back into production  in

late summer  is already outstripping  production expectations,  and  an industry spokesman stated that

Minnesota's  1995  iron shipments  will be the  highest in over a decade.  Copper  producers and an

aluminum processor face especially  favorable  prices and are described as producing at capacity.  Paper

mills are reportedly  increasing  output  as  strengthening national  and international  demand for many types

of paper allow them to bring  underutilized capacity  back into use.  Oil and gas drilling remains  higher

than earlier in the year.  Lumber and building  board production remains  strong.  Sawmills  in Montana

reportedly  are having  a better year than anticipated  as timber sales  from private lands  have increased  to

partially fill the gap  caused by reduced federal  sales.

IX-2

Construction

"Housing  activity  is starting  to level off,"  said one advisory  council member  from  Wisconsin, noting

the effects  of higher mortgage  interest rates.  His comments  were  also echoed by colleagues  from

Montana.  Single-family  home  permits  issued in  October in the  Minneapolis-St.  Paul area  were about 9

percent below  year earlier figures.  And while building  activity in  the eastern Dakotas  remains  strong,

advisory council  members and  directors indicate  that fewer new jobs  are in the  pipeline and that the  1995

building season  will be down somewhat  from  1994.  These views were  confirmed by  a Minneapolis  Fed

mid-November  poll of business people  who reported  a marked softening  of their expectations  for housing

starts  in their communities,  compared  to responses  to the  same question  six months  and  a year ago.

Commercial  and  heavy construction,  however,  continues  to outpace  year-earlier  levels,  and the

number of projects  already initiated  should ensure  that the  1995  season will also be a busy  one, according

to one  industry  source.  Publicly  let contracts  in Minnesota and the Dakotas  for  1994  through October

were  13  percent above  1993 levels.

Agriculture

Ninth District agriculture  is celebrating  its best crop ever, but mourning  the  lowest combination  of

crop and livestock prices  in many years.  Corn,  soybean  and sugar crops  were the  best ever for the  district

and wheat yields were excellent  in most areas.  Grain prices have  generally  stabilized at levels  15  percent

to 30  percent below  1993  harvest prices  after dropping  nearly  continuously  from February  into early fall.

Favorable  yields will offset the drop in prices and crop incomes  will be substantially  above  1993 in all

areas  except  Montana  and western  North Dakota.  But 1993  was  an unusually  bad year and  1994 crop

income is likely to be  only  slightly  above longer run averages.

Livestock prices, particularly  for hogs,  is  where the farmer's  shoe is  pinching.  In early  November

slaughter hog  prices hit the lowest point in more than two decades in current dollars  and in constant

terms  approached  20th century  lows  set in  1933.  Cattle  prices are  also down  substantially, with  the

greatest impact felt by cow-calf operators  in Montana  and in  western South Dakota.

The upshot  of this pattern of good crops  but unfavorable  prices for both grains  and livestock is  that

farm  household and  capital spending  are  expected  to be muted this year.  Bankers  responding  to a

Minneapolis  Fed third quarter  survey of agricultural credit conditions  indicated that while farmers  are

generally  able  to service  debt, few  are expected to make  major capital expenditures.  Exceptions  are  crop-

dependent eastern North  Dakota, where farm  machinery  sales  are particularly  strong.  At the other

extreme,  Montana bankers in  areas  where  no crops  are  grown have  begun to express  concern  about the

ability of less  well capitalized ranchers  to  weather  the slump.

IX-3

Consumer spending  and tourism

General  merchandise  sales  reportedly  improved  through the fall.  Traffic  in malls and sales figures  for

national chains,  regional  retailers,  and  specialty  "category  killer" merchandisers  all  point to  strong

consumer spending  as the year closes.  Although  a snowstorm  slowed  shopping at  the end of the

Thanksgiving  weekend,  store operators  reported very  good  sales  before the storm  hit  and expressed

optimism about holiday  season sales.  But there are  some signs of slackening  demand;  a few  advisory

council  members  described  increasing  consumer caution in  their communities.  And a director  who

operates  a trucking business  noted a distinct  drop in  furniture  shipments into the  region.

Vehicle  sales continue  to  generally  be robust, with reports  from Wisconsin to Montana of dealers  who

are unable  to get  certain popular models.  One industry  source, however, noted a  plateauing  in sales of

sedans,  station wagons  and minivans.  Pickups  and sport utility  vehicles  continue  to  sell well.

Tourism  and recreation  businesses  are  doing well.  South Dakota had an excellent  pheasant hunting

season with optimal  weather  conditions  and  record spending  by out-of-state  hunters.  The  warm, late fall

delayed ski  and  snowmobile recreation,  but expectations  for such winter business  are very good.

However,  Canadian cross-border  tourist traffic  reportedly  is down from  previous years.

Employment,  wages and prices

"It  is hard to  hire anyone to do anything,"  is how  one  advisory council  member from eastern North

Dakota described labor markets  in his area.  There  are  many other indications that labor markets  continue

to tighten.  Help  wanted  signs are ubiquitous  in  most urban areas.  Employment applications  commonly

are  placed  at sales counters  in  retail establishments.  Minneapolis-St.  Paul school bus operators

reportedly  are short over 300 drivers, while  retailers  in these  and other cities are  having  extreme  difficulty

finding  seasonal workers  for the holiday rush.  Some firms offer employees  bonuses for new recruits.

"Labor shortage raises  wages  in region,"  was  the headline in  one central  Wisconsin newspaper, but

that headline would accurately  characterize  wage  tendencies  in many other areas  of the Ninth District.

One director from North  Dakota described  wage  increases  of 4 percent to  10 percent in manufacturing

firms he had contacted.  News  reports and  advisory  council members  also note that substantial  wage

increases  are becoming  more  common.  One Minnesota  manufacturer reportedly  raised  its starting  wages

from  $6  to  $7 per hour to  attract needed workers.

Many sources  report price increases  in raw materials  or intermediate  goods. Both steel  and non-

ferrous metals  continue to rise in price,  as  have hardware  items.  Adhesives and plastic  laminate prices

have  increased by 6 percent to  10 percent in recent months.  And a Minneapolis  Fed survey  of business

people showed  a marked increase  in expectations  that consumer prices would increase  at an above-trend

rate,  compared  to responses  to the same  question six  and  12 months  earlier.

TENTH  DISTRICT  - KANSAS  CITY

Overview.  The  Tenth  District  economy  continues  to  grow  at  a  healthy  pace.

Retail  sales  increased  over  the  past  month,  and  manufacturers  continue  to  operate  at

high  levels  of capacity.  District  energy  activity  improved  slightly,  although  homebuilding

activity  continues  to  slow.  In  the  farm  sector,  conditions  remain good  for  crop  producers

but  somewhat  less  favorable  for  cattle  producers.  While  the  supply  of skilled  labor  is

tight  across  most  parts  of the  district,  only  a few  manufacturers  and  a  few builders  report

upward  pressure  on  wages.  Retail  prices  remain  stable,  while  the  prices  of  some

manufacturers'  inputs  are  up  slightly  from  a  year  ago.

Retail  Sales.  District  retailers  report that  sales  have  increased  from  last  month

and  a year  ago.  Sales  of  home  furnishings  and  men's apparel  remain  notably  strong.

Most  district  retailers  are  satisfied  with current  inventory  levels  after  increasing  their

stocks  over  the  past  month.  Retailers  expect  holiday  sales  to  be  significantly  higher  than

last  year.  Auto  dealers  report  that, while  sales  were  off slightly  during  the  past  month,

sales  are  expected  to  increase  over  the  next  few  months.  Financing  is  available  for  both

dealers  and  buyers.  Dealers  are  generally  maintaining  steady  inventory  levels.

Manufacturing.  Most  firms  are  operating  at high  capacity  levels.  Most  agents

continue  to  report  shortages  of  skilled  labor.  Several  agents  report  longer  lead times  but

do  not  expect  significant  problems  in  obtaining  materials  during  the  next  few  months.

Firms  are  generally  satisfied with  their  inventory  levels.

Energy.  Drilling  activity  in the  district  improved  slightly  in October  and  the  first

X-2

two  weeks  of  November.  Crude  oil  prices  helped,  moving  slightly  higher  in  recent  weeks.

But  energy  activity  across  large  parts  of  the  district  remains  dampened  by  low  natural  gas

prices.

Housing.  Most  builders  report  a  decline  in  housing  starts  from  last  month  and  a

year  ago.  Moreover,  most builders  expect  building  activity  to  continue  cooling  off during

the  coming  months.  Sales  of new  homes  have  picked  up  somewhat  over  the  last  month

but  are  below  their  year-ago  pace.  Builders  in  most parts  of  the  district  report  materials

are  generally  available  with  few  delays.  Mortgage  demand  continues  to  decline  as

interest  rates  climb.  Most  lenders  expect  demand  to  remain  sluggish  in  the  months

ahead.

Banking.  Loan  demand  last  month  rose  at  almost  all  reporting  banks.  Most

banks  report  higher  demand  for  commercial  and  industrial  loans,  consumer  loans,  and

commercial  real  estate  loans.  Demand  was  down  for  home  mortgage  loans,  flat  for

home  equity  loans,  and  mixed  for  residential  construction  loans  and  agricultural  loans.

Loan-deposit  ratios  were  up  from  the  previous  month,  and  security  investments  were

down.

All  respondents  raised  their  prime  rate  last  month,  and most  expect  to  raise  the

rate  again  in  the  near  term.  All  banks  raised  their  consumer  lending  rates  last  month,

and  almost  all anticipate  further  increases  in  the  near  future.  Lending  standards  were

unchanged.

Deposits  last month  were  flat  to  up  at  most  banks.  Most  respondents  report

increases  in  demand  deposits.  NOW  accounts  were  constant  to  up,  while  large  CDs were

X-3

constant  to  down.  Money  market  deposit  accounts  and  small  time  and  savings  deposits

were  both  mixed,  with  about  equal  numbers  of respondents  reporting  increases  and

decreases.

Agriculture.  Harvest  of the  district's  corn  and  soybean  crops  is  nearly  complete,

with  farmers  in much  of the  district  harvesting  the  biggest  crops  on  record.  The  district's

winter  wheat  crop  is  generally  in  good  condition.

Large  supplies  of red  meat  and  poultry  are  holding  down livestock  prices  and

clouding  the  outlook  for  district  livestock  production.  Lower  feed  costs  and  somewhat

stronger  fed  cattle  prices  have  trimmed  losses  to  near  break-even  levels  in  most  cattle

feedlots.  But  a  sharp  decline  in  feeder  cattle  prices  has  pushed  down  profits  on  ranches.

Meanwhile,  low  hog prices  have  triggered  the  liquidation  of hog  herds  by  some  small-

scale  producers.  Despite  the  downturn  in  livestock  earnings,  bankers  report  their  farm

loan  portfolios  generally  remain  in  good  condition.

Prices  and  wages.  Retail  prices  remain  stable  and  are  generally  expected  to

remain  constant  over  the  next  three  months.  Manufacturers'  purchasing  agents  report

input  prices  are  flat  to  slightly  higher  than  a year  ago,  and  most  expect  input  prices  to

rise  slightly  in  the  months  ahead.  Despite  widespread  tightness  in  markets  for  skilled

labor,  only  a  few  manufacturers  report  upward  pressure  on wages.  New  home  prices

have  been  stable  over  the  last month  but  remain  above  year-ago  levels.  A few  builders

report  an  increase  in  prices  of  certain  materials  such  as  sheetrock  and  lumber.  While

construction  wages  have  generally  remained  stable,  a  few  builders  report  higher  costs  for

skilled  workers  such  as  carpenters.

XI-1

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

Economic  activity  continued to  rise  at  a  solid pace,  although contacts

in  several  industries  expect  activity  to  soften  in  the  new  year. Manufacturing

orders  increased, while activity  at business  service  firms  accelerated

slightly.  Retail  sales  were  sluggish  but  strengthened over  the  Thanksgiving

weekend. Higher  interest  rates  and  economic  uncertainty  tempered growth in  the

construction  industry, although activity  is  said  to  be  strong overall.  Loan

demand was  stable.  Steady  demand kept  district  energy activity unchanged,

while  excessive moisture  and a  late  frost  disrupted agricultural production.

Scattered price  and wage pressure  continued to  be  reported  in

manufacturing and  services,  but  retailers  said  selling  prices were  lower.

Rents  were up  for  some  types  of  property, but home  prices  stopped  increasing

despite  higher costs  for  several  inputs.  Energy prices  were  up  slightly, and

agricultural  prices were  lower.

Manufacturing  orders  continued to  increase  at  a  solid rate.  Demand was

strongest  for  electronics,  paper, food  and petrochemicals.  Declining housing

starts  slowed orders  for  construction-related products  such  as  brick and

lumber,  but producers  said they were  still  operating at  capacity.  Inventories

were  low  for  many electronics  products,  and manufacturers  said that  hiring had

led  to  slight wage pressure, but  selling prices  continued to  decline.  Sales  of

industrial  electrical  products  were extremely  strong, partially because  of

rebuilding  after  floods  in the  Houston area.  Orders  for paper products  were

still  strong,  although a  lack of  storage  space  had reduced double  ordering.

Most paper  contacts  said they were  still  producing at  capacity,  and higher

XI-2

costs  pushed up  selling prices.  Demand for  fabricated metals  was unchanged,

while  orders  were  slightly  lower  for  primary metals.  Primary and  fabricated

metal  producers  reported low  inventories  because  delayed rail  shipments  had

caused shortages  of  raw materials.  Rising  apparel  sales  resulted  in  some

hiring, but garment  finishers continued  to  report  declining  demand. Demand  for

oil  field  services  and machinery was  unchanged, but  contacts  said cost  cutting

had increased profits.  District refining  was  returning  to  normal  following  a

break  in  the  Colonial  pipeline. The  pipeline break  improved profits briefly,

but higher  fuel  oil prices  and a seasonal  decline  in gasoline  sales  kept

overall  refiners  margins weak. Demand for petrochemicals  was extremely  strong,

and the  industry  had not  completely recovered from the  fire  and  flood on  the

San Jacinto River,  which reduced capacity  and led to  a fifth  round of  price

increases  in  1994.  Inventories  were very  low  for most petrochemicals,

particularly propylene. Capacity  is  being added  as  quickly  as  possible,

although shortages  of  capital equipment  are  reported  to  be  limiting  expansion.

Economic  activity  at  business  services  firms  increased at  a slightly

faster  rate.  Accounting, temporary  and  legal  firms  reported an  acceleration in

demand, while  demand at  transportation firms  continued to  grow at  a moderate

rate.  Demand for  corporate  legal  services,  such  as  mergers and  initial public

offerings,  continued to  increase.  Labor market  tightness  in technical  and

professional  fields,  such  as  programming,  engineering and word processing,

resulted in wage and price  increases  in  the  temporary help  industry.  Trucking,

accounting and communications  firms  also  reported higher wages.

Retail  sales  were  soft  in early November,  but  gained strength  over  the

Thanksgiving weekend. Most contacts  said weekend sales  were  good but  not

great.  Retailers  expect  good sales  over  the holiday period. Contacts  report

XI-3

that price  competition heated up  in  the  past month,  and selling prices  remain

lower  than  a year ago.  Auto  sales  declined  seasonally in  October,  but remained

above  a year ago.

Overall  loan  demand at  district  banks  is  reported to  be  unchanged

although higher  interest rates  have curbed demand  for  construction loans,

particularly for  residential mortgages.  Consumer  and business  lending

continues  to  expand, and continued competition from alternative  credit  sources

is  limiting  increases  in  loan rates.

Construction activity remained strong, but higher  interest rates  and

economic  uncertainty  led several  contacts  to  revise  their  outlook downward.

Commercial  and retail  construction was  strong,  although respondents  said

economic  uncertainty caused  some projects  to  be  put  on hold. Demand for

office,  retail  and  industrial  space  was  strong,  and  rents moved up  slowly. New

home  sales  and starts  dropped  in October and November. Contacts  said new

single-family home  prices  stopped  increasing, and median existing home  prices

had  fallen.  Labor  shortages  are  still  reported for  some  subcontracting  trades.

Steady  demand kept  district  energy  activity unchanged. The  rig  count

increased  seasonally, but  remained below last year's  levels.  Most  drilling

continued  to  be  for natural  gas,  although  oil  drilling was  up  slightly. Oil

prices were between $17  and  $19  per barrel,  which was  slightly higher  than the

last beige book. Spot  prices  for natural gas  remained  at  low levels,  between

$1.55  and $1.60  per mcf. Storage  capacity  for natural  gas  is  94 percent  full.

Rainy weather,  flooding  and a late  frost  slowed the  agricultural

harvest.  Producers  said  delays had  increased costs.  Lower  crop  and  livestock

prices  pushed  the  October Texas All  Farm  Products  Index of  Prices Received

down  8 percent  from 1993's  level,  and 2 percent  lower  than  last month.

XII-  1

TWELFTH  DISTRICT  --  SAN  FRANCISCO

Summary

The  expansion  of economic  activity  in  the  District  as  a  whole  is  continuing  at  a

moderate  pace.  A  slight  pickup  in  growth  in  California,  which  accounts  for  about  60  percent

of the  District  economy,  is  being  offset  by  some  slowing  in  fast-growing  District  states,  like

Idaho  and  Utah.  Real  estate  and  construction  activity  in  the  District  has  slowed  to  a  more

moderate  pace.  Within  the  retail  sector,  a  slight  dropback  in  motor  vehicle  sales  has  not

overshadowed  strength  elsewhere.  Business  investment  appears  to  be  strong  in  most  of the

District,  owing,  in  part,  to  manufacturers'  efforts  to  expand  capacity.  Loan  demand  at  banks

is  increasing,  buoyed  by  strength  in  the  commercial  and  consumer  segments.  Scattered

reports  of  price  pressures  pertain  mainly  to  intermediate  materials.

Business  Sentiment

Twelfth  District  business  leaders  generally  remain  optimistic.  Survey  respondents

expect  national  output  to  grow faster  next  year  than  the  long-run  average  pace  of growth,  and

respondents  continue  to  expect  inflation  to  accelerate  slightly  next  year.  Regional  growth

over  the  next  four  quarters  is  expected  to  exceed  the  national  average  in  Arizona,  Oregon,  and

the  intermountain  states,  match  the  national  average  in  Washington,  and  be  only  slightly

weaker  than  the  nation  in  Alaska  and  California.  Compared  to  the  previous  survey,  the

outlook  for  regional  growth  has  been  scaled  back  a  bit  for  interest-sensitive  sectors,  such  as

business  investment  and  residential  construction;  some  potential  investors  were  reported  to  be

adopting  a  "wait-and-see"  posture  on  whether  the  interest  rate  increases  to  date  will  seriously

impede  demand.  Nevertheless,  about  one-half  of the  respondents  still  expect  business

XII  - 2

investment  to  accelerate  next year.

Retail  Trade  and  Services

Within  the  retail  sector,  a  slight  dropback  in  motor  vehicle  sales  has  not  overshadowed

strength  elsewhere.  Respondents  from  California  describe  recent  retail  activity  as  bustling  and

report  high  expectations  for  holiday  sales;  more  recently,  media  reports  suggest  a  strong

Thanksgiving  weekend  start  to  holiday  sales  in  California.  A  major  western  grocery  chain

reports  good  sales  and  some  pressure  on  food  prices  from  the  earlier  passthrough  by

manufacturers  of  increases  in  prices  of  plastics  and  other  packaging  raw  materials. 

In  Idaho

and  Washington,  truck  sales  generally  were  reported  to  be  strong,  though  some  softening  in

the  mini-van  market  was  noted.  New  vehicle  sales  as  a  whole  were  reported  to  have  been

constrained  earlier  by  delays  in  deliveries  to  dealers  from  manufacturers.  More  recently,  the

lead  time  from  order  to  delivery  is  reported  to  have  shortened,  owing,  in  part,  to  a  slight

dropback  in  dealer  sales.

Conditions  are  mixed  among  service  producers.  In  California  and  Washington,

employment  and  investment  in  the  health  care  industry  reportedly  are  being  restrained  by

consolidation  and  uncertainty  about  future  industry  structure.  Also,  given  an  uncertain

regulatory  environment,  a  major  auto  and  home  insurer  is  modifying  earlier  plans  to  expand  in

Central  California.  In  contrast,  the  transportation,  communications,  computer  services,  and

tourism  industries  generally  are  operating  at  high  levels  and  expanding.  Sales  of software

produced  in  Washington  are  strong,  and  respondents  expect  software  sales  to  be  buoyed

further  by  increasing  exports.  In  Utah,  hotel  occupancy  rates  are  high,  and  advance

reservations  for the  ski  season  are  strong;  several  hotels  in  Salt  Lake  City  plan  to  expand  their

XII  - 3

capacity.

Manufacturing

Outside  of  the  depressed  aerospace  sector,  District  manufacturing  activity  remains  at

high  levels.  A  Washington  electronic  components  manufacturer  reported  a  further  increase  in

order  volume,  and  a  Utah  machinery  manufacturer  indicated  that general  business  conditions

remain  strong.  Sales  of western  wood  products  also  have  been  strong,  despite  recent

moderation  of  housing  construction,  as  supplies  of southern  wood  products  have  been  limited

by  weather-related  production  difficulties.  Respondents  from  Oregon  indicate  that  paper

prices  are  up  sharply,  and  timber  costs  remain  high.

Efforts  to  expand  capacity  were  reported  for  many  manufacturing  industries.  A  U.S.

affiliate  of a  Japanese  television  manufacturer  is  reported  to  be  expanding  research,

development,  and  distribution  facilities  in  San  Diego,  as  production  at  its  Tijuana

manufacturing  plant  picks  up.  In  Central  California,  a  major  food  processing  plant  is

doubling  capacity.  An  air  bag  manufacturer  is  reported  to  be  expanding  operations  in  Utah,

and  a  multinational  consumer  electronics  manufacturer  is  building  a  large  plant  in  Oregon.

Agriculture  and  Resource-Related  Industries

Recent  reports  from  the  farm  sector  suggest  improved  sales  volumes  and  prices  for

some  major  commodities.  Sales  volumes  for  cattle,  grain,  and  late  season  crops  have  been

moderate  to  strong,  and  most  respondents  from  the  agricultural  sector  report  that  product

prices  are  relatively  high.  Particularly  strong  prices  are  reported  for  cotton  and  wheat,  and

fresh  fruit  prices  have  risen. 

In  contrast,  potato  prices  are  weak.

Real  Estate  and  Construction

XII  - 4

Real  estate  activity  has  slowed  noticeably  in  some  areas.  In  California,  housing  sales

volume  dropped  back  in  the  third  quarter  from  a  strong  second-quarter  pace;  however,

respondents  from  Southern  California  described  the  overall  increase  in  real  estate  activity  as

"meaningful."  Outside  of  California,  residential  sales  activity  appears  to  have  slowed

significantly  from  a  rapid  pace,  particularly  in  Idaho  and  Utah.

Construction  activity  is  mixed.  In  Idaho  and  Utah,  a  slowdown  in  residential

construction  in  the  last  three  months  is  reported  to  have  eased  capacity  constraints;  however,

prices  of construction  materials  are  reported  to  be  still  increasing  quickly.  In  eastern

Washington,  residential  housing  investment  continues  at  a  relatively  high  level,  but  a

respondent  sees  preliminary  evidence  of a  softening  in  demand.  In  Southern  California,  new

construction  of  office  properties  is  almost  non-existent,  but  the  industrial  real  estate  picture  is

reported  to  be  brighter.

Financial  Institutions

District  banking  conditions  are  reported  to  be  healthy.  In  California,  commercial  loan

demand  at  large  banks  has  picked  up,  and  asset  quality  is  reported  to  be  improving  slowly.

Consumer  loan  demand  is  strong  in  Utah  and  Idaho,  but  real  estate  lending  is  down

substantially  from  a  year  earlier.

