SUMMARY  OF COMMENTARY

on

CURRENT  ECONOMIC  CONDITIONS

BY  FEDERAL  RESERVE  DISTRICT

April  1994

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS

SUMM ARY 

......................................... 

First  District - Boston  ................................... 

.. 

Second  District  - New  York  .. 

........... 

.................. 

Third  District  - Philadelphia  .................. 

............... 

Fourth  District  - Cleveland 

........ 

........... 

...  ........ 

.

Fifth  District  - Richmond 

.................................. 

Sixth  District  - Atlanta 

.................................... 

Seventh  District  - Chicago 

................................. 

i

I-

II-1

III-

IV-1

V-1

VI-1

VII-1

Eighth  District  - St.  Louis 

..... 

..................... 

..... 

.

VIII-1

Ninth  District  - Minneapolis 

.............. 

............... 

.. 

Tenth  District  - Kansas  City  ............... 

.... 

.... 

........ 

Eleventh  District  - Dallas  ............. 

......... 

... 

....... 

.

Twelfth  District  - San  Francisco

IX-1

X-1

XI-1

XII-1

i

SUMMARY*

Solid  economic  growth  is reported  in  most  parts  of the country. 

In  California,

conditions  remain  weak,  although  some  positive  signs  are  starting  to  emerge.  Reports  from

all Districts  indicate  that  retail  sales  were  strong  in  March,  due  in  part to  improved  weather

in  many  parts  of the country.  Retail pricing  remains  competitive,  as few  price  increases  and

some  price  cuts are  noted.  Apparel  sales  improved,  and  auto  sales  are  very  strong.  Service

sector  activity  is reported  to be  good,  with  strength  in business  services  and  tourism.

Manufacturing  activity  is expanding  overall,  although  aerospace  activity  continues  weak.

Production  of autos,  vehicle parts,  steel,  and building  materials  is  near  capacity.  Price

increases  are  reported  for some  raw  materials,  but competitive  pressures  appear  to be

restraining  prices  for  most  manufactured  products.  Agricultural  conditions  are good  in  most

parts  of the country.  Oil  drilling activity  is down,  but  drilling  for natural  gas remains

strong.  Home sales  activity  is reported  brisk in most  parts  of the  country,  and improving  in

the  Northeast  and California.  Several  Districts  note  that recent  interest  rate  hikes have

contributed  to a  temporary  surge  in home  sales.  Contacts  indicate  that lending  activity  is

picking  up,  with greater  strength  in consumer  lending  than in business  lending.

Retail  Trade

Several  Districts  report double-digit  year-over-year  increases  in retail  sales,  as  long-

Prepared  at the  Federal  Reserve  Bank of San Francisco  and  based  on  information  collected
before  April  25,  1994.  This  document summarizes  comments  received  from  businesses  and  other
contacts  outside the Federal  Reserve  and  is not a commentary  on  the views of Federal  Reserve
officials.

ii

awaited  spring  weather  in much  of the  country,  combined  with  an  early  Easter,  boosted

March  results.  Philadelphia reports  that  healthy  sales  continued  into  early  April.  Improved

apparel  sales  are  noted  in the New  York,  Cleveland,  Atlanta,  Chicago,  and  Kansas  City

Districts.  Pricing  remains  very  competitive  in  most  areas,  with  few price  increases  and  some

price  cuts for retail  products.  Dallas  reports  slow  sales  growth,  with  the  strongest  gains

reported  by retailers  who  have reduced  their  prices  during  the past  year.  No  inventory

surpluses  or  shortages  are  noted.

Reports  suggest  that  auto  sales  were  very  strong  through  early  April.  Inventories  of

some  models  are  quite tight.  Most  Districts  indicate  that  higher  interest  rates  did  not reduce

auto  sales  through  mid-April,  although  one Chicago  District  auto  dealer saw  a  sharp  decline

in  activity  as  interest  rates  rose and  customers  worried  about their losses  in  the financial

markets.

Services

The  service  sector  is generally  healthy.  Dallas  reports  growing  demand  in  a  wide

range of business  services,  and  San Francisco  notes  growing  demand  for telephone  services

in  California and  Washington.  Contacts  indicate  that employers'  health  costs  are  rising more

slowly,  and health  care providers  are  cutting  their  costs.  Boston  reports  that hospitals  are

sharply  reducing  orders  for  large equipment.

Hotel activity  is  strong  in many  tourist  destinations  throughout  the West  and

Southeast,  including  Myrtle  Beach,  New  Orleans,  Las Vegas,  and  Salt Lake  City,  while

activity  is  improving  in many  California  markets  and  in  Hawaii.  In Florida,  observers  hope

that very  weak  visitor activity  from  Europe  will  be  offset by  more tourism  from  the

improving  economies  of Latin  America  and  the Caribbean. 

In  the northern  Midwest,  cold

weather  restrained  winter  resort  activity,  but industry  officials are  optimistic  about the

iii

summer  season,  especially  in  Montana.

Manufacturing

Manufacturing  activity  is  expanding  in  most  Districts,  although  the pace  of activity  is

uneven  across  industries  and  regions.  Many  manufacturers  in  the  Cleveland  District  report

that  demand  from  foreign  buyers  has improved.  In  the  Richmond  District,  shipments,  new

orders,  and backlogs  grew,  but  employment  changed  little.  In  the Atlanta  District,  demand

for apparel  fabric  appears  to  have  improved.  Electronic  equipment  manufacturers  in  the

Chicago  and  San  Francisco  Districts  report  healthy  sales  growth,  but  at  rates  somewhat

slower  than  last  year.  The Chicago  and  Cleveland  Districts  note  that  vehicle  manufacturing

activity  is at  or near  capacity.  Several  Districts  report  strong demand  for building  materials.

Aerospace  and  defense-related  manufacturing  continues  weak.  San  Francisco  reports  strong

investment  in  computer  and  communications  equipment,  as  companies  replace  outdated

equipment  in  order  to  increase  productivity  and  improve  their competitive  positions.

Manufacturers  note  that  competitive pressures  are restraining  prices  for  most

products.  However,  significant  price increases  are  reported  for  certain  raw  materials,

including  building  materials.  Chicago  indicates that  capacity  constraints  have  led  to price

increases  for  special-order  steel products,  since  extra  production  time must  be  set  aside  to fill

these  orders.  Several  manufacturers  in the  Boston,  Richmond,  Chicago,  and  St.  Louis

Districts  have  successfully  resisted  suppliers'  price  increases,  but  some  have  been  forced  to

absorb  the  increased  cost of materials.

Agriculture  and Resource-Related  Industries

Favorable  spring  weather  through  the  third  week  of April  created  good  conditions  for

field preparation  and  planting  in  much  of the  country. 

In  the Richmond  and  Minneapolis

Districts,  field  preparation  and  planting  were  on  schedule  or ahead  of schedule.  In  the

Kansas  City  District,  however,  farmers  were  waiting  for  warmer  and  drier  weather  before

planting corn  and  soybeans.  Kansas  City District  cattle  feedlots  are  operating  near  capacity,

and cattle  prices  are  up.  The Dallas  and  San  Francisco  Districts  report  good  agricultural

activity,  but  dry  weather  and  water  supply  restrictions  are  creating  concerns.  St.  Louis  notes

that  fertilizer  prices  have increased  substantially  during  the past  year.

Low oil  prices  have led  to reduced  oil production  and  oil drilling  activity  in  the

Kansas  City  District.  Natural  gas prices  declined  slightly,  but Dallas  reports  that drilling

activity  is very  strong  in  the  Gulf of Mexico,  where  more  than  70 percent  of drilling  is  for

natural  gas.

Real  Estate  and  Construction

Home  sales  activity  is  reported  brisk in  most  parts  of the country,  and  improving in

the  Northeast  and  California,  where  activity  had  been  weak.  New  homes  are  selling  well  in

the  New  York  and  Atlanta  Districts.  A  contact  in  the Chicago  District reports  that  home-

buying  traffic  fell  off during  April after  a  strong  first quarter.  Real  estate  agents  in  the  St.

Louis  District  report  a shortage  of houses  on the  market,  especially  in the  mid-price  range,

and  note  that many  sellers  are  receiving  two  or more bids  at  the  asking price  or higher.

Minneapolis  reports  "tight" housing  markets  in  its District,  with  strong  growth  in  new

housing  permits.  In  the  Kansas  City  District,  building and  sales  activity  both  are  strong,  and

v

inventories  of unsold  homes  are  low.  Several  Districts  report  higher building  materials  costs.

Through  mid-April,  higher  interest  rates  appear  to  have  generated  a  surge  in  activity,  due in

part  to buyers'  concerns  that rates  could  rise  further.  Several  respondents  in  various  regions

of the country  expressed  concern  that  higher  interest  rates  could  restrain  activity  later in  the

year.

Major  commercial  construction  projects  are  under  way  for  the first  time  in  several

years  in  Manhattan.  Office  leasing  activity  in  New  York is  reported  to be  "fairly  brisk."

Vacancy  rates  and leasing  activity  have improved  in  the Atlanta  District  as  well.  Strong

commercial  building  activity also  is  noted  in  North  Dakota,  Wisconsin,  South  Dakota,  and

Montana.

Financial  Institutions

Several  Districts  report  improved  lending  activity,  with  consumer  lending  generally

characterized  as  stronger  than  business  lending.  In  the Philadelphia  District,  consumer

installment and  credit  card  lending  is reported  up,  while  business  lending  is  flat or increasing

marginally.  Mortgage  lending  for  home  purchases  is  up  in  many  Districts,  but  refinancing

activity  has  fallen  sharply  throughout  the  country.

I-1

FIRST DISTRICT  - BOSTON

A moderate recovery continues  in the First  District.  Most  of  the

retailers,  manufacturers, and residential realtors  contacted report

increased activity  in recent  months, although  some results  are  negative.

Retail

The  long-awaited  arrival of  spring brought out New England's

shoppers.  First District  retail  contacts were pleased with  increases  in

sales  ranging from 5 to 8 percent  in March compared to  year-earlier

levels.  April  results were mixed, however,  with two  contacts  reporting

sales declines  compared to April  of  1993.  One contact  noted a decrease

in  sales of  electric  appliances, toys  and kitchenware, but  attributed  it

in part to  a consumer shift toward big-ticket purchases,  such  as  homes

and automobiles.  Two hardware and building  companies voiced concern

that  continued fluctuations  in  lumber prices might dampen  sales  and

profits.  Other prices have remained stable, and only one  contact

expects vendor  price increases  later this year.

The  region's retailers  are reasonably optimistic  about  the next

six months,  anticipating modest  sales  growth of  3 to  5 percent  over  last

year.  Inventories  are up slightly  in  anticipation of  increased sales.

Employment  levels  are expected to  rise slightly,  and contacts generally

intend to  increase wages about  3.5 percent.

Manufacturing

First District  contacts  indicate continued, though  uneven,

expansion in the manufacturing sector.  Manufacturers  serving consumer

durables, housing,  and  some  computer markets report year-over-year

percentage revenue gains  in the high  single digits  or  greater.  Sales  of

I-2

nondurables  are flat  or  increasing  slightly, while demand  for  aircraft

engines  and minicomputer products  is  falling.  Medical equipment  sales

are generally flat,  but hospitals  are reportedly cutting back sharply on

orders  for  large  equipment.

Manufacturers report  only minor  increases  in materials  costs,  with

the  exception of  double-digit  inflation  for  cotton fibers  and  copper.

Contacts  generally indicate  no possibility of  passing  through higher

costs, because  of  highly competitive  sales markets.  Prices  for

computers and other equipment continue to  fall,  at  an  accelerated rate

in  the case  of major  hospital  equipment.  Wage increases  range up to  3

or 4 percent,  but reportedly  are offset by productivity gains.

About  one-third of this month's  respondents  (serving consumer

durables  and electronics markets)  are expanding capacity.  Worldwide

capacity constraints for  some  computer parts  reportedly are or  may soon

be  delaying selected deliveries.  One automotive parts supplier, by

contrast,  notes being able to  increase utilization at  either domestic  or

foreign plants to  fill  booming orders  from Detroit.

Two-fifths  of manufacturing  contacts report that the size of  their

work force  increased  over the past year, two-fifths  that  it  decreased,

and the remainder that  it  held steady.  Weak  sales or  cost-cutting

efforts are expected to continue to  lead to employment  reductions  at

some large  companies.

Manufacturers' views about the  future range  from  optimism

(resulting from perceived strength in  the U.S. economy or  their  own

earnings gains) to  caution  (resulting from tighter monetary policy  or

weakness  in particular markets).  Exporters anticipate  a modest  upturn

in  European demand  starting  in  late  1994.

Residential Real  Estate

Housing sales  in much  of  the First District are reportedly as

strong  as they  have been since the mid to  late  1980s.  Home prices  are

rising  in much of  eastern Massachusetts,  particularly for  new

construction, with prices  in  some suburbs west  of  Boston exceeding their

1988-89 peaks.  Much of this  activity  is  attributed to pent-up demand

among trade-up buyers.  Respondents  also  reported  sales volume  rising in

New Hampshire and Connecticut.  Several  contacts  commented that  the

greatest  improvements  in  activity  are  taking place  in previously

depressed areas  of Massachusetts and Connecticut.  Contacts were  split

on the impact  of higher interest  rates, with several  arguing that the

residential market  will not be adversely affected  until 30-year mortgage

rates  exceed 10  percent,  but others expecting negative effects  later  in

the year--either a reduction  in activity or a shift  of  potential home

buyers toward lower price ranges.

Nonbank Financial  Services

Sales  at  insurance companies  are mixed.  Half of  the respondents

report that  sales  increased  in the  first quarter of  1994,  compared to

the  first  quarter of  1993,  while the other half reported  flat  or

declining  sales.  The  strongest  sales  increases were registered in

variable annuities,  variable  life  insurance, and mutual  funds.  Almost

all  respondents reported  flat or declining employment  in the  first

quarter of  1994  and for the rest  of  the year.

SECOND  DISTRICT--NEW  YORK

Reports  on  District  economic  developments  were  by  and  large  more  favorable  in

recent  weeks,  suggesting  that  the pace  of economic  activity  has  been  picking  up  in recent

months.  Most  retail  contacts  posted  February  and  March  sales  results  that  were  above

expectations,  homebuilders  in  several  areas  noted  an  increase  in  traffic  and  contracts,  and

office  vacancy  rates  declined.  District payroll  employment  continued  to  show  over-the-year

gains.  Most loan  officers  at  small  and  midsized  banks  indicated  no  change  in  their

willingness  to lend  from  two  months  earlier.

Consumer  Spending

Most  District  retail  contacts  reported  that March  sales  results  (on  a  year-over-year

basis)  were  well  above  plan,  following  February  sales  that  a majority  said  were  also  greater

than  expected.  The  strong  March  gains  occurred  even  after  allowance  was  made  for  this

year's  earlier  Easter  and  a  severe  storm  in  March,  1993  which  reduced  sales  activity  in  much

of the  area.  Widespread  demand  for most  types  of merchandise  was  reported  with  both  big

ticket  items  and  nondurable  goods  selling  well  in recent  weeks.  Several retailers  mentioned

being  particularly  pleased  by  a  resurgence  of demand  for women's  apparel  after  several

months  of sluggish  performance.

Over-the-year  sales  changes  ranged  from  -3  percent  to  +13  percent  in  February  and

from  +3  percent  to  +17  percent  in March,  with  the  majority  of contacts  reporting  double-digit

gains  in  March.  While  better-than  expected  sales  reduced  inventories  more  than  was  intended

at some  stores,  the  majority  of respondents  still  found  stocks  to  be  at sufficiently  comfortable

levels  to  avoid  any  difficulties  in  meeting  demand.  In  general,  retailers  were cautiously

optimistic  about what  lies  ahead.

Residential  Construction  and  Real Estate

II-2

Homebuilders  in  much  of the  District have  noted  an  increase  in traffic  and  contracts

written  in  recent weeks,  after  a  long  and cold  winter during  which  little  or  no  building

activity  could  take  place.  The  situation  in  several  places  was  described  as  spotty,  however,

with  some  builders  doing  well, but  others  less  well.  Response  to  spring  exhibitions  of new

homes  was  generally  reported  as  good  and  exhibitors  are  hopeful  that  this  will  result  in

additional  contracts  being  signed  in  the  near  future.  Thus far,  the  rise  in mortgage  rates  has

apparently  not  had  a  negative effect.  Some respondents  said  that, if anything,  it  is  motivating

people  to  act  now  before  rates go  any  higher.  Most contacts  anticipate  a  slightly  better year

than  in  1993,  but also  stated  that  this  will depend  in  part on  the  future  course  of mortgage

rates.

After  several  years  of little or  no  new  construction  activity  in Manhattan,  three  large,

mixed-use  towers  are  going  up  in  the  Lincoln  Center  area  that  will  contain  substantial

amounts  of new  retail  and  entertainment  space  together with  rental  and  condominium

apartments.  Plans  have  also  been  announced  to  gut  a  nearby  44-story  office  building

overlooking  Central  Park  in  order  to  reconstruct it with  several  hundred  condominium

apartments  and  possibly  some  offices  as  well.

Office  leasing  activity  was  fairly  brisk  in  much  of the  District  recently,  and primary

vacancy  rates  declined  in  all  of  the  areas  for which  data are  available  except  Downtown

Manhattan.  Lower  vacancy  rates  were  posted  in  northern  New  Jersey,  Westchester  County,

Fairfield  County,  Connecticut  and  on  Long  Island,  which  registered  a  large,  two  percentage

point  decline  in  the  first  quarter.  In  addition  to  the  lower  vacancy  rates,  rents  have begun  to

stabilize  and  smaller  concessions  are  now  reportedly  being  offered  to  potential  commercial

space  renters.

Other  Business  Activity

New  York  reported  an  over-the-year  increase  in  payroll  employment  of 87,000  in

March,  its sixth  consecutive  over-the-year  gain,  and New  Jersey  posted  an  over-the-year  rise

II-3

of 32,000  in  February,  its seventh  consecutive  gain.  Unemployment  rates  increased  in  both

states  during  March.  New  York's  rate  rose  to  8.1  percent from  7.8  percent  in  February,  while

New  Jersey's  rose  to  7.9  percent  from  7.3  percent  in  February.

For the  first  time  in  several  months,  only  a  few  large-scale  employment  cutbacks  have

been  announced  recently.  Natwest  will  shift  1300 jobs out  of the  District  beginning  in

August;  U.S.  Surgical,  which  is  headquartered  here,  will  eliminate  900 jobs,  and  Fleet

Financial  Group  plans  to  layoff  600 in  New  York  State.  The  impact  on  Long  Island  of

Northrup's  recent  purchase  of Grumman  remains  to  be  seen.

The  March  survey  of  purchasing  managers  in  Buffalo  showed  an  increase  in  the

percentage  of firms reporting  improved  orders,  but  a  decrease  in  the  percentage  with  greater

production.  The  February  survey  of purchasing  managers  in  Rochester  recorded  a  rise in  the

percentage  anticipating  improved  conditions  during  the  next  three  months.

Financial  Developments

Most  senior  loan  officers  surveyed  at  small  and  midsized  banks  in  the  District

indicated  that they  remain  as  willing  to  lend  as  they were  two  months  ago.  Several  officers,

however,  did  mention  an  increased  willingness  to  lend,  and  a  few  reported  easing  credit

standards.  Loan  demand  was  mixed,  particularly  for  consumer  loans  and  commercial  and

industrial  loans.  On  balance,  residential  mortgage  demand  continued  to  decline  due  to  the

sharp  drop  in refinancing  activity,  but  a few  officers  did  report  an  increased  demand  for new

home  mortgages.  The  only  loan  category  exhibiting  significant  improvement  in  demand  was

nonresidential  mortgages.

Lending  rates  were  generally  higher for  all  types  of loans,  although  a  few  officers

mentioned  lowering  rates  on business  loans  "to meet  competition  for quality  loans."  While

only  a  third  of  the  respondents  had  raised  rates  on  deposits,  the  majority  of those  who

reported  rates  unchanged  intend  to  increase  them  in  the  near future.  Finally,  almost  all

respondents  reported  either stable  or  lower  delinquency  rates  during  the  preceding  two

months.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT  - PHILADELPHIA

The  trend in economic activity in the Third District remained positive  in

April,  according  to  reports  from  area  businesses.  Manufacturers  said  they

continued to post  gains  in  orders  and shipments,  and the  increases were  fairly

widespread across  the  industrial  sectors  in  the  region.  Retailers  reported a

rebound in sales  in March as  extreme winter weather conditions  abated, and  the

pickup  appeared  to  continue  in April.  Auto  dealers  reported  recent  gains  as

well.  Bankers noted growing demand for consumer loans, especially for auto loans

and credit card purchases.  They also noted a slight increase in commercial and

industrial  lending.  Residential  mortgage  activity,  however,  was  easing  as

refinancings  dropped substantially.

The outlook in the Third District business community is generally positive.

Manufacturers forecast continued improvement,  including increases in orders and

backlogs,  although,  on  balance,  they  do  not  expect  to  boost  employment.

Retailers, noting signs  of growing consumer confidence, expect  the upward sales

trend to persist through the summer.  Auto dealers  generally believe sales will

be strong unless auto  loan rates move higher.  Bankers  echo merchants' feelings

that consumer confidence is improving, and they expect personal lending to remain

strong.  They also forecast gains,  albeit  slight,  in commercial and  industrial

lending.

MANUFACTURING

Reports  from  Third  District  manufacturers  in  April  indicated  that

industrial  activity remained on the  rise,  although the number of  firms posting

III-2

gains during the month declined somewhat from the prior month.  Around 40 percent

of the  firms polled said they received  more orders  for their  products in April

than they had in March and they were stepping up  shipments commensurately.  Less

than  20  percent  noted decreased demand  for  their  products.  Gains  were  fairly

widespread among industrial  sectors  in the  region.

With respect to employment,  three-fourths of the firms contacted for this

report were maintaining steady work force  levels,  and nearly one  in five hired

additional workers during April.  On balance, working hours were unchanged during

the month.

Looking ahead, about half of the managers at area industrial plants expect

orders  and  shipments  to  rise  over  the  next  six  months  and  about  one-third

anticipate that order backlogs will move up as  well.  Few foresee weaker demand

for  their  products.  Despite  the  generally  optimistic  outlook,  plans  at  area

manufacturing  firms  call  for  just  steady  employment  levels  over  the  next  six

months.

RETAIL

Most of the  retailers  contacted for  this  report said sales  in late March

rebounded  from  the  low  levels  prevailing earlier  in  the  year when a series  of

winter  storms kept shoppers at home  and  forced store  closings.  Some  merchants

said  that  a relatively  early  Easter  boosted  sales  in  March,  possibly  at  the

expense  of April  sales.  Nevertheless, most  retailers  also  said that sales  in

April were  running at  a healthy pace.

Third District merchants  expressed  generally  positive  views  of  the  near

future.  Several said that consumer confidence appeared to be improving and could

propel growing  sales  for  the  rest of  the year.

Auto dealers in the  region said sales picked up  strongly in April after a

III-3

bleak first quarter.  Most are optimistic that sales will remain strong this year

as  long  as  auto  loan rates  do not rise  from current levels.

FINANCE

Bankers at major Third District banks generally indicated that loan volumes

were  rising  moderately  in  April,  propelled  mainly  by  growth  in  consumer

installment lending, especially auto loans and credit cards.  While several noted

that commercial and industrial lending seemed to be on an upward trend, most said

the increase was marginal.  Nearly all described residential real estate lending

as  easing, with refinancings  off substantially.

In general, bankers contacted for this  report expect modest growth in loan

demand  through  the  rest  of  the  year.  They  expect  consumer  lending  to  be

relatively  strong,  reflecting  growing  consumer  confidence,  but  they  do  not

anticipate  more  than  slight  gains  in  business  lending unless  overall economic

activity moves to  a steeper growth path.

IV-1

FOURTH DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

General Business  Conditions

Business  activity  in the Fourth  District continues to be strong, particularly  in areas

related  to automobile  and capital  goods  manufacturing.  Although  retailers noted  some

slowing  in  sales and traffic  during April,  the overall  performance  of the  retail  sector

appears  to be holding  steady.  District auto  dealers  continue to report  shortages  in many

models,  including some  imports.  A  strike of roughly  70,000  Teamsters  has  virtually shut

down major union trucking  establishments;  nonunion operations  and alternative  transport

firms appear  to have filled the void.  There  were no reports  of transportation  bottlenecks.

Manufacturing

In February,  manufacturing  employment  in Ohio was up  1% from a year  earlier,

somewhat  dampened  by the severe winter weather in the region.  Reports from

manufacturers  suggest that production  recovered  fully by mid-April  and that new hires are

slowly  becoming  more common.  Although domestic  orders appear to be holding  at a

relatively high  level,  many  manufacturers  noted  improved demand  from foreign  sources.

Capital  goods producers were  uniformly upbeat concerning  business conditions.

Orders books were active across a broad  range of capital  goods categories,  and were

particularly  strong in the vehicles  area.  Heavy and  light truck production  was at or

quickly  approaching  capacity,  and  orders backlogs  were thought to  be commonplace.

Respondents  cited  continuing  softness  in  defense-related  and  aerospace  industries,

however.

IV-2

Retailing

According to most  sources,  retail  spending  in March was  very strong,  although

some  spending  retrenchment  and a reduction in consumer  traffic  was noted  during the first

half of  April.  It is unclear whether  the slowdown  represented  a payback from the strong

March  numbers,  or was  a  downshift  in underlying  demand.  Several  retailers  thought April

tax payments  may  have had a  damping  influence  on spending.  Confidence  may have been

affected  by interest  rates, although  rates on most types  of revolving  credit  were  reported

to be  little affected  by the recent upward  pressures.

Some  concern was noted that higher mortgage  rates suggested  the potential  for

slower home  sales that may eventually  damp  durable goods  spending,  although  no  such

slowdown  was thought to have  occurred  yet.  Durable  goods sales  continue to  lead the

retail categories.  Apparel  sales have picked  up from the low levels posted  earlier  in the

year, although  pricing of apparel  goods was  still characterized  as very competitive.

While interest rates in the market for auto loans have  headed  slightly higher,  (about

1/4 to  1/2  percentage  point), new car demand  remains  robust.  A few  auto dealers  noted

increases  in the popularity of leasing,  which may have minimized  the interest-rate  effects.

Auto dealers  reported inventory  shortages  in several  models, even  some import makes.

Auto  producers have not altered their sales  forecast  for the year,  although the full

impact of the recent interest  rate increases  has apparently introduced  an element  of

uncertainty.  More  hiring is occurring  in some areas,  but few auto-related  manufacturers

plan to expand  capacity to meet current  demand.

Loan  Demand

Bankers in the District report mixed loan  demand,  although consumer  lending

activity  continues to outpace  business credit needs.  While some bankers  reported  growth

IV-3

in  various  commercial  and industrial  loan  categories  in early April,  most  indicated  that

credit  demands here  remained  about  even.  Some bankers  suggested  that high corporate

profitability  and  improved  liquidity  may  be prompting  businesses  to fund investments

internally.

Consumer  lending  activity  was reported  to be brisk, even  outside the auto-related

categories.  Loan demand  has picked up from mid-March  and  the early April  numbers

appear to be  good.  Competition  from  nonbank credit  sources  remains  stiff, however.

All  of the bankers  contacted  anticipate further  increases  in  the federal  funds rate

this year,  although they  differ in opinion  concerning  the timing  of such  actions.

FIFTH  DISTRICT-RICHMOND

Overview

Continued  economic  growth  was  indicated  by  increased  activity  in  manufacturing,  real

estate,  agriculture,  and  in  the  service-producing  sectors,  including  ports  and  tourism.  Trends

in the  financial  sector  were  less  certain;  mortgage  refinancings  declined,  but  consumer  and

commercial  loan  demand  remained  fairly  strong.  Upward  pressures  on  prices were  reported

for  manufacturers'  inputs  and  for  building  materials.  Wages  rose  in the  service-producing

sectors,  and  commercial  rents  increased  in  some  areas.

Consumer  Spending

Retailers  in all  District  states  reported  improved  business  in March.  Employment

changed  little,  but  most other  indicators  were  up.  Retailers  expected  consumer  demand  to

increase  in the  next  six  months.  Respondents  reported  a 0.4  percent  increase  in retail prices

in March,  and  they  expected  prices  to rise  1.1  percent  during  the  next  six months.

Manufacturing

Our  mail  survey  of manufacturers  indicated  increased  District factory  activity  in

March.  Shipments,  new  orders,  and  backlogs  grew,  but employment  changed  little.  Raw

materials prices  rose  by  less  than  the  general  rate  of inflation;  finished  goods  prices  were

steady.  Several  contacts  doubted  that  production  cost  increases  could  be passed  along  to

purchasers.  While  most producers  agreed  that cost  increases  were  limited  so  far  to raw

materials,  one  manufacturer  noted that  "price  pressures  were  no  longer  dormant."

Manufacturers  expected  higher  shipments  and  prices  over  the  next  six  months  but  little  change

in  employment.

Service-Producing  Sectors

Our  mail  survey  of District  service-producing  firms  showed  increased  activity  in

March.  All  sectors  reported  increased  revenues,  and  respondents  expected  stronger  demand  in

the  next  six  months.  All  sectors  except  wholesale  trade  reported  higher  wages.  The  real

estate  and  health  services  sectors  reported  increased  employment;  all  other  sectors  indicated  no

change.  Respondents  reported  a  0.2  percent  price  increase  during  March,  and  they  expected

prices  to rise  1.0  percent  during  the next  six  months.

Ports

Representatives  at  the  District  ports  of Baltimore,  Charleston,  and  Hampton  Roads

(Norfolk)  indicated  that  exports  were  generally  higher  in March  than  in February,  while

imports  were  unchanged.  Compared  with  a year  ago,  imports  were  higher  and  exports

remained  about  the  same.  All  three  ports  expected  exports  to  increase  faster  than  imports

during  the  next  six  months.

Tourism

Tourist  activity  at  District  hotels,  motels,  and  resorts  was  higher  in the  first  three

weeks  of April  than  in  March  or  in April  1993.  Myrtle  Beach  noted  that  group  bookings  rose

because  of the  increased  interest  in golfing  packages  offered  in that  area.  Almost  all  of the

respondents  indicated  that  spring  bookings  were  higher than  a year  ago,  and most respondents

expected  tourist  activity  to  improve  further  relative  to  year-earlier  figures  during  the  next  six  months.

Finance

District  financial  institutions  indicated  that  credit  conditions  were  mixed  during  the  last

six  weeks.  Interest rates  on  commercial  loans  increased  faster  than  did  rates  on  consumer

loans.  Loan  demand  remained  fairly  strong.  Some  commercial  lenders  noted  that  a  few

businesses  were  delaying  new  projects  because  of interest  rate  uncertainty,  but  most

commercial  and  consumer  lenders  were  optimistic  that  demand  would  remain  relatively

strong,  given  current  rates.  Mortgage  originations  were  steady,  but  refinancing  activity  fell

substantially  as  residential  mortgage  rates  rose.  Mortgage  lenders  were  cautious  about  future

loan demand  because  of their  fears  of further  rate  increases.

Residential  Real  Estate  Housing

Our  contacts  reported  that  District residential  real  estate  activity  remained  strong  in

late  February  and  March.  Improved  home  sales  were  attributed  to  an  improving  economy.

Most real  estate  agents  indicated  no  discernible  negative  effect  on  sales from  recent  mortgage

rate  increases,  though  they  observed  heightened  uncertainty  among  buyers.  Most

homebuilders  indicated  that  housing  starts  were  slightly  fewer  than expected  during  the

period,  and  some  attributed  the  slower  pace  to  higher  mortgage  rates.  Home  prices  changed

little,  and  lumber  prices  rose  only  slightly,  although  prices  of other  building  materials

increased  sharply.

Commercial  Real  Estate

Commercial  real  estate  contacts  reported  declining  vacancy  rates throughout  the

District.  Demand  for  space  was  especially  strong  in North  Carolina,  and  contacts  in Charlotte

and  Raleigh  indicated  that shortages  of space  might  occur  soon.  Contacts  reported  little  new

V-4

construction  in most  areas,  although  some  speculative  warehouse  construction  was  underway

in the  Carolinas.  Rental  rates  increased  in  North  Carolina  and  in parts  of West  Virginia,

while  rents  in other  states  remained  unchanged.  Charlotte  contacts  predicted  larger  rental  rate

increases  in  1995;  some  Raleigh  contacts,  however,  speculated  that rent  increases  might  end  in

1995  with  the  addition  of new  space.  Large  discount  retailers  continued  to  dominate  retail

leasing  except  in  Charlotte,  where  contacts  noted  increased  leasing  by  smaller  shops.

State  Revenues

State  governments'  March  revenues  suggested  reasonably  strong  economic  growth

across  the  District.  North  Carolina's  revenue  growth remained  strongest;  the District  of

Columbia's  was  weakest,  though  inflation-adjusted  revenue  growth there  was no  longer

negative.  Several  states  reported  very  strong retail  sales,  particularly  of automobiles.

Agriculture

Generally  favorable  weather  assisted  farmers  with their  spring  field  work.  Corn

planting progressed  at  an  above-normal  pace  across  the  District.  Field preparation  for

soybean,  tobacco,  and  peanut  planting  was  also  reported  to be  ahead  of schedule.  Cattle  had

been put  into  pastures,  which  were  in  generally  good  condition.  Farmers  were  optimistic  that

the  hay  crop  would  be  sufficient  to  replenish  the  stock  depleted  as  a result  of last  winter's

severe  weather.  The  peach  crop  was  in fair-to-poor  condition.  On  a pessimistic  note,  dry

weather  was  reported  in  eastern  South  Carolina.

VI-1

SIXTH  DISTRICT  - ATLANTA

Overview:  Business contacts reported  that the Southeast economy continued  to expand

at a healthy pace in April.  Retailers  noted  that spring  sales improved  over last year's levels,  and

the majority  of auto dealers  also  saw year-over-year  sales gains.  Manufacturers  in most sectors

reported increases in new orders,  shipments,  and production,  although defense-related  producers

continue  to  struggle.  Bankers  said  that  overall  loan  demand  was  more  mixed  than  in  recent

months,  mainly  because  of large  but  anticipated  declines  in residential  mortgage  refinancings.

Single-family  home  building  remained  strong  throughout  the  District,  while  commercial  real

estate  markets  also  continued  to show  improvement.  Wages  and  input  prices  were  reported  to

be  stable  by  most  manufacturers.  However,  firms  linked  to  the  home  building  industry

experienced rising  materials prices as well as continuing  upward pressure on  wages,  particularly

for  skilled construction  workers.

Consumer Spending:  District retailers  reported  that spring  sales have been better than

expected this year, with several noting double-digit year-over-year  sales growth.  Durable goods

continue  to  sell well,  but most of the recent  improvement  in sales  have  come  from  nondurable

goods.  Sales  of women's  apparel  have  improved  considerably  over  last  year's  disappointing

levels,  while  men's  and  children's  clothing  sales  have  been  quite  strong.  Despite  this

improvement  in  sales,  there  were  no  reports  of  upward  retail  price  pressures.  Most  retailers

remain  cautious  in  their  expectations  for  this  year  and  continue  to  maintain  relatively  lean

inventories.  Auto  dealers  continued  to report year-over-year  increases  in  sales,  and  most  were

optimistic  about their  prospects  for  the remainder  of this  model year.

Tourism:  Tourism officials  in Florida expect  a 4 percent  increase  in visitor traffic  in

1994  following  a  "disappointing"  1993.  The state hopes  to see an  increase  in tourists  from  the

improving  economies  of Latin  America  and  the Caribbean.  However,  the number of European

VI-2

visitors  remains  down  in  south  Florida.  Several  travel agencies  that  cater  mainly  to Europeans

have  been  forced  to  lay  off employees  because  of  the  dramatic  reduction  in  bookings.  By

contrast,  Mississippi's  gaming  industry  reportedly  has  created  16,000  jobs  directly  and

"energized" tourism  in the state.  In New Orleans,  first quarter figures suggest record occupancy

levels  at  local  hotels.

Manufacturing:  Manufacturers  in  most  sectors  reported  increases  in  production,

shipments,  and  new  orders  in  April,  as  well  as  positive  expectations  for  future  activity.  The

major exceptions  to this  rule are defense  and  aerospace  producers  who  continue  to  struggle  in

the face  of domestic  defense  cutbacks and  weak  foreign  markets.  Production  and  shipments  of

household  textiles  remain  strong,  and  there  have been  recent  reports  of improving  demand  for

apparel  fabric.  Capital  equipment  producers  have  noted  increases  in  recent  business  activity.

Several consumer goods  manufacturers  announced plans  for plant expansions  to be completed  in

the District  within the  next year.  Regional  suppliers  to the  automotive industry  are  reported  to

be  running  at  near  capacity,  while  temporary  help  agencies  that  supply  workers  to  the

manufacturing  industry  continue  to  report strong  demand  for  their  services.

Construction:  Realtors across the Southeast generally  reported that single-family  home

sales  were  strong  in  April.  According  to  several  contacts,  the  recent  increases  in  mortgage

financing  rates  have created a slight surge in buying activity  which they expect  to taper  off over

the next few months.  Inventories  of homes for sale remain  low in many  areas,  stimulating price

increases in the most active  markets.  New homes continue to be among popular sellers,  keeping

building  contractors  extremely  busy  in  most areas.

Commercial  and  multifamily  real  estate  markets  continue  to  improve  slowly.

Commercial  and  office  vacancy  rates  have  declined  throughout  the  District  while  leasing  has

improved.  Although  no new speculative  construction  has been  announced  recently,  commercial

VI-3

real  estate agents in several areas have noted an increase in discussions about possible speculative

projects.  In addition,  rising  apartment  rents  have encouraged  new  multifamily  construction  in

several  District  cities.

Financial  Services:  According  to  District bankers,  loan  demand  was  more  mixed in

April than it had been in previous  months.  Most institutions reported declines in home  mortgage

lending  as  the  recent uptick in  rates caused  refinancings  to plummet.  However,  these declines

were  anticipated,  and  there  was general  agreement  that  it  was  too early  to  tell  if rate  increases

would  affect other loan areas.  Commercial  loan demand  generally  was reported  to be moderate

to  strong,  although  contacts  in  several  areas  reported  some  slowdown  in business  lending.

Wages  and  Prices:  Most  contacts  continued  to  report no  change  in  the prices  paid

either  for raw  materials  or  for prices  received  for  finished  products.  Although  home  builders

reported  that  lumber prices  have begun  to stabilize,  they  noted  that  the prices  of other  building

materials,  as well  as  wages  for  skilled  construction  labor,  have  continued  to rise.

VII-1

SEVENTH  DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.  Seventh District economic  conditions  continued  to improve  in March  and  April, with retail  sales

boosted by substantially  greater improvement  in the  weather than the norm for this time of year.  Aside  from the

weather effects, the underlying  upward momentum  in consumption  and housing activity may have  slowed

somewhat from the unusually  rapid fourth  quarter pace.  Reports from manufacturers  generally  remained  quite

upbeat,  although a  number of manufacturing  contacts  expressed  greater uncertainty  about the pace of activity  in

their markets  in the latter half of 1994,  citing the effects of increases  in interest rates.  Reports  of price increases

remained  concentrated  in  building materials  and metals industries.  Early planting and  weaker export prospects

are  currently  weighing on crop prices, but District farmland  values continued  to  appreciate  in early  1994.

Retail  Sales and Housing.  Consumer spending  and housing activity continued to expand in the District in

recent months,  aided by substantial  improvement  in the weather following  unusually harsh conditions  earlier  in

the  year.  A large general  merchandise  retailer stated that underlying  sales momentum  remained positive through

early  April, with sales of home furnishings  and other housing-related  items  still leading overall sales growth.  This

firm's outstanding  consumer loans  are  still rising,  while delinquency  rates continue to decline.  Another large

national  retailer reported  that its sales  growth slowed in April on a holiday-adjusted  basis.  A large retail  chain

concentrated  in  the District reported that  sales of seasonal  items, such  as lawn and garden  and sports equipment,

improved  in line with plan during March  and  April.  A group  of retailers  in Michigan  reported improvement  in

apparel sales growth during March,  and a large general merchandise  firm also reported better apparel  sales gains

in March.  A commercial  real estate firm expected new  shopping center  construction in the  Chicago  area to  rise

nearly 40 percent in 1994,  partly due to  the entry of new chains in the local market,  and some  financial  industry

contacts  expressed  concern about the pace of new retail space  creation in the area.

A large realtor  reported that existing home  sales  transactions  were about in line  with last year, but noted that

listings have been moving  down for the first time in a long time.  This contact stated that higher mortgage  interest

rates probably brought more buyers into the market in the first quarter, potentially borrowing  from sales later in

the year.  A large association of homebuilders in the  Chicago area reported that traffic  increased from  strong year-

earlier levels in the first quarter, but then fell off during April.  While many builders have expressed  concern

about the impact of higher mortgage  interest rates,  this contact believed  buyer confidence remains  strong.

VII-2

Manufacturing.  Manufacturing  activity continued  to lead the District  economy in March  and early April.

Purchasing managers'  surveys in Chicago,  Detroit and Milwaukee  suggested  that manufacturing  output growth in

the District picked up further momentum  in the first quarter, following significant gains in the  fourth quarter  of

1993.  Purchasing managers'  surveys conducted in Western Michigan suggested that  strong growth continued  in

late March, with gains led  by the  auto industry.  A steel industry  analyst  stated that "integrated  mills are  still going

full out,"  as automakers  continue to push for order fills.  Heavy-duty  truck orders surged to an all-time  high in

March,  according  to  an industry analyst,  and retail sales bounced back following  slower, weather-impacted  results

in January and February.  Shortages  of construction  machinery are developing  sooner in the  year than they did last

year, according to an industry  analyst.  A large regional bank stated that its mid-sized manufacturing  customers

are  still generally  enjoying  "very healthy" orders  gains, led by firms  in automotive  and machine tool-related

industries.  A large manufacturer  of communications  systems stated that growth in systems installations was still

running in line with the healthy results for the fourth quarter, with especially  strong results in Northern  Illinois.  A

large diversified  manufacturer reported a pickup in industrial chemical  sales in Europe,  although  its sales of

agricultural equipment  in Europe  remain relatively weak.  A large electronics  manufacturer reported  that its

worldwide bookings continued to grow at a rapid pace in late  1993  and early  1994, but the growth rate may have

slowed slightly  in recent months.

Autos.  Auto industry  contacts reported  that sales results thus far in April pointed to a modest slowing in

seasonally  adjusted  sales rates.  Discussions  with a wide variety of auto dealers  were mixed but generally

positive, although one of the largest dealers in the District noted that "it seems like  someone just turned off the

faucet,"  citing interest rate increases  and customer concern with their losses in financial markets.  Several banking

contacts  noted that residential  refinancing has "dried  up," and one  regional analyst  expected this to inhibit auto

sales  in coming  months.  Auto dealers in Michigan reported  substantial strengthening in April sales, as consumers

rush to beat a state sales tax  increase slated for May.  Auto suppliers in the region  continued to produce at high

levels,  and one large auto  supplier stated that the run-up in long-term  interest rates  in early  1994 has not yet

affected its expectations  for significant growth in  1994.  Year-over-year growth  in motor vehicle assemblies in the

District continued to post larger increases  than the nation  as a whole  in early  1994.

VII-3

Agriculture.  Most areas  of the  District have experienced  warm  and unusually dry  weather patterns  this

spring, although there was  some localized  flooding in mid April.  Crop farmers  responded  with faster-than-normal

progress  with field work.  The pace picked up dramatically during the  week ending April 23,  when corn planting

began in earnest in most areas.  The early start has buoyed prospects  for the  1994 harvest,  which has combined

with a weak pace in export shipments to weigh on crop prices.

The latest survey  of District agricultural  bankers  found the farmland  market strengthened  further this winter.

The two  percent gain reported  for the three months  ending with March was  fairly  widespread throughout the

District, and  it was the largest such increase  in several quarters.  The volume  of farmland  transfers picked  up

during the winter months, fueled both by a stronger demand among  buyers and  a pick up in offerings  for sale.

Prices.  Reports of price  increases remained  concentrated in metals  and building  materials markets.  A steel

industry  analyst stated that  steel prices are  "definitely moving higher."  Negotiations  between integrated  mills and

automakers  have taken on a more  "commercial" tone, as opposed to a dictatorial character  in recent years.  Steel

price  increases  are concentrated  in special  orders for nonstandard  sizes that take more time to fill, as production

time has become  more valuable at current levels of capacity utilization.  Steel scrap  prices have stabilized  in

recent months, however, after exploding last year.  A large  bank stated that its mid-sized manufacturing  clients

are  still unwilling to pass on metals price increases,  and  "for the time being,  are willing to eat them."  A large

association of homebuilders  stated greater lumber shortages  are  expected during the summer, along with new

shortages  of dry wall.  A large manufacturer  of a variety of chemicals has not experienced  significant price

increases  for inputs, while competitive pressures  continue to dampen its own prices and margins.  A large auto

supplier stated that it has recently  received price  increase notices from its suppliers,  but has  been successful in

resisting those requests, and  remains unable to implement price increases to its large automaker  customers.  A

large electronics  manufacturer noted that price increases for components sold to the  auto industry  seem to have

become  more feasible, but they haven't been implemented, noting that "we don't want to pay the price  when the

downside  arrives."  Two large retailers  each stated that prices paid by their customers  continue  to decline, on

balance.  The price component of the  Chicago purchasing  managers'  survey indicated  modestly faster price

increases  in early  1994, but this index remained  below year-earlier  levels, and  considerably below its  average

level in  1988  and  1989.

VIII-1

EIGHTH  DISTRICT  - ST.  LOUIS

Summary

The  District  economy  has  expanded  robustly  in  recent  months  with  many  firms

reporting  expansions,  additions  to payrolls  and  increases  in  sales.  Auto  manufacturers  in

particular  report  booming  activity,  and  expect to increase  auto production  employment  in

St.  Louis  to  the  highest  level  since  1989.  Input price pressures  remain  muted  for  many

firms.  In a recent  survey  of District  small businesses,  about  30 percent  believe economic

conditions  will  improve  further  during  the  next quarter.  The  District's real  estate  sector

remains  in  high  gear,  as  evidenced  by  double-digit  increases  in  building  permits  and

frequent  assessments  that  homes  available  for  sale  are  in  short  supply.  Loan  demand,

especially  for consumer  loans,  continues  to  pick up  at  area  banks.  Fertilizer prices  have

risen  dramatically  from  year-ago  levels.

Manufacturing and Other Business  Activity

District  firms,  particularly  manufacturing  firms,  report healthy growth,  citing plant

expansions  and  new  hirings.  Announcements  of  expansions  by  two  of  the  three  auto

makers  in  St.  Louis  will  boost  the  region's  auto  production  significantly.  One  firm  will

reopen  its  second  plant  to  build pickup  trucks  and  minivans.  The  other  firm  will  build

both  minivans  and  sport  utility vehicles in  the same  plant.  Reports  are  that these  moves,

along  with the  third auto  firm's plant reopening  in  1995  to build  full-size vans,  will bring

St.  Louis  auto production  employment  to  15,000,  its highest  level  since  1989.

A  St.  Louis-based  defense  contractor received  the Administration's approval  to sell

fighter jets to Israel,  guaranteeing  about 5,000jobs through  mid-1998.  One of the nation's

largest  trucking  companies  is hiring  300  more  drivers  for  its Memphis  terminal  to  meet

higher  demand.  A  maker  of screen-printed  T-shirts  in  Louisville  will  add  220  workers

because  of  increased  demand.  A  maker  of  refrigeration  compressors  in  northwest

VIII-2

Mississippi  will add  400 workers  as  it undergoes  an  $80 million  expansion.  An  Arkansas

poultry  processor  selected  Pine  Bluff for  its first  of four  new  plants  to  be  built,  bringing

another  400 jobs into  the  area.

Firms  in northeast  Arkansas  and northwestern  Tennessee  also report growth.  For

example,  a building  supplies company reports a  10 percent  year-to-date  sales increase  over

last  year,  and  a  metal  salvage  company  reports  year-to-date  revenues  up  40 percent  over

last  year.  A  conveyor  manufacturer  and  a  caster  manufacturer  report  year-to-date  sales

increases  of between  3 percent  and  5 percent  over last  year.

There  were,  however,  also  some  reports  of layoffs.  An  apparel  maker  is letting

250 workers  go from  its  Arkansas  plant because  of cuts  in  production.  A  paper products

maker  sold  its Memphis  plant  to another  firm,  resulting  in the  loss  of 650 jobs.  A  shoe

manufacturer  will  lay  off  350  employees  from  its  Missouri  plant;  about  100  of  these

workers  will  be offered  positions  at  other  plants,  though.

A  recent  National  Federation  of Independent  Businesses  survey  of District  firms

reveals  that  about  19  percent  think  now  is  a  good  time  to  expand  and  about  30 percent

believe general  economic  conditions will improve during the next quarter.  During the first

quarter,  14  percent  increased  employment,  and  20 percent  plan  to increase  employment

this  quarter.

Prices

According  to  the  aforementioned  NFIB  survey,  about  17  percent  of small  firms

reported  price  increases  during  the first quarter  of the year,  while nearly  30 percent  plan

to increase  their prices this quarter.  Elsewhere,  an  informal survey  of several mostly large

Eighth  District  firms  suggests  that, 

in  general,  cost  pressures  remain  modest  to

nonexistent.  A  large  appliance  manufacturer,  for  example,  reports  that  it  continues  to

resist  price  pressures  from  its  suppliers  where  possible;  this  behavior  was  also  noted  by

other  firms.  A  few  firms  reported  that  prices  of important  raw  materials-for  example,

steel,  aluminum and  certain petrochemicals-have  increased  recently.  A bathroom  fixture

VIII-3

manufacturer  reports  that  significant  price  pressures  have  developed  in  certain  resins,

chemicals  and corrugated  cardboard.  A food and beverage  manufacturer reports that lower

packaging  costs  in  the  first  quarter  (year-over-year  basis)  more  than  offset  higher prices

for raw ingredients.  Some  firms  suggest  that  they  expect  to see increased  price  pressures

for raw  materials beginning  early  next year.  On the output  side,  nearly  all firms  surveyed

report  that  competitive  pressures  preclude  any  substantive  price  increases.  Some  firms,

however,  are  trying  to  increase  prices  where  possible,  with  varying  degrees  of success.

Construction and Real  Estate

Residential  construction  activity  remains  brisk,  and  recent  increases  in  long-term

interest  rates have apparently  spurred  "fence  sitters"  into  the market.  Despite  recent  cost

pressures,  especially  for lumber,  two-thirds  of District  construction  respondents  in  a  first

quarter  1994  small-business  survey  had  no  plans  to  increase  prices  in  the  next  three

months.  District  real  estate  agents  report  a  shortage  of houses  on  the  market,  especially

in the  mid-priced  range,  and note  that  many  sellers  are  receiving  two  or  more  bids at  the

asking  price  or higher.

Banking and Finance

Loan  demand  continues  to  pick  up  modestly  in  most  parts  of  the  District.

Consumer  loan  demand  is  generally  characterized  as  stronger  than  commercial  loan

demand.  Rates paid  on deposits have risen only  slightly  in response  to the general pick-up

in  interest  rates.  Mortgage  refinancing  activity  has  slowed  considerably  because  of the

recent  increases  in long-term  rates.

Agriculture and Natural Resources

Fertilizer  prices  have  increased  substantially  over  last  year's  relatively  low  levels

according  to  three  large  manufacturers.  Prices  have  increased  because  of  reduced

ammonia  supplies  from  the  former  Soviet  Union,  unanticipated  shutdowns  of domestic

plants  and  an  increase  in  demand  stemming  from  a  relatively  large  U.S.  corn  acreage.

These  prices  are  expected  to  prevail  throughout  the  planting  season  and  into  late  May.

IX-I

NINTH  DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

The  economy of the  Ninth Federal  Reserve  District shows  strong  growth  in  early  spring.

Automobile sales  are  booming and  general  merchandise  sales have reportedly  increased.

Construction  remains  strong  in comparison  to past years  and markets  for existing residences

are tight.  Manufacturing  sales reportedly  continue  to strengthen.  Mining  output shows  little

change,  but petroleum  production  in the  district continues  to erode  slightly.  With  favorable

weather, the  crop  season  is off to a strong start.  Livestock  numbers  remain high  and continue

to trend  slightly upward.  Employment  levels  are  generally 3  percent  above year-earlier

levels,  and  unemployment  rates remain  below  the national  average  and  year-earlier  levels.

There is little evidence  of significant  upward  movement in  wages,  but employers  in  some

regions report  difficulty  in finding qualified  new hires.  A  few  manufacturers  report difficulty

in  securing  some inputs.

Consumer  spending  and tourism

"One of the  best first quarters  ever,"  said  a state  auto dealers  association  spokesperson  in

describing  vehicle  sales.  His  assessment  was  echoed  by counterparts  in  other states  and

verified  by Minnesota first-quarter  new registrations,  which were  up 6 percent  over  year-

earlier figures  for automobiles and  over 50 percent for pickups.  In  South  Dakota  car  and

pickup  sales  were  up  nearly  19 percent.  General merchandise  sales  also appear stronger.

"First-quarter  sales  were well  above last  year's," reported  a marketing  manager  for one  South

Dakota  mall.  Regional  department  store  chains  also reported  improved  sales.

Tourism  is stable.  Winter  business in  Wisconsin,  Minnesota  and Michigan's  Upper

Peninsula  was  slower than normal  due  to cold  weather, according  to industry  officials  and a

director.  But South  Dakota enjoyed a strong  ski  and  snowmobile  season.  Industry officials

are  generally  optimistic  about the summer  season;  Montana,  in particular,  is gearing  up  for a

very strong  season  after a recent  spate of laudatory  news  articles  about  that state's  tourism

opportunities.

IX-II

Construction  and  real  estate

Construction  of all types is  very  strong  across the  Ninth  District, and markets  for existing

housing are  tight in many metropolitan  areas.  March  new housing  permits  in the

Minneapolis-St.  Paul  area  were  10  percent  above  1993  levels.  Commenting  on  the  effects of

recent mortgage rate increases,  one building association  spokesperson  states,  "We're

concerned,  but so far all it's  done  is get the fence  sitters off the fence."  Industry  sources  note

very active  home  building in  Sioux  Falls,  S.D.,  and described  the  market  for existing housing

as  the  tightest in  years.  Residential  construction  is reportedly  also robust in  Billings,  Mont.

and Eau  Claire, Wis.  Directors  from North  Dakota  and Wisconsin  describe  very  strong

commercial  building  in their  areas in  addition  to active  home  building.  Newspapers  from

Montana,  North Dakota  and  South  Dakota  echo these  reports.  In Minnesota  and  the  Dakotas,

commercial  and heavy  construction  contracts  through  the  first quarter were down  slightly

from  1993  levels  but still 24 percent  above  1992.

Manufacturing  and  natural  resource industries

District directors  note  growing  sales  by  small and  medium-size  manufacturing  firms.

Institutional  furniture,  farm  machinery  and building  components  face  particularly  good  sales

environments.  A  metal components  firm describes  good sales  growth  for automotive,

appliance  and housing-related  items  but little  growth  in other areas.  First-quarter reports  for

publicly  traded  manufacturing  firms show  strong growth  in revenues  and earnings.  Industrial

use  of electricity  continues  to  grow above  trend in  Minnesota and  South  Dakota.

The  Ninth  District petroleum  sector  is reportedly  suffering  the  effects  of low  crude  prices.

A  director reports  that  some existing wells  are being  shut in,  and published  rig counts  are  the

lowest  in  10  years.  Crude production  is down about 5  percent from  a year ago,  although

refinery  throughput  is up  12 percent  as upgrades  at three major refineries  have  come  on

stream.  Non-ferrous  metal  mining output shows  little change.  Ice  packed  in  Lake  Superior

near  the  Soo  locks continued  to impede  ore shipping  in mid-April  but  was  expected  to clear

rapidly  with  warmer  weather.

IX-III

Agriculture

After  1993's  difficulties,  the  1994  crop  season  is  opening with near ideal  conditions.

Moisture  levels  are  adequate  in virtually  all  areas,  relatively  few areas  complain  of surplus

moisture,  and little of the  flooding that was  anticipated  earlier actually  materialized.  Crop

planting  on  April  15  slightly  lagged  long-term averages  but was  generally  ahead  of year-

earlier  levels.  State  agricultural  statisticians  also  noted that weather  was  ideal  in  the  week  of

April  18-23  and  anticipated  that planting  of most crops  would  be well  ahead  of historical

levels  by the  end of the month.  Planted  acreages  of most major  crops  are expected  to  be

steady  or up  from  1993  levels.

Output of slaughter livestock  is  strong;  numbers  of livestock on  farms  and slaughter  levels

show moderate  growth  from  year-earlier  levels.  With  higher  grain  prices,  feeding  livestock  is

less  profitable  than  a  year ago,  but industry  observers expect  numbers  to  continue  to grow

modestly throughout  1994.  However,  dairy production  is down  somewhat from comparable

periods  in  1993  in spite  of generally  higher milk prices.  The decline  is  most pronounced  in

Wisconsin,  but  Minnesota  and South  Dakota also show  some slippage.

Employment, prices  and  wages

Employment shows  increasing  growth.  March  non-farm  employment  numbers  across  the

district are  about  3  percent above  year-earlier  levels.  A  director  noted that some firms  in

North  Dakota  experience  increasing difficulty  in  attracting qualified  workers.  Similar

problems  are  reported in  areas of  South Dakota,  Minnesota  and Wisconsin.  Unemployment

rates  are down  from March  1993  levels  in all  states  but North  Dakota.  Excepting  Michigan's

Upper  Peninsula,  unemployment  levels  throughout  the  Ninth  District remain  well  below  the

national  average.

Directors  and industry  sources  report  wage  increases  in  the  1 percent  to 3  percent range

for both private  and public  sector workers.  Price  increases  have  been reported  for some

industrial  inputs,  including  wood particle  board  and metal finishing  chemicals.  Several  firms

reportedly  have difficulty  in  securing desired  quantities of particle  board,  and there  is  one

report of shortages  in  certain  types of steel.  Lumber  prices remain  higher  than  a year  ago,

while  petroleum  fuels  continue  3 to  10  cents per  gallon  below early  1993  levels.

X-1

TENTH DISTRICT  - KANSAS  CITY

Overview.  The  Tenth District  economy appears  to be  growing at  a healthy

pace.  Residential construction and retail  sales  are  increasing  and the  demand

for bank loans  is  strengthening.  In  the farm  sector, profit margins  on cattle

are higher.  District energy activity, however, has  slowed  further.  Retail

prices  remain generally stable, while manufacturers'  input  prices  are

increasing  slightly.

Retail  Sales.  Most district  retailers  report moderate  sales  increases

over  both the  past year and the  past month.  Led by strong  sales  of  spring  and

summer  apparel,  total  sales  are expected to  increase steadily  in the next  few

months.  Keen competition has  kept retail prices  stable and  is  expected to

preclude  any significant  price  increases  in the near term.  Most retailers  are

satisfied with current  inventory levels,  although some  respondents  expect  to

increase  inventory purchases  in response to  rising demand.

Most auto dealers  report  sales  increases  from last month and anticipate

further increases  in the next  few months.  Financing is  available for

inventories,  and potential buyers  are generally able to  obtain loans.  Dealers

are  generally maintaining current  inventory levels.

Manufacturing.  Purchasing agents  report slightly higher input  prices

compared with a year ago.  Few expect further price  increases  in  the near

term.  Most  agents  report no problems with  input  availability nor with changes

in  lead  times,  and they generally predict no major difficulties  in  acquiring

inputs  for the  remainder of the  year.  Several  respondents  are  reducing

current inventory  levels and  intend  to continue  doing  so  in  the near term.  A

number of  respondents also report their firms  are operating  closer  to

X-2

capacity, but most  report no bottlenecks.  Few purchasing  agents  report they

have yet been seriously affected by the  Teamsters  strike.

Energy.  District  energy activity has  slowed  further as natural  gas

prices have  softened and  crude oil  prices  have  remained low.  Sources  in

Kansas  report declines  in oil  production, with continued closings  of high-cost

stripper wells.  Overall,  the number of  drilling rigs  operating  in district

states  fell  from  237  in February to  218  in March.  The  rig  count  continued to

fall  in the  first  half of April to  212.

Housing.  Housing  starts  remain  significantly higher than a year ago and

have  generally  increased over the  past month.  Builders  expect  starts  to

remain  strong for  the  rest  of  the  year.  Sales  of new homes are  also strong,

causing a very low  inventory of unsold homes  despite  the  increases  in starts.

Prices  of building materials  remain high.  Slight  increases  in delivery times

have been reported.

Mortgage  demand has  declined  as  refinancing has  lessened, mainly due  to

increasing mortgage  rates.  But most  respondents  expect  demand to  remain about

constant  for the  rest  of the  year, due  to  the  expectation that rates will  soon

level  off.

Banking.  Loan demand at most  reporting banks  strengthened last month.

Most banks  report higher demand for consumer  loans,  residential  construction

loans,  and  commercial and industrial  loans.  Demand was generally unchanged

for  commercial  real  estate  loans  and agricultural loans,  and mixed for home

equity  loans.  Loan-deposit ratios were mostly unchanged from the  previous

month, and  investments  were  flat.

Almost  all respondents raised their prime rate  last month and  expect

further  increases  in  the near term.  However, most banks  left their  consumer

X-3

lending rates  unchanged and anticipate  no change  in those  rates  in  the near

future.  Lending  standards were unchanged.

Deposits  at most  banks  were up.  Demand deposits  and money market

deposit accounts  were  generally higher.  NOW accounts  and  small  time  deposits

were  constant  to higher, while  large CDs  were mixed.

Agriculture.  The district's  winter wheat  crop remains  in good

condition, having escaped with only minor frost  damage  in  early April.  Spring

rainfall has  improved crop  prospects  in wheat-growing regions  that had been

unusually dry,  but additional rainfall  is needed to  ensure  normal wheat

yields.  While  preparing fields  for  spring plantings,  most  district farmers

are waiting to  plant corn and  soybeans  until warmer and  drier weather arrives.

Cattle  feedlots  in the  district  are operating near capacity. Producers

are avoiding a buildup of  cattle  inventories,  however, even though higher

cattle  prices  and  lower feed costs  in recent  weeks  have boosted profit

margins.  Producers  remain  cautious because  larger  supplies  of  beef, and

competing meats  are  expected to push cattle prices down later  this  year.

District bankers report  generally steady retail  sales activity  and no

adverse effects of  the recent  trucking  strike activity  in their rural  lending

areas.  Spending was  somewhat  restrained, however, by lower  incomes  in  some

farm-dependent  communities, which suffered  large  crop losses  in  last  summer's

heavy rains  and flooding.

ELEVENTH DISTRICT--DALLAS

Economic  activity  continued to  expand at  a moderate pace. Price

pressures were mixed. Additional  hiring  led to  scattered wage pressures  in

some  industries. Manufacturers reported  an  increase  in  orders.  Business

service  firms  said that demand was  higher  and that prices  were generally

stable  or  lower.  Construction  and real  estate demand  increased  leading to

higher  prices  in  several markets.  Strength in natural gas  prices  kept  energy

activity stronger  than expected despite weakness  in oil  prices.  Agricultural

conditions  improved.

Manufacturing orders  increased,  leading to  hiring  and  scattered wage

pressures.  Price movements were mixed. Demand  for  construction-related

manufacturing continued to  be  strong. Brick and cement  producers were

operating at  capacity and tight  inventories  led to higher prices. Glass

producers  said that they were  hiring because of  higher  demand  from automobile

manufacturers. Orders  for  lumber and wood products weakened but were stronger

than a year earlier.  Some  contacts  lowered their  lumber prices  to unload

inventory because they were  concerned that  demand would slow.  Sales  of

corrugated  boxes  increased, while  sales  of  other  packaging materials remained

steady. Prices  and input  costs were higher  for boxes and  packaging products.

Primary metal producers reported higher demand  for their products, especially

steel.  Demand for  fabricated metals was  slightly below year-ago levels.  Sales

of  electrical  and  electronic machinery  increased. Prices  were lower  for

semiconductors,  printed circuit boards,  and computers.  Apparel contacts  said

that  demand for  garments  increased,  and they were optimistic  that  growth  in

orders would  continue.  Higher wages  led to higher  prices  for  some  apparel

products. Growth  in  contracts  for  garment-finishing slowed,  however, causing

lay  offs  in this  segment  of  the industry.  Some of  this  work was absorbed  into

other parts  of  the industry  through vertical  integration. Some  garment-

finishing was moved  to  other  countries,  including Mexico, and some  contracts

were  delayed because a new  "wrinkle-free" process had  slowed production.

XI-2

Demand  for  food  and kindred products increased.  Food producers  reported that

they were  passing along  higher  costs  by raising their prices. Demand  for

chemicals  remained strong.  Inventories  of  ethylene and propylene were very

low, and prices  increased  for those  and some  other  chemicals.  Despite the

increases, prices  remained low for many  chemicals  and several  companies  were

planning  restructurings and  job  cuts. Refiners  reported that  cold weather  had

stimulated  demand for  oil products  and that  low oil prices  had boosted profit

margins.  Demand and margins  slipped this  spring,  but  remained healthy.  Natural

gas  drilling continued to boost  demand for  oil  field  equipment  and services. A

backlog  of  orders  is  expected to  keep sales  of  energy-related manufacturing

strong  through the second  quarter. Except  for  Canada, foreign demand  for

energy equipment  and services  had been weak.

Business service  firms  said  that  demand increased  and prices were

generally  stable.  Temporary service  contacts  still  reported the  strongest

activity, but  advertising, accounting, communications, consulting,

transportation  and legal  firms  also reported growing  demand for their

services.  Temporary businesses  said that they  are having difficulty  hiring in

Austin  and Dallas  and  expect wages  and prices to  increase. Heavy  competition

led to unusually heavy discounting of transportation  services.  Several  service

firms  noted that their medical  insurance  costs were  increasing  at  a slower

rate  or  declining. Hospitals  reported that  lower demand  for  inpatient  care led

several  facilities to  restructure their  operations to  reduce costs  and

employees. One  hospital contact  said that HMOs  and other  managed care

contracts  are  critical  to maintaining demand and that  selection  is  driven

increasingly more by price than quality.

Retail  sales  continued to  grow slowly.  Sales remained very competitive,

and  contacts who  reported the strongest  sales  gains  also reported that their

prices  were below  year-ago levels.  Some  contacts with national  companies

reported that  sales  at  their stores  in  Texas were  not  as  strong as  at  stores

in other parts  of  the country. Auto sales were  strong  in March and  contacts

were  optimistic that  sales  growth would continue.

XI-3

Construction and real  estate  activity  increased across  most of  the

District.  New  home  construction remained very  strong  and prices  were higher

because  of  higher  costs particularly  for  sheet  rock, brick, concrete,  and

developed  land. Fear  of  higher  interest rates  was  credited with  causing a

surge  in existing home  sales  in Dallas  and Houston. Apartment markets

continued to  be  tight  with  some  new construction in Dallas  and Austin.

Occupancies  are  high  and  rents  are rising, particularly  in Austin. Commercial

markets  strengthened,  especially retail  and  industrial.  Office markets

tightened  in Austin, El  Paso  and  San Antonio.

Strength in  natural  gas prices kept  energy  activity  stronger than

expected  despite weakness  in  oil prices. Oil prices bounced between  $14  and

$17  per barrel  in March  and April. Prices  were pushed up by signs  of  stronger

economic  growth and  reduced shipments out  of  the North Sea.  Natural gas  spot

prices dropped to  $2.05  per Mcf  as winter weather moderated. Still,  the number

of  rigs  searching  for natural  gas  did not  experience a normal  seasonal  decline

and oil  drilling dropped only  slightly.  Improved technology spurred  drilling

in the Gulf  of Mexico  -- "the hottest offshore market in  the world."  Rigs,

supply boats  and  other  offshore equipment  were being brought  into the Gulf

from  all over  the world. Over  70  percent of  Gulf  drilling  is  for  natural  gas.

Bankers reported moderate  loan demand. Lending was particularly strong

in Austin and  along the Mexican border. Real estate  lending  remained strong

but  contacts noted growth  in  consumer  lending and said  that they were being

increasingly  aggressive  in obtaining business  loans.

Agricultural  conditions  improved and crop  planting was  ahead  of the

1989-93  average.  Crops  and livestock were generally  in  fair  to good condition,

and  supplemental  feeding of  livestock had decreased. Still, most  areas

continued to be  in need of  a good  soaking rain.  In  March the  Texas  Index of

Prices  Received  for All Farm  Products was  1.3  percent higher than a year

earlier.  Livestock and Livestock Product Prices  were 5.2  percent below  last

year's  level,  while the Crop Prices  rose  17.0 percent from  a year ago.

XII-1

TWELFTH  DISTRICT  -- SAN  FRANCISCO

Summary

Economic  activity  is  strong  in  the Twelfth  District  outside of  California  and  Hawaii.

In  California,  conditions  remain  weak,  although  positive  signs  are  starting  to  emerge.

Business  sentiment  in the  Twelfth  District  continues  to  strengthen.  Retail  and  tourist  activity

are  reported  strong  or  improving  in most  parts  of the  District.  Manufacturing  activity  is

mixed,  with  weak  aerospace  markets  and  strong  investment  in  computer  and  communications

equipment.  Export  markets  for District  agricultural  products  continue  to expand.

Construction  and  real  estate  activity  is  booming  in  many parts  of the District,  while

residential  markets  are  starting  to  show  signs  of life  in  California.  Loan  demand  is  reported

to  be  strong  or improving  in  most parts  of the District.

Business  Sentiment

Sentiment  among  Twelfth  District  business  leaders  continues  to  improve.  About  two-

thirds  of respondents  expect  real  national  growth  to  exceed  2  1/2  percent  during  the  next  four

quarters,  compared  with  half of respondents  in  February.  Growth  is  expected  to  be

especially  strong  in  Arizona  and  the  intermountain  states,  and  weaker  than  the  national

average  in  California  and  Hawaii.  Well  over  half of respondents  now  expect  the  inflation  rate

to rise  during  the  next  four  quarters,  while  less  than  half expected  rising  inflation  in

February.

Retail  Trade  and  Services

Retail  and  service  industry  conditions  are reported  strong  in  most  of the  District.

Sales  in the  intermountain  states  are  reported  strong  for  a wide  range  of products,  but  the

XII-2

truckers'  strike reportedly  is  starting  to  cause  problems  for  retail  distributions.  Respondents

in  the  Puget  Sound  area  report  strong  sales  of specialty  products. 

In  California,  food  store

sales  improved  in March.

Conditions  in  the  tourism  industry  are  strong.  In  Las  Vegas,  bookings  at  the new

hotels  are  very  strong. 

In Salt  Lake  City,  robust  tourist  and  convention  demand  has  boosted

hotel occupancy  rates  above  90 percent.  California  ski  resorts  reportedly  have had  a  good

season.  Hotel  occupancy  in  San  Diego,  Orange  County,  and  West  Los  Angeles  has  been

better  than  expected,  with  strong  advance  summer  bookings  reported.  Conditions  for  San

Francisco's  hotel  industry  are  described  as  excellent.  In  Hawaii,  where visitor  activity  has

been  disappointing,  the  visitor  count  increased  8 percent  between  February  1993  and

February  1994.

In  California,  demand  for  non-cellular  telephone  services  has  increased  since  the  end

of  1993. 

In  Washington,  cellular  phone  subscriptions  are  reported  stronger  than  anticipated.

Manufacturing

Manufacturing  activity  remains  mixed  in  the  District.  Aerospace  firms  continue  to

report  sluggish  conditions  and  excess  capacity.  One  machinery  manufacturer  reports  strong

first-quarter  sales,  and  expects  product prices  to  increase  3 to  4 percent  this  year. 

In  April,

Boeing  introduced  its new  777,  which  could  be  approved  for commercial  use  by  May  1995.

A  producer  of computers  and  related  hardware  expects  sales  to  increase  5 to  10

percent  in  1994,  a  slower  rate  of growth  than  in  1993.  Strong  investment  is  reported  in  a

wide  range  of industries  throughout  the  District,  as  companies  replace  outdated  computer  and

communications  equipment  in  order to  increase  productivity  and  improve  their  competitive

positions.  As  of mid-April,  interest  rate  increases  had  not  lowered  1994 capital  spending

XII-3

plans  significantly.

Agriculture  and  Resource-Related  Industries

Agricultural  conditions  generally  are  good  throughout  the District,  although  reduced

water  allocations  for  farmers  in  California's  Central  Valley  are  causing  concern.  California

exports  of cotton  to  China  have increased.  Other  agricultural  export  markets  also have

strengthened,  particularly  Japan,  Korea,  and  Mexico.  Beef and  apple exports  have  risen.

Increased  imports  of barley  from  Canada  and  strawberries  from  Mexico  have  lowered  prices

for  those crops.

Real  Estate  and  Construction

Real  estate  markets  are  reported  to  be  strong  in  most  District  markets  outside

California  and  Hawaii.  Double-digit  home  price  increases  are  reported  in  Tucson.  In

Phoenix,  home  prices  and  residential  construction  are  increasing  and  the  commercial  vacancy

rate  is  declining.  Virtually  no  Class  A  office  space  is  reported  to be  available  in  some parts

of the  Phoenix  area.  Low  vacancy  rates  also  are  reported  in  northern  Utah. 

In  California,

home  sales  activity  has picked  up in  recent  months,  and  prices  appear  to  be  stabilizing  after  a

prolonged  decline.

Construction  activity  is  reported  to  be  booming  in  all  parts  of  the  West except

California  and  Hawaii.  The increased  activity  has  strained  capacity  and  lengthened

development  times  in  some  areas.  Shortages  of skilled  construction  workers  are  reported  in

many  areas. 

In  addition,  prices  for  some construction  materials  are  increasing. 

In

California,  housing  permit  activity  has  improved  in  recent  months,  although  the pace  of

XII-4

activity  remains  low  by  historical  standards.

Financial  Institutions

Loan  demand  is reported  strong  in  most  parts  of the District. 

In  Arizona  and  the

intermountain  states,  deposit  growth  and  loan  demand  have been  strong,  and  the rate  of

problem  loans  continues  to decline.  Bank contacts  in  Oregon  and  Washington  report  strong

profits  with  rising  deposits  and  loan  demand.  Several  contacts  report  sharp  declines  in

refinancing  demand.  In  California,  respondents  note  some  increase  in  lending  activity,

especially  in  home  mortgages  and  real  estate  construction,  although  overall  conditions  remain

soft.

