For use  at Noon,  E.D.T.
Wednesday
June 21,  1995

Summary  of Commentary  on

Current
Economic
Conditions

by Federal  Reserve  District

June 1995

SUMMARY  OF COMMENTARY  ON
CURRENT  ECONOMIC  CONDITIONS  BY
FEDERAL  RESERVE  DISTRICT

JUNE  1995

TABLE  OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY  .............................................. 

..............

i

First District - Boston ................................................ 

I-1

Second District - New York.....................................II-1

Third District - Philadelphia  ..................................

III-1

Fourth District - Cleveland.................................... 

IV-1

Fifth District - Richmond.........................................  V-1

Sixth District - Atlanta ...........................................  VI-1

Seventh District - Chicago....................................  VII-1

Eighth District - St. Louis...................................  VIII-1

Ninth District - Minneapolis  .................................. X-1

Tenth District - Kansas City .............................. 

.......  X-1

Eleventh  District - Dallas..........................................XI-1

Twelfth  District - San  Francisco........................... 

XII-1

SUMMARY'

Economic  activity  remains  at a  high level  across much  of the nation,  although there are

indications  of some  softening in many  reports from  the  12  Federal Reserve  districts.

Activity  in interest-sensitive  sectors generally  remains well below year-earlier  levels and

continues  to decline  in some areas.  There are  regional  variations, with  strongest growth

reported in the center  of the  country,  but generally  less favorable  conditions on the East

and West coasts.  Manufacturers  of capital goods  and electronics  continue  to report good

sales.  But producers  of some consumer items,  automobiles  and their components,  and

building materials report  slowing  demand.  Residential  building remains  slower  than last

year, but strength in  commercial  and  other non-residential  construction  is taking up the

slack in some  areas.  Developments  in energy  and mining  are favorable,  but agriculture

has been  hurt by unfavorable  weather and livestock prices. Loan  demand  is largely flat,

with some  declines reported  in lending rates.  Most districts report  that non-auto retail

sales improved  in May from  earlier in the year.  Auto  sales remain  depressed,  with a few

indications  of an upturn.  Tourism is mixed, with  some  districts reporting  slow  business

due  to unfavorable  weather.  Labor markets  generally remain  tight, but little  wage

pressure  is evident.  Similarly, price  increases  for products  such as paper and

semiconductors have  been partially  offset by price declines  for  building  materials.

Manufacturing

Conditions  for manufacturers  vary  across the country.  At the extremes,  Philadelphia

and Richmond  report notable declines,  while  Boston, Minneapolis  and  Kansas  City

describe continued  strength.  Other districts fall  somewhere  in between.  There  are  some

common threads  running through  several district reports.  Orders for high-tech  items

appear stronger  than for traditional  products such  as apparel or  home furnishings.

Chicago  notes that a manufacturer  of industrial  automation  equipment  has an  order

"backlog  of Biblical  proportions,"  while Dallas and  Atlanta describe rising orders for

electronic  products,  semiconductors  and  telecommunications  equipment.  San Francisco

' Prepared  at the  Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis  based on  information  collected  before  June  12,  1995.  This
document  summarizes  comments  received  from  businesses  and other  contacts outside  the Federal Reserve  and is  not
a commentary  on the views of Federal Reserve  officials.

reports  increased  capacity utilization  and lengthening  lead times for makers  of electronics

components.

Demand  for capital items  seems more sustained  than for durable  consumer  goods,

particularly  for  Chicago  and Cleveland.  Several  districts report  slowing  output of

vehicles  and their components and  a decrease  in orders for building  materials.  Reports

on consumer  items are  mixed;  several  districts, especially  Boston,  see weakness  in this

area.  Atlanta notes specific  declines  in carpet, furniture and  some apparel  categories.

Apparel  is also down  for  St. Louis,  but footwear is  stable and furniture  strong.  Within

this overall pattern for  the manufacturing  sector,  several districts  cite export orders  as

one source  of strength.

Construction  and Real  Estate

Residential  construction  remains below year-earlier  levels in all  districts  and a few

report continuing declines  in  single-family home activity.  But a  few others,  including

Dallas  and  San Francisco,  report gains  in home building, and several  districts report

some degree  of optimism on the part of builders with regard to  the  1995  construction

season.  Moreover,  multifamily  construction  activity is buoying  some regions,  especially

St. Louis  and San  Francisco.  Furthermore,  in several districts, notably Cleveland,

Minneapolis,  Dallas and San  Francisco,  commercial  and other  non-residential

construction  is  strong, in some cases fully offsetting  any weakness  in the residential

sector.

Leasing  and sales of existing housing  follows  a similar checkered  pattern.  Eastern

cities  such as Boston,  New  York and  Washington reportedly  have weakening  rental

markets for housing  and commercial  property, as does  Chicago.  But Atlanta  and San

Francisco report strong rental markets in  some areas.

Agriculture

Conditions  are poor  for farmers  in  several  districts, largely  because  of adverse

weather.  For Chicago,  Kansas  City, Minneapolis  and St. Louis,  the problem is too much

rain.  Corn,  soybean  and wheat planting has  been  severely delayed  across most of the

Midwest and much  of the Great Plains,  and yield expectations  are dropping.  Missouri,

iii

North Dakota and  South  Dakota are particularly hard hit.  Dallas and Kansas  City  report

that winter wheat is in poor condition due  to unfavorable  weather  earlier in the year.

Bad weather is also  hurting  agriculture  in the Richmond  and Dallas  districts, but here

the  problem is drought  and unseasonable  heat.  The  Carolinas  and southern  Texas are

particularly  hard hit.  Livestock prices remain  depressed.  Kansas  City reports  higher

than  normal levels of farm loan refinancing,  largely  as a result of losses in the livestock

industry.

Cleveland,  which  describes producers  as expecting excellent  harvests, is one bright

spot in the agricultural  sector.  San  Francisco,  which reports  strong  growth in exports  of

fruit and  other agricultural  products, is another.

In other natural resource  sectors,  Dallas and Minneapolis  report increased  oil and  gas

activity,  but Kansas  City notes  continuation  of a half-year  decline in  drilling.  For Dallas,

the increase  is concentrated  offshore,  while for Minneapolis  production  drilling into a

new formation  has led to a minor  boom in  North Dakota and Montana.  Minneapolis  also

reports  high production  in iron  and non-ferrous  metal mining, and  good  business for

paper mills  and loggers in  spite of a price  slump for lumber producers.

Financial  Institutions  and Credit

Most districts report flat to slight increases in loan demand.  One  exception  is San

Francisco where  growth  is strong  throughout the district,  with improvements  in real

estate and  construction  lending  in California.  Loan demand  softened somewhat  in

Cleveland,  although  new mortgage  lending  and  mortgage refinancing  have improved

with declining  rates.  Loan demand  is mixed  in Atlanta, with moderate  to strong  activity

in commercial real estate,  industrial and  general business  lending,  and slower activity  in

consumer lending,  especially auto  loans.

Loan rates decreased  slightly  in several  districts.  Average loan rates declined  at about

60 percent of small  and mid-size  banks  in the New York district.  In  Richmond rates  fell

slightly  for consumer  and commercial  loans  and fell  sharply  for mortgage loans.  Kansas

City reports little change  in rates.

Consumer  Spending  and Tourism

General retail sales  improved  slightly  in May  compared  to  April in most districts.

Exceptions include  New  York and Minneapolis  where  sales  show moderate  growth  and

Richmond,  St. Louis  and San  Francisco  where  sales are  sluggish.  In Boston  sales are  up

1 percent  to  10 percent  over year-earlier levels, though  retailers  view  the second half

with uncertainty.  Computers  and telecommunications  equipment are  selling well in

Cleveland,  while home improvement products  are  moving  slowly.  A  large retailer  in

Chicago  reports that sales of appliances and  home electronics  exceeded  average for May

and June, while  apparel  sales  also strengthened.

Auto sales are  slow in many districts.  Sales  are described  as significantly lower  than

year-earlier  levels in Cleveland  and Dallas,  while  waning in St. Louis.  Kansas  City

dealers report flat  or declining  sales  for the past month.  Sales  continue somewhat  below

last year's pace in  Minneapolis,  but there are  signs  of an upturn.  Chicago  dealers report

that  sales are  up for May and  early June,  compared  to  April, and  they expect  a  small gain

in the latter half of  1995.

Tourism is mixed  across districts.  Activity for May  was  above  April and  year-earlier

levels in Richmond.  Tourism in Florida is  spotty, but growing  in the rest of the Atlanta

district.  Cold weather has slowed  activity  in Minneapolis,  while San  Francisco  service

industries report continued  strong demand.

Labor Markets

Labor markets  remain  tight.  Employment growth  remains robust, Minneapolis notes,

and several  New  York small  business  executives relate difficulty in attracting  and

retaining  skilled workers.  Many areas  of the St. Louis district are  still experiencing  tight

labor markets, particular  for entry-level  positions, and  have relaxed  hiring  standards.

One-third  of manufacturing  firms  surveyed  by Boston  have current  openings  or hiring

plans.  Help-wanted  advertising  and demand  for temporary workers  are  strong in  the

Chicago  district.  Philadelphia,  however,  notes  that area manufacturers  plan to trim

payrolls.

Wages  and Prices

Notwithstanding  taut labor markets, wage pressures  are muted.  Reports  of wage

increases  remain  scattered, according  to Kansas  City, and recent wage  agreements

specify increases in the 2 percent to  3  percent range  in the Minneapolis  district. Wage

increases  remain  generally  stable,  states Atlanta.  Moreover, although  district labor

markets  remain  tight, Chicago reports  that a  slowing of expansion  in the demand for

labor  may have  eased  wage pressures in recent months.

While prices continue  to increase,  the rate  of increase  has recently  diminished,

according  to Chicago,  Cleveland,  Dallas,  Kansas  City, Philadelphia and  Richmond.

Some of this easing relates  to the letup in  home-building as Atlanta,  Dallas, Minneapolis

and  San Francisco  report  a  softening in building material  prices.  Atlanta's  apparel and

carpet producers  are having  trouble  passing  on higher material prices to  consumers.

Only  10 percent  of manufacturers  are raising prices  on their own products, according  to  a

Philadelphia  survey.  Semiconductor  prices,  however, have  accelerated,  states Dallas,

while Boston, Kansas  City and Minneapolis  report price  increases  for packaging

materials.  But according  to  Dallas,  manufacturers  of paper  and corrugated  boxes said

that selling prices have  flattened,  which  may signal easing  cost pressures  in coming

months.

FIRST DISTRICT - BOSTON

Economic activity  continues to  expand in  the First District,

although signs  of  a slowdown are  apparent.  New England retailers  are

slightly more upbeat  than six weeks  ago.  Manufacturing contacts  report

ongoing year-over-year gains in  sales.  A few have experienced

significant slowdowns in  incoming  orders in  recent weeks;  the majority

have  not.  The residential real  estate market  has  slowed.

Retail

First District retail  sales  have varied considerably in April and

May.  Most  contacts  from discount  and specialty chains  cite  somewhat

encouraging  sales gains  of  1 to  10  percent during this  period compared

to year-earlier  levels.  A slight upturn  in  apparel sales  is  also

welcome news.  By  contrast, lumber  companies  and others selling  home

building materials  report  disappointing results, particularly  in May,

with sales  down  1 to 4 percent  from year-ago  levels.  These contacts

attribute the May slump in  activity to high mortgage rates  in  this

year's first  quarter.  Retail  respondents generally view the second half

of  1995 with uncertainty, anticipating some  fits  and starts  in  consumer

spending, and  sales  growth of  0 to  5 percent.

Contacts cite  few  increases  in vendor prices  on merchandise;

however, they report  significant  increases  in the prices  of  retailer

supplies,  such as  paper  and plastic.  An exception is  lumber  prices,

reported to have declined by more than 20 percent  in the  past two

months.  Most respondents note  an  increase  in  1995  profits,  despite

varied success at  improving gross  margins.  Contacts  generally

anticipate little  growth  in employment  and capital  spending in  1995  and

wage gains  of  less  than 4 percent.

Manufacturing

Most  First District manufacturers contacted  in early June continue

to  report  good growth in  shipments,  with year-over-year gains  ranging

from  5 to  16 percent.  Almost  half of  the respondents  see no evidence

that demand  is weakening;  among the rest,  two-thirds note  signs of

modest  deceleration, one-third has experienced a significant  slowdown in

incoming business  in  recent weeks.  Contacts observing  signs of  weakness

tend  to serve  customers  in the  auto or  other consumer-goods  industries.

Several respondents mentioned that the dollar depreciation  is  supporting

sales  overseas.

Views  on input  costs  are mixed, with some  contacts reporting that

materials prices  are stabilizing but others  seeing no moderation  in

rates  of  increase.  In particular,  firms  using oil-based and paper

products  (resin, polyester, pulp, paper and packaging materials)  note

little or no deceleration.  Most  contacts  have  achieved selling price

increases on  selected products, with the increases  ranging  from 1 to  5

percent.  A minority have unchanged prices or  across-the-board gains.

Most  contacts report that  employment  levels  are little  changed

from a year  ago;  however, two  have had recent  layoffs,  and three  cite

job gains  ranging up to  12  percent.  While  a few firms mentioned  that

overtime hours  are down,  no  additional  layoffs are planned.  By

contrast, one-third of the  firms  have current openings or hiring plans.

First  District manufacturers surveyed  generally expect  capital

spending to equal  or  exceed last  year's pace.  The  increases  cited range

from 10 to  100 percent.  Roughly half  of  the contacts mentioned the  need

to ease  capacity constraints.

Looking  ahead, most  contacts describe themselves as  wavering

between hopeful  optimism and watchful  concern.  They contrast their own

order books  with media reports  and are keeping a wary eye on the auto

industry, Congress, the  stock market and  corporate earnings.  Some

foresee further deceleration  in growth;  no one  expects a recession.

Residential Real Estate

The residential real  estate market  continues to  show signs  of

cooling off, with brokers  in  all  parts of  the  region noting a decline  in

spring sales versus the  previous year.  The  inventory of  unsold houses

is  reported to be  rising across New England, even in previously strong

markets in  suburban Boston.  However, respondents  in Maine and Rhode

Island note that traffic  has  increased  in the  last  6 weeks  and attribute

this improvement to  the recent  decline  in  interest  rates.  Other

contacts  expect the  drop in  rates to  stimulate activity in  the near term

as  consumers recognize the new  lower rates.

New construction is  reported to be  significantly slower, as  many

builders struggle to  sell  "spec" houses built  in  anticipation of  a

stronger spring market.  One Massachusetts builder noted that  this was

his worst  spring  in  a number of  years  and that  layoffs were  imminent.

Nonbank Financial Services

Investment management  firms report  increased  assets under

management  in the  last  six  weeks  and  since the beginning of  the year.

The increases  are due to rising market value  of the  assets  and strong

sales  of  domestic equity  funds.  Bond  sales  are still  in  net

liquidation,  despite recent bond-market gains.  Municipal  bond funds

have been particularly hard hit  because  of  concerns  about  the possible

enactment of  a flat  tax and  lingering concerns about  Orange County.

Most  respondents report  stable employment  levels this  year.

II-1

SECOND  DISTRICT  --  NEW  YORK

Reports on District economic conditions remain mixed,  but somewhat more positive

than  in  recent  months.  Retail  sales  were  significantly  stronger  in  May  than  in  the

preceding  two  months.  Discussions  with  small  business executives suggest that output

of  small  manufacturing  firms  remains  strong,  spurred  in  part  by  exports.  However,

purchasing  managers  in  the  Buffalo  and  New  York  metropolitan  areas  report  that

production  has  declined.  Manhattan's  commercial  real  estate  market  weakened

considerably during  April as  leasing activity slowed.  Finally,  aggregate loan  demand  has

remained  steady over  the  past two  months,  although  average  loan  rates  have  declined.

Consumer  Spending

District retail sales strengthened significantly in  May, following disappointing results

in  March  and  April.  Although  May's sales gains varied from  +2  to  +11  percent on a year-

over-year  basis,  most  results  were  clustered  at  the  upper  end  of  the  range.  Moreover,

fully  half  the  contacts  reported  that  May sales were  above  plan,  while  only one  contact

reported  below-plan  results.  Strong  May sales left inventories at or slightly above desired

levels  by  month's  end.

Sales of women's  apparel strengthened  during  May, while Mother's  Day gift items

--  including  cosmetics,  fragrances,  and  jewelry  --  sold  well.  Furniture  sales  remained

weak, however, and  several  retailers  noted that  cool,  rainy weather  had slowed  sales of

lawn  and  garden  products.  Finally,  several  contacts noted  that  continuing  increases  in

costs  had  led  to  modest  increases  in  prices.

Construction  and  Real  Estate

Midtown  Manhattan's commercial  real estate market weakened dramatically during

April.  Leasing  activity  --  which  peaked  in  October and  remained  above  1.3  million

II-2

square  feet  a  month  between  November  and  March  -- declined  to  just 815,000  square

feet.  Lower  levels  of  leasing  activity coupled  with  return  of  space to  the  market  caused

the  supply  of  commercial  space  available  in  Midtown  to  rise.

Other  Business  Activity

In  contrast  to  the  sharp  decline  in  U.S.  household  employment,  employment  in

both  New York State and  New Jersey rose during May.  New York's employment increase

was  attributable  to  a  decline  in  the  number  of  unemployed;  as  a  result,  New  York's

unemployment  rate  fell  0.5  percentage  points in  May  to  6.3  percent.  New  Jersey's  rise

in  employment  was  accompanied  by  a  slightly  more  rapid  increase  in  the  labor  force,

causing  the  unemployment  rate  to  edge  up  to  6.5  percent.

Two  major corporate changes will have an  immediate  impact on employment  in the

Buffalo area.  The  expansion of  Ingram  Micro,  Inc.  -- a wholesale  distributor  of computer

products  --  has  just  created  600  new  jobs,  while  the  closing  of  Occidental  Chemical

Corporation's  production facility  in  North  Tonawanda eliminated  150  positions at the end

of  May.

Purchasing  managers  in  the  Buffalo  and New  York  metropolitan  areas  report that

production  declined  in  May;  in  the  downstate  area,  weakness  in  the  non-manufacturing

sector  more  than  offset  strength  in  manufacturing.  Managers  in  both  regions  noted

continued  increases  in  commodity  prices.

Small  Businesses

In  recent  discussions, executives  of small  manufacturing  firms  expressed  a  more

positive  view  of  business  conditions  in  the  Second  District.  Two-thirds  of  those

interviewed  reported  that  production  increased  in  May  and  early  June,  with  several

II-3

attributing  increases  in  output  and  new  orders  to  dollar-driven  increases  in  exports.

Nearly  all of the executives noted that commodity  prices  -- particularly for paper products

-- had  continued to  rise.  Finally, several  of the executives  reported  difficulty in  attracting

and  retaining  skilled  labor.

Financial  Developments

Over the past two  months, aggregate  loan  demand has  remained  steady at three-

fifths of the  small  and  midsized  banks surveyed  in  the  District;  demand  is evenly divided

between  higher  or  lower  at  the  remaining  banks.  The  residential  mortgage  and  the

commercial  and  industrial loan  segments  have the highest levels of  loan  generation,  with

about one-third  of  the  banks  reporting  higher  demand,  and  nearly  half  reporting  stable

demand  in  each  of  these  categories.  Though  refinancing  activity  is  steady  or  lower  at

almost all  of the  banks,  some of  the senior  loan  officers surveyed  expect an  increase in

the  near future.

Average  loan  rates  have  decreased  at  about  sixty  percent  of  the  participating

banks,  and  are  the  same  at  close  to  forty  percent.  The  decrease  in  rates  is  most

widespread  in  the residential  mortgage  market, occurring  at about seventy percent of the

banks.  All  of those  surveyed  are  just as  willing or  more  willing to  lend  compared  to  two

months  ago.  Almost  all  of  the  banks  have  maintained  their  credit  standards,  and

delinquency  rates  are stable  or  lower  at  over  eighty  percent  of  the  banks.

III-1

THIRD  DISTRICT  - PHILADELPHIA

Economic  activity  in  the  Third  District  showed  some  signs  of slowing  in  late  May  and

early  June,  according  to comments  from  business  contacts.  Manufacturers  continued  to  report

declining  demand  for  their products,  and they  were  scaling  back production.  Retailers  generally

reported that  sales  were  running  at  a steady  pace, but  below plan,  and many  were  implementing

unscheduled price reductions to keep  inventories from rising to problem  levels.  Auto dealers  also

said that  sales were  slow and that inventories  were  above desired  levels.  Comments  from bankers

indicated  that loan  demand  remained  soft.  While  consumer  lending has  edged  up,  business  loan

volumes have been  slipping.  On balance,  bankers  indicated that mortgage  lending  has not picked

up  despite  the  recent  decline  in interest  rates.

Third District businesses contacted  for this report foresee  little change  in conditions  in the

second  half  of  the  year.  Manufacturers  expect  a  slight  pickup  in  orders  and  shipments,  on

balance,  but  they  plan  to  trim  payrolls  and  cut  back  capital  spending  nonetheless.  Retailers  do

not  anticipate  a significant  rebound in  sales during the seasonally  slow summer  months, but some

auto  dealers  said  vehicle  sales  could  pick  up  by  the  fall  if auto  financing  costs  declined.  Most

of the  bankers  surveyed  do  not expect  any  strengthening  in overall  credit  demand,  and  they  see

no  signs  that  competitive  pressure  for  new  lending  is  abating.

MANUFACTURING

Third District  manufacturers  continued  to report  declining  activity  in early June.  While

about  half  of  the  firms  contacted  were  operating  at  a  steady  pace,  about  one-third  were

III-2

experiencing  softening  demand  for  their  products--twice  the  number  that  reported  increased

business. 

In  most  of  the  major  industrial  sectors  in  the  District,  orders  and  shipments  were

declining.  Manufacturing  employment was also trending  down  in early  June:  while three-fourths

of the firms polled were maintaining  steady staffing levels, one-fourth were  reducing  work forces.

Industrial prices in the region continued to  move up,  according to manufacturing  contacts,

although  reports of increases  appeared to  be somewhat  less widespread  than they had been earlier

in  the  year.  Nearly  one-third  of the  firms  commenting  on  prices  said  input  costs  continued  to

increase  while  about  two-thirds  said they  were  steady.  For their  own  products,  only  one  in  ten

of the  firms  surveyed  were  raising prices;  three-fourths  were  holding  prices  constant.

Third  District  manufacturers  are  nearly  evenly  divided  among  those  expecting  further

slowing,  those  expecting  a  leveling  off  at  current  production  rates,  and  those  anticipating  a

rebound  in  activity.  However,  firms  expecting  increased  orders  for  their  products  slightly

outnumber  those predicting  a further drop.  Nonetheless,  Third District manufacturers  plan further

reductions  in  employment,  on  balance,  and  some  scaling  back  of  capital  spending  during  the

second  half of the  year.

RETAIL

Most  of the  Third  District  retailers  contacted  in  early  June  said  sales  have  been  running

at  a  steady  pace  in  recent  weeks,  but  many  also  said  the  sales  rate  was  lower  than  they  had

expected.  Some  merchants  also  noted  that  the  pace  of  sales  at  discount  stores,  while  steady

recently,  had  declined  from  the  pace  set  earlier  in the  year,  even  after  accounting  for  seasonal

factors.  Several  merchants  said inventories  going  into  June  were  above planned  levels  and  price

reductions  were being  made  to reduce  stocks.  Some store  executives  said additional  promotional

III-3

efforts  may  be  instituted  in  an  effort  to  keep  sales  from  slipping  further  during  the  summer.

Other  indications  of slackening  consumer  demand  were  reports  that  a  major  store  chain  would

be  closing  some  stores  in  the  District  and  that  another  chain  was  reducing  hours  for  its  sales

workers.

Auto  dealers  in  the  District  generally  reported  a  slow  pace  of sales  for  May  and  early

June,  and  they  said  inventories  were  moving  up.  Dealers  were  reducing  their  forecasts  for  the

full-year  level  of sales,  although  some  said  they  thought  sales  could  pick  up  by  the  fall  if auto

financing  costs  declined.

FINANCE

Third  District bankers  contacted  in  early  June  generally  said  loan  demand  remained  soft.

Comments  from  bankers  indicated  that  overall  lending  was  steady  to  down  slightly.  Consumer

lending  was on the  rise,  but commercial  and industrial  lending has  been  falling  in recent  weeks.

While  some  banks  reported  slight  increases  in  mortgage  activity,  on  balance  mortgage  lending

in  the District  did  not appear  to  be  increasing  despite  the  recent  decline  in  interest  rates.

Third  District bankers  do not  see  any  indications  that  credit  demand  might  pick up  soon.

Most  of the bankers  surveyed  said  competition for  business  loans continues  to be  strong and  that

net  interest  margins  remain  narrow.  Furthermore,  those  banks  that  have  been  able  to  increase

consumer  lending  recently  said  they  have  been  making  strong  promotional  efforts  to  gain  the

additional  loan  volume.

IV-1

FOURTH  DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

General Business  Conditions

The growth rate of business activity in the District has slowed,  with many

industries  indicating  production levels  about  even with the first quarter.  Construction

activity is mixed:  Residential  construction  remains mostly flat,  but the District  continues  to

see growth in commercial  construction,  especially in Ohio.  The region's agricultural

producers  are expecting  excellent  harvests,  and some downward  pressure  on crop prices

has already occurred.

Unemployment  has  risen in the region, but is still low relative  to the national

average.  Despite  scattered  reports of labor  shortages, wage pressures  remain generally

moderate.

Manufacturing

Although District manufacturers  have seen a slowing in the growth rate of

production  and new orders  over the past  few months,  they  still note generally  high

production  levels.

Excluding  makers of transportation  equipment,  capital goods  producers  are

continuing  to  enjoy strong production  and  orders,  albeit  at  a somewhat  more moderate

pace.  Heavy truck production  has weakened,  with new orders  down by  about half since

March, and  some cancellations  of earlier  orders have occurred.  On balance,  the region's

automakers have  seen  lower-than-expected  new vehicle  sales and  associated  inventory

buildups,  and  several  assembly plants in Ohio have  cut production.  Auto suppliers have

IV-2

also  scaled back production  plans in the face  of a noticeable  drop in orders.  While  there

has been a sharp  falloff in auto exports to Mexico,  shipments of auto parts to Canada

appear to be holding  firm.  Other  export markets  continue  to strengthen,  particularly  in

Europe, presumably  reflecting  both the rise in foreign currency  prices  and  a strengthening

in foreign economies.

No widespread  manufacturing  layoffs have been  reported.  To date, production

slowdowns  have been  accommodated  with a reduction  in the workweek,  mostly from

fewer overtime  hours.  Nevertheless,  the industrial  sector is currently  operating  at a

slightly-more-than-typical  work schedule.

Industrial  price pressures have  eased in the past  several months, although  some

commodities,  including  aluminum, paper,  plastic resins,  and stainless  steel, are  still

reported  to be in short  supply,  and their prices continue to  move sharply higher.  Energy

and  copper prices are  noticeably  lower.

Retailing

District retailers report  mixed  results.  Retail  spending  gains in the region  seem to

be somewhat  better than  along the East Coast,  but below levels in the Central  and

Southeastern U.S.  Nondurable  goods are generally  selling better than durables,  although

the market for consumer electronics  is reportedly  booming,  including  computers  and

telecommunications  equipment.  Demand for home improvement  products  has been very

soft,  and while  apparel  sales have  strengthened  in the the past  few months, the gains  have

been limited  mostly to  large chain stores.

IV-3

Retail inventories  are generally  described  as a little  heavier  than desired, but there

are no reports of any substantive imbalance.

Auto Sales

District auto  dealers report that  May and early June sales were a little better than

April's  dismal performance.  On a year-over-year  basis,  second-quarter  sales  are coming in

much lower than in  1994.  Shortages of popular car models that were noted  in the

previous District report have vanished.  Dealers  also report  lower-than-usual  profit

margins  for the spring market,  and more intense  price competition.  New vehicle loan  rates

are hovering  in the  10 percent  range  for a 60-month term,  although  a few dealers  have

noted  an easing  in auto loan rates recently.

District auto  dealers  say that inventories  are high at current  sales rates.  Local

dealers  report  a 70 days'  supply--about  10  days less  than the  national average.  In fact,

District dealers  say that current inventory  levels would be appropriate  in a normal market.

Banking and Credit

Loan demand  in the District  has  softened somewhat,  although new mortgage

lending  and mortgage  refinancing have improved  with the recent  decline in rates.

Consumer  lending patterns have been mixed,  with auto credit  off substantially  and

revolving  credit somewhat  stronger.  Commercial  lending activity  is still growing,

although not in all regions or at all institutions.  Some of the commercial  credit expansion

originates from higher inventories,  but some reflects borrowing  for plant expansion.

Although delinquency  rates remain very low, several District bankers  are concerned  about

a further  decline in credit  standards.

V-1

FIFTH DISTRICT  - RICHMOND

Overview:  The  rate  of economic  expansion  in  the  Fifth District  appears  to  have

decreased  in late  April  and  May.  Retailers,  service  producers,  and  manufacturers  reported  that

growth  decreased  in their  industries.  Likewise,  government  forecasters  reported  somewhat

slower  growth  in  state  revenues.  Contacts  at  area ports  and  in the  tourism  industry  reported

experiencing  increased  activity.  Temporary  employment  agencies  saw  increased  demand  for

temporary  workers.  Dry,  hot weather  continued  to  hamper  some  agricultural  production,  but

conditions  improved  somewhat.

Retail  Trade:  Indicators  of retail  activity  growth  decreased  in  May  from  their  April

levels,  according  to  a  mail  survey  of District  retailers.  The  indexes  of sales,  employment,

inventories,  big-ticket  sales,  and shopper  traffic  decreased.  The  index  of wages  increased,

however.  Survey  respondents  indicated  that  retail  prices  rose  0.6  percent  in May.  They

foresaw  slower  growth  in the  demand  for  their products  and  an  increase  of 1.1  percent  in  their

prices  during  the  next  six  months.

Service  Production:  Indicators  of  service-sector  activity  growth  declined  slightly  in

May  from  their  April  levels,  according  to  a District  mail  survey.  The  revenues  index

decreased,  and  the  employment  and  wage  indexes  changed  little.  Service  producers  reported

that  prices  rose  0.3  percent  in May.  They  expected  slower  growth  in the  demand  for  their

services  and  an  increase  of 0.9  percent  in their  prices  during  the  next  six months.

Manufacturing:  Most  indicators  of factory  growth  declined  in  May  from  their  April

levels,  according  to  a  mail  survey  of District  manufacturers.  The  new  orders,  backlog,  and

workweek  indexes  declined,  and  the  shipments  and  employment  indexes  changed  little.

Manufacturers  were  less  optimistic  about  the  growth  in  shipments  and  in  the  workweek  during

the next  six  months,  but  they  expected  higher  employment  growth  than  they  had  expected  in

V-2

April;  they  also  anticipated  increased  exports.  Finished  goods  and  raw  materials  prices  rose

more  slowly  in  May  than  in  April,  and  at  rates  below  the  general  inflation  rate.  Respondents

expected  their  prices  to  rise  more  slowly  during  the  next  six  months  than  they  had  expected  in

April.

Tourism:  A  telephone  survey  of hotels,  motels,  and  resorts  throughout  the  District

indicated  that  tourist  activity  in  May  was  above  that  of April  and  a year  ago.  Contacts

reported  above-normal  bookings  from  both  vacationers  and  business  groups.  Contacts

expected  better-than-normal  business  and  some  price  increases  during  the  next  six  months.

Port Activity:  Representatives  at  District  ports  indicated  that  export  levels  in April

were  higher  than  those  in  March  and  a  year  ago;  import  trends  were  mixed.  Contacts

expected  that,  during  the next  six  months,  exports  would  increase  faster  than  imports.

Temporary Employment:  A  telephone  survey  of temporary  employment  agencies

indicated  that  the  demand  for  temporary  workers  strengthened  in  May  compared  to  April  and

a  year  ago.  Demand  was  particularly  strong  for  skilled  computer  operators  and  customer

service  employees.  Contacts  expected  demand  during  the  next  six  months  to  be  greater  than

usual.  Wages  rose  faster  than  the  general  price  level  did  during  the  past  year,  although

contacts  expected  wages  to  stabilize  during  the  next  six  months.

Finance:  District  financial  institutions  reported  that  credit  conditions  were  mixed

during  the past  six  weeks.  Interest  rates  fell  slightly  for  consumer  and  commercial  loans  and

fell  sharply  for  mortgage  loans.  Demand  increased  moderately  for  mortgage  loans  and  fell

slightly  for  consumer  and  commercial  loans.  Mortgage  lenders  across  the  District  reported  an

increase  in  mortgage  refinancing  inquiries  and  applications  in  May.

Residential  Real  Estate:  According  to  a  telephone  survey  of District  real  estate

agents  and  homebuilders,  residential  real  estate  activity  was  unchanged  in  late  April  and  May.

V-3

Buyer  traffic,  home  sales,  and  housing  starts  changed  little  over the  period,  except  in South

Carolina,  where  home  sales  increased.  District  building  permits  fell.  Contacts  reported  that

lower-priced  homes  were  selling  better  than  expensive  homes.  Home  prices  were  steady

across  the  District,  although  the price  of lumber  decreased.

Commercial  Real  Estate:  District  contacts  reported  that  commercial  real  estate

activity  changed  little  in late  April  and  May.  Leasing  activity  was  unchanged  except  in

Charlotte,  N.C.,  where  it  increased,  and  in Washington,  D.C.,  where  it decreased.  Vacancy

rates  declined  slightly  in  the  Carolinas  but  were  stable  elsewhere.  Commercial  rents  changed

little  except  in Charlotte,  N.C.,  and  Columbia,  S.C.,  where  they  inched  upward.  The

availability  of prime  office  space  tightened  somewhat,  and  contacts  reported  that  build-to-suit

office  and  retail  construction  changed  little  in most  District  cities.  Contacts  reported  some

speculative  warehouse  construction  in Greenville,  S.C.

State  Revenues:  State  government  forecasters  said  that  tax  collections  grew

somewhat  more  slowly  in  May.  Real  revenue  growth  was  slightly  lower  in the  District  of

Columbia  and  Maryland;  steady  in  North  Carolina,  South  Carolina,  and Virginia;  and  slightly

higher  in  West  Virginia.

Agriculture:  District  agricultural  conditions  improved  in  recent  weeks,  although

weather-related  problems  persisted  in  some  areas,  according  to  agricultural  analysts.  Spring

planting  and  small-grain  harvesting  progressed  at  a normal  pace  in most  areas.  In  South

Carolina,  however,  and to  a  lesser  extent  in North  Carolina,  above-normal  temperatures  and

below-normal  rainfall  continued  to  hamper  spring  planting  and  to  reduce  small-grain  yields.

Contacts  also  reported  below-normal  hay  yields  in  some  areas  of the  District.

VI-1

SIXTH  DISTRICT  - ATLANTA

Overview:  According  to  contacts,  growth  continues  unevenly  in  the  Southeast

economy  with  some  sectors  continuing  to  slow  and  others  rebounding.  Retailers  generally

reported  that  sales  increased  during  May,  and  inventories  were  in  good  shape.  Most

manufacturers  report  little change in production.  Tourism  remains  mixed,  but the  outlook for

this  summer  is  positive.  Both  commercial  and  multifamily  construction  markets  continue  to

improve,  while  the  recent  decline  in  mortgage  rates  is reported  to have  reinvigorated  single-

family  housing  markets  in some  parts  of the region.  Reports  on prices  and  wages  suggest  that

pressures  remain  moderate.

Consumer Spending:  Retailers throughout the District report that sales were up during

May,  and met  or exceeded  their expectations.  At the  same  time,  most  merchants  said  that they

are comfortable  with current inventory  levels.  Sales of home-related  products  continued to slow

with  the exception  of New  Orleans where retailers  found  it difficult to keep  up with  demand  for

home products  after recent  flooding.  Retailers  generally  anticipate  significant sales  growth  this

summer  compared  with  last year.

Manufacturing:  Many  industrial  contacts  reported  little change  in  output  during  the

past  month.  For  those  reporting  changes,  increases  matched  decreases.  Export  demand  for

paper remains strong,  offsetting declines in the domestic market.  New parts production facilities

for the District's expanding  number of vehicle assembly  plants continue  to be announced.  Steel

producers  are expanding  operations  and modernizing,  and  several telecommunications  equipment

manufacturers  report an  upsurge  in orders.  In contrast,  competitive pressures continue  to force

carpet manufacturers  to scale back with new announcements of layoffs.  Sales have been slowing

at low-end  furniture and bedding manufacturers,  and they are paring hours worked and near-term

forecasts.  Although  apparel  production  is steady  for some products  such as blue jeans,  demand

VI-2

has  fallen  off for  others  such  as  hosiery  and  women's  clothing.  Slowing  dealer  orders  have

reduced  heavy  machinery  production.  Output  for packagers  is below  last  year's  levels  and  is

expected  to decrease  further.  Some producers of lumber products  note a slowdown  in demand.

Large  employers  such  as NASA  continue  to  downsize,  adversely  impacting  a  myriad  of small

suppliers.

Tourism  and  Business  Travel:  Although  contacts  characterize  Florida  tourism  as

spotty,  tourism  and  business  travel  are  growing  in  the  rest  of the  region. 

In  south  Florida,

tourism  is  rebounding  and  destination  resorts  are  reporting  healthy  advance  bookings  for

conventions.  Airport  arrivals  have  slowed and hotel  occupancy  has declined  in central  Florida.

Travel  agents report,  however,  that families are arranging  more  expensive vacations.  Northern

Florida resorts reported  record-breaking  Memorial  Day crowds.  A new  theme park and several

outlet malls are  stimulating tourism  in Mississippi,  and  hotel occupancy  is above last year levels

in Nashville  and  New  Orleans.

Construction:  According  to  most real  estate  contacts,  single-family  home  sales  and

construction  increased  during  May.  Realtors  attribute  the  increase  in  housing  demand  to  a

dramatic decline in mortgage rates;  however,  several contacts noted that some buyers are holding

off  on  home  purchases  because  they  anticipate  rates  will  go  even  lower.  Both  builders  and

realtors  remain  optimistic  and  expect  to  maintain  their  current  pace  through  the  summer.

Commercial  and  multifamily  real  estate  contacts  continue  to  report  strengthening

markets.  In several parts of the District builders continue  to report that strong demand is driving

apartment construction.  The majority of commercial construction  remains build-to-suit;  although

very  little unleased  space is available.  Realtors  anticipate that both commercial  and multifamily

markets  will  continue  to strengthen  during  1995.

VI-3

Financial  Services:  Bankers  report that overall  loan demand  is mixed.  Most contacts

said  there was moderate  to strong activity  in commercial,  industrial,  and commercial  real estate

lending.  Consumer loan demand,  on the other hand,  was characterized  as  soft.  Several bankers

noted that auto loan demand had slowed  significantly.  They said that so far lower mortgage rates

had  not  led  to  significantly  greater  mortgage  lending.

Wages  and  Prices:  Wage  increases  remain  generally  stable.  Skilled  construction

workers are in such high demand  in some areas that employers  are recruiting  outside their states.

Although  there  are some  instances  of pressures  on input prices,  most  contacts  report that  these

are not being passed  on.  At the  same time,  some  construction  materials  suppliers  have recently

noted  a softening  of prices.  Apparel  and  carpet producers  are having trouble passing  on higher

material  prices  to  the consumer.  Other  contacts  report  that  material  prices  charged  by paper,

plastics,  tire,  and  chemical  producers  continue  to  escalate.

VII-1

SEVENTH  DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.  District  economic  conditions  improved in May  and early June, as consumer

spending strengthened  and input price pressures eased in the manufacturing  sector.  Inventory

paring prompted  retrenchment  in District industrial  output growth in recent months,  while capital

equipment producers'  reports  remained  stronger than those from manufacturers  of consumer

goods.  Retail  sales growth  strengthened  in May and  early June,  after bad weather and  some other

special factors cut into sales  in March  and  early  April.  Lower mortgage  interest  rates have yet to

spark  a widespread rebound  in home  sales  and construction,  but they have  certainly buoyed

optimism  in this sector.  District labor markets remained  tight, but slowing  growth in labor

demand  eased  wage pressures in some areas.

Manufacturing.  Inventory paring prompted  retrenchment  in District industrial output

growth in recent  months.  Purchasing managers'  surveys in the region depicted  substantial  easing

in production  and new orders  growth  during March, April, and  May.  In turn, the  price

components  of these  surveys  pointed  to  diminished input price pressures.  Survey respondents'

comments  and reports  from  other District contacts pointed to  a smoother flow  of goods in the

pipeline.  However, even after its recent decline,  the prices-paid  component  of the Chicago

purchasing  managers'  survey remained  at a relatively  high level  (in line with the  late  1980s).

District steel  production flattened  out at high levels through the  early part  of the  second

quarter, then declined relatively sharply  in late May  and  early  June -- largely due to  an explosion

and downtime  at a large blast furnace  in Gary.  Orders for steel  from  auto and  appliance

producers  have  eased in recent months,  according  to a large steel  producer,  while  other markets

remain relatively  strong.  A large appliance  manufacturer  stated that shipments remain below

year-earlier  levels, but have  improved  recently.  Appliance  industry data  suggest shipments

increased  slightly in  April and  the first four weeks  of May on a seasonally  adjusted basis.  A large

manufacturer  of housing products  stated that shipments  are running  ahead of orders,  but the

company  is building  inventory even as  backlogs  decline.  "We think things  could turn up in the

latter half of the year, and we don't want to  get caught short."

Capital  equipment  producers' reports  generally  remained  stronger than those  from

manufacturers  of consumer  goods.  A large manufacturer  of machine  tools characterized  orders

from  the automotive  industry as "stable;"  with no  significant recent  cancellations.  Manufacturers

VII-2

of construction equipment  continued to report  strong sales gains.  A heavy-duty  truck

manufacturer  reported that orders fell  below year-earlier  levels after a stronger-than-expected  first

quarter, but a price increase  and tighter order cancellation policies prompted some  of the recent

pullback.  A manufacturer  of industrial  automation  equipment  reported  a slight decline  in orders

growth in April  and May,  but noted that "we've still got a backlog  of biblical  proportions."

Retail Sales.  Retail sales  growth improved  in the District in May and  early June.  A

large retailer reported  a stronger sales  gain during  May than in April,  in spite of a more difficult

year-over-year comparison.  In turn, sales  gains in early  June were running  above  May's pace.

Growth in this retailer's  sales of appliances  and  home electronics  exceeded the company-wide

average  in May and  June, while apparel sales  strengthened  as  well.  Another large  retailer stated

that appliance  sales increased  along normal  seasonal trends  and  in line with expectations  during

May,  after falling  below expectations  in March  and April.  A large superstore  chain also reported

faster sales  gains in May  and early June than earlier in the year.  Improved weather boosted  sales

of seasonal  items,  although this contact noted that these  sales remain below targets set earlier in

the year.  A large apparel  retailer stated that sales growth improved  in May, particularly  in areas

where poor weather curtailed seasonal improvement  in spring  apparel  sales in March  and April.

"We are  cautiously optimistic,"  this contact  noted.  "We aren't optimistic,  we are cautiously

optimistic."  A large car rental  firm stated that business  in the region strengthened  significantly

during May, after adjusting for normal  seasonal trends.  Sales tax revenues  in one  large District

state posted  a year-over-year  increase  in May twice the rate of the increase  for the  year-to-date.

A  majority  of  surveyed  District  auto  dealers  reported  stronger  sales  in  May  and  early

June  than  in April,  after  discounting  normal  seasonal  trends,  while  a slimmer  majority  expected

sales  to  strengthen  from  the  first half of the  year  to  the  second  half.  Most  speaker presentations

prepared  for  our  recent  auto  industry  outlook  conference  were  cautiously  optimistic,  and  the

consensus  forecast  prepared  for  the  meeting  implied  a  small  gain for  new  vehicle  sales  in  the

latter half of 1995.

Housing.  Reports from  realtors  and homebuilders  did not yield  evidence of a widespread

upturn in housing,  but lower mortgage  interest rates  have certainly buoyed optimism  in the sector.

A  minority of surveyed realtors  stated  that lower rates  boosted homebuying interest  in recent

weeks.  The latest survey conducted  by a state association  of realtors  showed a significant year-

VII-3

over-year decline  in existing  home sales in the first quarter of 1995.  Home prices have been

relatively  stable this year,  according  to an association  leader,  and seem to remain on an uptrend.

Homebuilding  permits  continued to decline  in the  Chicago  area through April,  and the leader of a

large  association of homebuilders  stated that declining  mortgage  interest rates "haven't really

sparked  all  that much new activity,  yet."  Nonetheless,  most housing  industry contacts  still

expected better results  in the latter half of the year.

Labor Markets.  District labor markets  remain tight, but slowing  expansion in the

demand for labor may have eased wage pressures  in recent  months.  A survey by a large

temporary  help company  showed  a flattening  out in the rate  of expansion in Midwest  firms' hiring

plans  in the second  quarter.  However, this measure  remained  at its highest level  since the  survey

began  in  1977.  Expansion in hiring plans among  Midwest durable goods manufacturers  has

abated thus far in  1995,  but these plans  remained  stronger than those of other Midwest employers

as  well as their national  counterparts.  Help-wanted  advertising  in the East North Central  region

posted  an increase from the first quarter to April.  A  District newspaper  reported  that its help-

wanted  advertising  section continued  to expand  strongly in May, albeit at a slightly slower rate

than earlier in the year.  "Its still very  robust here," this contact stated.  Another  large newspaper

reported that help-wanted  advertising  revenues posted  a larger  increase  in May than the

substantial  increase for the year-to-date.  An index  of help-wanted  advertising  slipped  in  Western

Michigan,  but remained  at a relatively  high level.  Several temporary help companies  reported

that expansion in  demand for temporary  workers  slowed, but remained  positive.  At the  same

time, the  supply of workers  continued  to tighten.  One temporary help firm stated that its

placements  could grow faster were  the  supply of labor to increase,  even if expansion in demand

were to  continue to  slow.  Prices charged  client companies  are still expected  to increase,  largely

due to the  rising expense  of attracting workers.  The regional  manager  of one large temporary

help company stated  that unfilled orders  "are still  running at a high level, and we're  only just

starting  to enter into  our busy period."  Automotive-related  placements  slowed in Indiana,

according  to this contact, but total  unfilled orders  are still at high levels.

VIII-1

EIGHTH DISTRICT  - ST. LOUIS

Summary

The  District  economy  continues  to  grow,  albeit  at  a  slower  pace.  Residential

construction  activity  continues  to  slow,  although  multifamily  and  commercial  construction

have  increased  recently.  District  bankers  report  little  change  in  loan  demand  and  supply

conditions.  Record  rainfall  has  produced  severe  flooding  along  major  rivers in the District,

affecting  thousands  of acres  of farmland and  causing  further  delays  in planting  spring  crops.

Manufacturing and Other Business  Activity

Contacts  continue  to  report  mixed  signals  about  economic  activity, with  many more

noting  a slowdown  than in prior periods.  Despite  the slowing, reports  of tight labor markets

are  common.  Although  many contacts  expect a continued  slowing in the economy,  most  do

not foresee  a recession  in the near future.

Contacts  describe  a  general  slowdown  in  the  national  and  regional  economies,

although  the  regional  slowdown  is  more  spotty.  Overnight  package  delivery  firms  and

interstate trucking  companies  report  a slowing in orders.  Suppliers to the auto industry  have

felt the effects  of waning  auto  demand;  one such  supplier reports the company's first  decline

in  sales  in more than  a  year.  Contacts  in the  apparel  industry  report  that  apparel  sales  are

down  and  do  not  show  any  sign  of bouncing  back  soon;  however,  shoe  sales  are  stable.

Competitive  pressures  have  caused  firms  in  this  industry  to  obtain  most  of their  product

overseas to control costs.  In addition, by managing their clients'  inventories,  these firms  have

held  prices  down  and improved  overall  industry  efficiency.  Generally,  international  markets

appear to be the  strongest  areas  of growth.

VIII-2

Contacts  at  public  utilities  report  that  the  pace  of new  residential  installations  has

fallen  because  of the  construction  slowdown;  meanwhile,  the pace  of industrial  installations

for small  businesses has  been  steady.  A chemical  company  that depends  largely on the  auto

and construction industries reports  strong sales in recent  months,  with  plants  operating  almost

at capacity;  this company's plastics division  has been  operating  above  capacity.  This contact

expects  the recent  slowdowns  in auto production  to  dampen  sales,  though.

Some  District  industries  continue  to  report  growth.  Mobile  home  manufacturers

around  the District  report sharp  increases  in  sales and  employment.  In addition, they report

increases  in starting wages to improve  recruitment  and retention  of new employees.  Furniture

makers  in  northeast Mississippi  are  operating  at  capacity with  plans  to  expand.  A contact

whose firm makes  prefabricated  metal  buildings  also reports  rapidly growing  sales.

Many  areas  of the District  are  still  experiencing  tight  labor markets,  particularly  for

entry-level  positions.  Some  contacts  still report  difficulty  finding  qualified  applicants.  One

firm reports  a  60 percent  turnover rate  for new employees,  and many  firms have  resorted to

hiring those applicants with "good  attitudes,"  that is, those who  are willing to be trained.  Some

firms  have  been  substituting  capital-especially  computers-for  labor  as a  way to  increase

productivity.  In some instances,  though,  this action  has added to hiring  pressures because  the

new  technology  raises  the job's  qualifications,  and  firms  are  finding  that  many  entry-level

applicants are  computer-shy.

Real  Estate and Construction

Most  parts  of the District  are  still  experiencing  declines  in the  number of residential

construction  permits issued,  owing  mostly to  last  year's interest  rates  hikes.  Home  sales  in

most areas  are  also lagging  behind  last year's levels.  In general,  there  continues to be a need

for  more  "starter"  home  construction  (less  than  $100,000)  in  many  parts  of the  District.

VIII-3

"Trade-up"  homes,  especially  those in the  mid-$100,000  to  $200,000 range,  are  not moving

well.  On  the  other  hand,  permits  for  multifamily  buildings  are  on  the  rise  in  many  areas,

especially  for  apartment  complexes,  and  commercial  construction  is  continuing  to  show  a

moderate  gain.

Banking  and Finance

District bankers  report  little  change in loan demand or  supply conditions  over the last

several  months.  A number  of banks  have  eased  terms on  commercial  loans  for  small,  mid-

sized  and large borrowers  in response to  intense competition  in some markets.  Loan  demand

is  reported to  be steady,  although  a  number of institutions have noted  a pickup  in residential

mortgage  demand  in recent  weeks.

Agriculture and  Natural Resources

Heavy  rains  during  May  have  slowed  the  pace  of  corn  and  soybean  planting  in

Missouri,  Illinois,  Indiana  and  parts  of Kentucky  and have  caused  flooding  in  many  areas.

Planting that should  have  been  completed  by  mid-  to  late-May  was reported  as only  half to

two-thirds  complete  by the  first  of June.  In some  areas,  further  delays  may force  farmers  to

plant  soybeans  instead of corn.  The  heavy rains have  also  caused  substantial  flooding  along

the Mississippi, Missouri and  Illinois rivers.  Reports  suggest  that  several  thousand  acres have

been  flooded because  of levee breaks.  The  amount of flooded  farmland  has been  especially

acute in Arkansas,  with  100,000 to 200,000  acres  affected.  The  flooding also  closed the port

of St. Louis for two  weeks,  stranding  more than  1,000  barges  and  several  million bushels  of

grain.  Cotton prices in the Memphis market continue to trade  above  $1 per pound,  as  demand

for cotton  remains  strong.

NINTH  DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

The Ninth District economy  shows few signs of  slackening  from the brisk pace reported

previously.  Manufacturing  is strong.  Oil drilling  is experiencing  a resurgence,  mines are

looking  for ways to expand  output  and paper mills  are running full out.  The construction

sector as a whole is robust, with commercial  and  heavy  building projects  more than  offsetting

declines  in residential work.  General merchandise  sales  are improved  from earlier in the

year.  Vehicle  sales remain  below  year-earlier levels, but some sources  note an upturn  in

sales.  Employment  growth remains robust and employers  report  continuing problems in

finding  employees.  Few substantial  wage  or price increases are  reported other than for paper

products  and  some industrial  inputs.

Adverse weather is responsible  for problems  in  two sectors.  Excess rainfall  and cool

weather  severely  delayed  planting in many areas.  Some loss  of potential  yield appears  likely,

particularly in the Dakotas.  Moreover,  the same wet, cool  weather  has dampened business  in

most tourist regions.

Manufacturing

"We  are as busy as we ever have been,"  says one Minneapolis  small  manufacturer, "and  so

is  everyone  else  that I talk to."  That  statement generally  characterizes  conditions for

manufacturers  across the district,  and is especially  true for Minneapolis-St.  Paul, Minn.,

Fargo,  N.D.,  and  Sioux Falls, S.D.  Orders remain  strong  and the most pressing problem for

many firms is securing  skilled employees.

Natural  resource  industries

Energy and  the other non-agricultural  natural resource sectors are  very  strong.  New

drilling technology  and  a recently discovered  oil formation  have caused  an upswing  in

drilling in North Dakota.  Leasing,  exploration  and drilling  activities  in that state  are  at  their

highest levels  in  a decade.  Gas  and oil drilling  is also  strong  in Montana.  The non-ferrous

metal  mining  sector continues to respond  to strong  prices by producing  at capacity.  An  open-

pit gold mine  in  South  Dakota proposed doubling  in  size, while  a new copper  refinery is

being constructed  adjacent  to  a mine in Michigan's  Upper Peninsula.  Iron mines  around Lake

Superior continue  to expect  1995  shipments to be  the strongest in  several years.

IX-2

Favorable  prices have paper mills running  at capacity and  looking for ways to  eliminate

bottlenecks.  Lumber prices  are down  in response  to slowing  of residential  construction  for

the nation  as a whole,  but loggers remain  busy.  Plants producing  oriented-strand  board  and

other plywood  substitutes are  also  busy.

Construction  and real estate

"The  construction  industry  will continue strong,  although  the boom in residential  and

commercial  construction  will  be replaced  by industrial and public  works  projects,"  says  a

Montana  business  forecaster.  That aptly  summarizes the construction  sector for the  Ninth

District  as  a whole.  There  is  some slackening  of residential  work from the effervescent  levels

reached  a year  ago,  but non-residential  projects  are  so  strong  that overall  activity is up

slightly.  In Minnesota,  for example,  total  construction employment  in April was up  1 percent

over year-earlier  levels in spite of a  25 percent  decline  in single-family permits  over the  same

period.  For the Minneapolis-St.  Paul  metropolitan  area, the employment increase  in the same

period was nearly  9 percent  as increased  commercial  work more than compensates  for the

drop in home  building.  Moreover, in  early June,  one  builders  association representative

reported  that declining mortgage  interest rates are  causing  increased  interest in  home

building.  Large, publicly let projects  in Minnesota  and the Dakotas  for the year through  April

are even  with  1994 and  well above levels of the previous three years.

Agriculture

Persistent rain, flooding  and excessive  soil  moisture are  widespread  problems for crop

producers.  Spring  planting was delayed  by two weeks or more for all major crops in  all

district  states except Montana.  Large  areas  of eastern North Dakota  and  South Dakota  are

still unplanted.  While  weather conditions improved  in  early June, planting delays were  so

severe and  so widespread  that  some yield  loss can be expected.  For example, as  of June  4,

only 55 percent  of South  Dakota's corn  was planted  compared  to a  five-year average  of 91

percent.  The  growing  season  in this  region is such that corn planted  after the first week in

June  is usually  ensiled as cattle forage,  but seldom  produces marketable  grain.  In the

livestock  sector,  hog  and cattle  numbers remain  high  and prices low.

IX-3

Consumer  spending  and  tourism

"Our  retail sales  continue to be  very  strong,"  reports  the  CEO of a  firm with department

stores  across the Ninth District.  Across  the region,  sales of general  merchandise  apparently

have improved  since the preceding report.  Some mall managers  describe a recent  pickup  in

traffic  after a  slump earlier  in the year,  and national  chains  based in  Minneapolis  report

improved  sales.

Vehicle  sales continue  somewhat  below  levels  that prevailed  a year ago.  In North Dakota,

South  Dakota and  Minnesota  new registrations  for the year through  May  are about  10 percent

below  year-earlier levels.  But there may be  some upturn.  While  South  Dakota's year-to-date

totals continue  to lag  1994, new registrations  for the month of May  were  up  11  percent from

year-earlier  levels.  Some  dealers and  association  representatives  confirm  some  strengthening

of sales, particularly  for pickups  and sport-utility  vehicles,

A  cold,  wet spring has dampened  tourism  in many  parts of the Ninth District.  Tourism in

the Upper Peninsula of Michigan  decreased  during  May from a year  ago due to poor  weather

and the  Canadian  exchange rate,  according  to tourist officials.  In South  Dakota, visitations  to

major outdoor attractions  dropped  about  10  percent.  On  a brighter note,  an  official  in Duluth,

Minn., reports  a 7 percent  increase  for May.

Employment, wages and prices

"State economy  still churning  out new jobs,"  was  a headline in  a recent Montana

newspaper  that could be used  to characterize  the Ninth  District as  a whole.  Employment

levels  are generally  2.5 percent to  3  percent above a  year  ago.  Unemployment rates  in most

important labor market areas range from less than 2 percent to 4.5 percent.  Many  firms

continue  to report difficulty  in securing  both  skilled  and entry level workers.

With respect to  wages and  prices, reports are  mixed.  Paper products  continue  to increase

in price,  and  there are reports  of magazine  publishers  switching  to cheaper  grades.  Some

manufacturers  report increases in prices  for steel  and plastic  components.  But a builders

association  noted  that building  materials prices,  especially  lumber, have  dropped

dramatically.  Reports  on wage  trends are  mixed.  Many  employers  report they have raised

entry-level  wages  substantially in  order to  secure needed  workers.  But others report new

wage  agreements  with increases  of 2 percent  to 3  percent.

X-1

TENTH  DISTRICT  - KANSAS  CITY

Overview.  The  Tenth  District economy  grew  at  a  moderately  strong  pace  over  the

past  month.  Retail  activity  improved  in  most parts  of the  region.  Manufacturing  activity

remained  generally  strong  across  the  district,  although  some  signs  of slowing  emerged.

In  other  sectors,  homebuilding  activity  eased  slightly,  energy  activity  slowed,  and  heavy

rains  dimmed  prospects  for  district  crop  producers.  Manufacturers  continue  to  report

increases  in  materials  prices,  but  prices  of finished  goods  have  been  stable  and  wage

pressures  remain  subdued.

Retail  Sales.  Most  retailers  report  sales  increased  last  month  from  the previous

month  and  were  generally  running  above  year-ago  sales.  Several  retailers  report  strong

sales  in  apparel  and  household  goods.  Most  respondents  expect  sales  to  grow  steadily

throughout  the  remainder  of the  year.  Despite  this  optimistic  outlook,  many  retailers  are

trimming  inventories.  Auto  dealers  report flat  or  declining  sales  over  the  past  month,

citing bad  weather  and  higher  financing  costs  as  the  main  causes.  Most  dealers  expect

sales  to  increase  during  the  summer  months.

Manufacturing.  Most  manufacturers  continued  to  operate  at high  levels  of

capacity  last  month, although  some  signs  of  slowing were  evident.  Backlogs  of  orders  fell

at  plants  across  the  region.  Respondents  generally  report  no  difficulty  in  obtaining

materials  and  do  not  expect  supply  problems  in  the  coming  months.  Most  manufacturers

are  satisfied  with  current  inventory  levels,  although  some  are  trimming  stocks.

Energy.  District  energy  activity  slowed  in  May,  despite  an  uptick  in natural  gas

X-2

prices  and  crude  oil prices  above  year-ago  levels.  The  average  number  of drilling  rigs

operating  in  the  district  fell  slightly,  resuming  a  six-month  decline  after  pausing  in  April.

Some  industry  observers  suggest,  however,  that  activity  in  the  district's  energy  industry

may  pick up  if  the  current  forecast  for higher  natural  gas  prices  holds  true.

Housing.  Builders  report  housing  starts  fell  slightly  last month,  due  mainly  to  bad

weather  across  the  region.  Housing  starts  also  remain below  their  year-ago  level.  Some

builders  report  sales  of new  homes  remained  stable  over  the  past  month  but  were  below

their  year-ago  pace.  Building materials  were  readily  available  with  no  delays.  With

mortgage  rates  declining,  lenders  expect  moderate  growth  in mortgage  demand  during

the  coming  months.

Banking.  Loans  increased  slightly  at district  banks  last  month.  Most  respondents

report gains  in  commercial  real  estate  loans,  home  equity  loans,  and  agricultural  loans.

Demand  for  consumer  loans  was  constant, while  demand  for  commercial  and  industrial

loans,  construction  loans,  and  home  mortgages  was  mixed.  Loan-deposit  ratios  were  up

over  the  last  month,  and  security  investments  were  mostly  down.

None  of  the  respondents  changed  their  prime  rate  last  month,  and  only one

expects  to  change  it in the  near  term.  Almost  all  respondent  banks  report  no  change  in

consumer  lending  rates,  and  few  expect  to  change  rates  in the  near  future.  Lending

standards  were  unchanged  at  all banks.

While  more  than  half of the  banks  report  an  overall  decrease  in deposits,  changes

were  mixed  across  various  types  of deposits.  Large  CD, IRA,  and  Keogh  accounts  rose

slightly,  while  demand  deposits  and  NOW accounts  slipped.  Changes  in  MMDAs  and

small  time  and  savings  deposits  were  mixed.

X-3

Agriculture.  Inclement  weather  has  eroded  prospects  for  district  crop  production.

Winter  wheat  yields  in  much  of  the  district  are  expected  to  be  well below  normal  due to

last  spring's  freezing  temperatures,  recent  heavy  rains,  and  developing  disease  problems.

Heavy  rains  have  also  delayed  the  planting  of the  district's  corn  and  soybean  crops.

Rising  feed  prices  and  low  livestock  prices  have  hurt the  profit  outlook  for  district

livestock  producers.  As  a  result,  some  large-scale  pork  producers  have  delayed

expansion  plans,  and  some  small-scale  producers  are  leaving  the  industry.  Despite  weak

cattle  prices, few  district  cattle  ranchers  have  reduced  the size  of  their  herds.

District bankers  report  an  increase  in  the  number  of farm  loans  refinanced  this

year,  following  last  year's  losses  in  the  livestock  industry.  While  little  if any  improvement

is  expected  in  district  farm incomes  this  year,  bankers  indicate  that  most  farm  borrowers

remain  in  solid  financial  condition.

Prices  and wages.  Manufacturers  continue  to  report widespread  increases  in

materials  prices.  Several  manufacturers  report  increases  in  prices  for  packaging

materials.  Labor  markets  remain  tight  in many  parts  of the  district,  but  reports  of wage

increases  remain  scattered.  A  late-April  survey  of manufacturers  across  the  district

showed  that price  increases  for  finished  goods  were  much  less widespread  than  earlier  in

the  year.  Retailers  continue  to  report  stable  prices  and  expect  prices  to  remain  steady

over  the  next  several  months.

XI-1

ELEVENTH  DISTRICT--DALLAS

Economic  activity  remained  fairly  strong  in May  and June,  but  there  were  some  further  signs

since  the  last  survey  that growth may  be  slowing.  Manufacturing  orders  remained  at high  levels,  but

contacts  in some  manufacturing  industries  said  demand  had  moderated  recently.  In addition,

transportation contacts  said cargo  volume  had  fallen  since  the last Beige  Book.  Retailers  reported  a

slight  pickup  in sales  in late  May,  although sales  were  still  weak  at  stores near  the Texas-Mexico

border.  On a  more  positive  note,  demand  for business  services  continued  to increase,  with  no

slowdown  in sight.  Contacts  in the construction  industry  said that  commercial  construction  continued

to  rise  and  that  home  sales  had risen  in May  and June  as  mortgage  rates  declined.  Bankers  reported

steady  loan demand.  Energy  contacts  said that  drilling had  improved  in  the  Gulf of Mexico.

Agricultural  conditions  are generally  good,  but  drought  continued  to  hamper  agricultural  production  in

some  areas  of the Eleventh  District.

Price and wage  pressures  seem  to have subsided  in the last  six  weeks.  The  notable  exception

was  in the semiconductor  industry,  where  contacts  said  low  supplies  led  to higher  selling  prices.

Although  some  manufacturing  contacts  said that  high prices  for packaging  had  raised  costs,

manufacturers  of paper  and  corrugated  boxes  said that  selling  prices  had  stopped  rising.

Manufacturers  of construction-related  products  said prices  had  softened  because of slower

homebuilding  in the  first  quarter.  In the service-producing  industries,  retailers  said  that apparel

discounting  was  widespread,  and  fees  for  business  services  were  stable  after  rising  earlier  in the year.

Crude  oil  prices  were  lower  in May and  June  after  moving  above  $20 per  barrel  in  April,  and  natural

gas  prices  were  flat.

Eleventh  District manufacturing  demand  remained  at  high levels,  but  there  were  some  signs

XI-2

that  growth may  be  slowing.  Corrugated  box and  paper  manufacturers  said  demand  remains  very

high,  but that  orders  had  flattened  in the  past  few months,  which may  signal  a  slowing  in the  growth

of overall  manufacturing  shipments.  Similarly,  respondents  in construction-related  manufacturing

industries  said that  while demand  related to  commercial  construction  remained  strong,  orders  for

lumber  and cement  had  slowed  as  fewer  homes  were  constructed  in  the  first  quarter of  1995.  In

addition,  glass producers  noted  a decline  in orders  stemming  from  lower  auto  sales.  Demand  for

electronic  products  continued  to  increase,  however.  Semiconductor  manufacturers  said  that orders

were  rising  strongly  and  that  a  lack  of capacity  was  putting pressure  on  selling  prices.  Apparel  sales

were  steady,  and  contacts  expected  demand  to  remain  at  current  levels  through  the  rest  of the  year

because  of slower  growth  in  retail  sales.  Demand  for  food  products  was  flat.  Respondents  in  the

petrochemicals  industry  said  that  demand  had  eased  slightly,  but that  high prices  were  still providing

very  strong  profits.  A  sharp  increase  in  gasoline prices  from April  through  May  provided  improved

margins  for  refiners,  after one  of the  worst  quarters  in  the  history  of the  refining  business.  Demand

for oil  field  machinery  remained  flat  despite  a pickup  in drilling  in  the Gulf of Mexico.

Respondents  at  business  service  firms,  such as  temporary  employment  agencies,  accounting

and  consulting  firms  and  legal  firms,  said  demand  continued  to  rise.  Sources  of increased  demand

included  real  estate  transactions,  mergers  and  acquisitions  and  high  technology  manufacturing.  Hiring

increased,  and  the  outlook  for the  next  several  months  was  optimistic.  Despite the  strong  demand,

competition  kept  prices  flat.  Respondents  in  the  transportation services  industry  said that  a

slowdown  in  economic  activity  and  Mexico's  peso  crisis  had  caused  demand  to  fall  in  the  last  six

weeks.  Nevertheless,  some  contacts  said  they were  starting  to  see  a  slight pickup  in  shipments  from

Texas  to  Mexico.

Retailers reported  a  slight pickup  in  sales  in  late  May,  although  sales  continue  to  grow  at a

slower  pace  than last  year.  Selling  prices  were  very  competitive,  with  contacts  reporting  no change  in

XI-3

price  for most  products  and  continued  discounting for  apparel.  Sales  remained  weak  at stores  along

the  Mexican  border.  Auto  sales remained  flat  in May  and  June,  and  were well  below  year-ago  levels.

District bankers  reported  steady  loan demand.  Construction  loan  demand  remained  strong,

primarily  because  of warehouse  and  plant  construction.  Although  demand  for  new  residential

mortgages  was slightly  weaker,  refinancing  was slightly  stronger.  Continued  competition  between

banks  and  other  lenders  for  business  and  commercial  and  industrial  loans  squeezed  margins.

Construction  activity  remained  strong.  Rising  demand  for warehouse  and retail  space  kept  the

level  of nonresidential  construction  high. In  addition,  there  were  several  reports  of new  office

construction,  something  that  has  not  been seen  since  the real  estate  bust  of the mid-1980s.

Homebuilders  said  that  sales  were  up  in May  and  June  after  declining  in the first  quarter,  mostly  a

result  of lower  mortgage  interest  rates.  Homebuilders  have revised  their  outlooks  upwards  but  still

expect  1995  sales  to be  below  1994  levels.

Energy  respondents  said  that drilling  activity  in the  Gulf of Mexico  had  improved,  with both

the number  of rigs  under  contract  and  the number  of active  rigs rising.  After moving  above  $20 per

barrel  in April,  crude  oil  prices  fell  to $18.69  on May  26th on news  that  a refinery  strike in  Brazil

had  ended.  Crude  prices  have  since  rebounded  to about  $19  per barrel.  Natural  gas  prices  remained

relatively  flat.

Agricultural conditions  were  rated  as  mostly good,  with the  exception  of the wheat  crop

which  was  rated  as  fair  to poor.  Drought  continued  to hamper  production  in South  Texas,  greatly

reducing  the amount  of forage  available  to  cattle.  Dry  conditions  have  also  stressed  crops,  and

irrigation  is  heavy  although  the  lack of rainfall  has  led  to pumping  limits  on  the Edwards  Aquifer.

Texas  farmers  received  higher  prices  for  most  crops  in May,  although  livestock  prices  continued  to

decline  and  are now  14  percent  below  last  year's  level.

XII-1

TWELFTH  DISTRICT  --  SAN  FRANCISCO

Summary

The  pace  of economic  growth  in  the Twelfth  District  continued  to  be  slow  in  the

second  quarter.  Retail  sales  were  sluggish,  especially  for automobiles.  Single-family  home

construction  remained  below  1994  levels  in  most  areas.  Manufacturers  of building  materials

reported  that the  decline  in  home  building  caused  weaker  sales  and  an  increase  in  inventories.

In  contrast,  firms  in  several  other  manufacturing  industries,  such  as  metals  and  electronics,

reported  continued  strong  demand  and  tight  capacity.  Tourism  continues  to  be  a  source  of

strength  in  the  District.  Agricultural  exports  generally  are  strong,  despite  sluggish  sales  to

Mexico.  Loan  growth  is  reported  strong  throughout  the  District,  with  an  improvement  in  real

estate  and  construction  lending  in  California.

Business  Sentiment

Twelfth  District business  leaders  expect  continued  moderation  in  the  pace  of national

economic  growth  over  the  next year.  About three-fifths  of survey  respondents  project  national

output to  grow  at  its long-run  historical  average  during  the  next  four  quarters,  while  about

one-third  expect  output  growth  to  slow  even  more.  No  survey  respondents  expect  a  recession

during  the  next  four  quarters.  Business  leaders  in  Arizona,  Nevada,  Oregon,  and Utah  expect

growth  in  their  regions  to  outpace  the  national  average;  in  Idaho  growth  is  expected  to  slow

to  the  national  pace;  and,  in  California  and  Washington  growth  is  expected  to  be  slightly

slower  than  the  nation.

XII-  2

Retail  Trade  and  Services

District  retailers  report  weak  sales  at  automobile  dealers  and  food  stores,  but  note

some  recent  strengthening  in  sales  at  department  stores.  Department  store  sales  are  reported

to have  improved  in  May  after  remaining  weak  through  April.  Among  sectors,  automobile

sales  showed  the  steepest  declines.  In  Idaho,  new  car  sales  in  May  were  down  9  percent  from

a  year earlier,  causing  a  rise  in  inventories  and  an  increase  in  the  use  of rebates.  Auto  sales

in  the  Puget  Sound  area  are  reported  to  have  declined  in  each  of the  last  two  quarters.  The

recent  increase  in  U.S.  tariffs  on  Japanese  luxury  cars  is  causing  concern,  particularly  in

California  where  these  cars  make  up  3.4  percent  of total  automobile  sales,  compared  with  1.4

percent  for  the nation.  Food  store  sales  have  slowed  since  January,  and  food  price  increases

at the  retail  level  remain  modest  despite  larger  increases  in  wholesale  prices.

District  service  industries  report  continued  strong  demand.  In  a national  survey  of

travel  agents,  California  cities  held  4  of the  top  11  spots  in  terms  of advance  summer  vacation

bookings.  In  Las  Vegas,  the  rapid  growth  in  tourist  activity  tapered  off slightly  in  March,

most  likely  because  of severe  weather  in  California.  Convention  attendance  and  air  passenger

traffic  continued  to  increase  in  March,  but  auto  traffic  from  California  declined.

Manufacturing

District  manufacturing  activity  remains  mixed,  with  weakness  in  the  aerospace  and

lumber  industries  offset  by  strength  in  other  sectors.  Aluminum  sales  and  metals  prices

continue  at  high  levels,  although  reports  suggest  possible  price  discounting  in  the  second  half

of 1995.  Electronic  components  manufacturers  report  increased  capacity  utilization  and

lengthening  delivery  lead  times.  Lumber  prices  are  down  sharply  from  last year's  levels,  as

XII-  3

sales  slow  and  inventories  build.  Exports  of wood  products  to  Japan  remain  strong,  however.

Agriculture  and  Resource-Related  Industries

District  agricultural  producers  report  generally  strong  export  growth,  although  sales  to

Mexico  remain  weak,  and  concern  over  a  trade  war  with  Japan  has  increased.  Japan

reportedly  purchases  a  quarter  of California's  overall  agricultural  exports  and  a larger  share  of

some  individual  commodities.  Japan  purchased  80  percent  of this  year's  California  cherry

crop  at record  prices.  The  high  prices  also  benefited  cherry  producers  in  Washington.

Washington  apple  exports  to  Mexico  are  reported  down  50  percent  from  last  year's  pace,  but

sales  appear  to  have  improved  recently.

Real  Estate  and  Construction

Single-family  residential  construction  has weakened  in  most areas.  Building  permits

are  reported  well  below  year-earlier  levels  in  Idaho,  Nevada, Utah,  and  the  Puget  Sound  area.

In  California,  home  building  remains  at  a  low  level,  and  home  prices  are  still  below  year-

earlier  levels,  but residential  construction  lending  is  reported  to  have  improved  recently.

Home  construction  remains  strong  in  Oregon,  with  a significant  shortage  of  skilled

construction  workers  reported.

Commercial  and  multi-family  real  estate  activity  in  the  District generally  remains

strong.  Commercial  office  rents  in  San  Francisco  are  reported  strengthening  slightly  at  the

higher  end.  In  Las  Vegas,  commercial  construction  activity  increased  in  the  last  quarter,  as

several  new  resort-casino  projects  started  and  the  development  of a large  new  mall  continued.

Apartment  construction  continues  at a  steady  pace  in Las  Vegas.  Apartment  rents  are

reported  rising  at  an  8 percent  annual  rate  in  Salt  Lake  City,  but  rent  increases  have  slowed  to

XII  - 4

a  4  percent  annual  rate  in  Boise.  In  some  parts  of Oregon,  the  apartment  vacancy  rate  is

reported  to  be  near  zero.

Financial  Institutions

District  banks  continue  to  report  strong  loan  demand.  In  California,  business  lending

is  reported  to have  strengthened,  with  a noticeable  increase  in  construction  and  real  estate

lending.  Some  of the  increase  in  lending  was  attributed  to  increased  financing  of unintended

inventory accumulation, however.

