For use  at  Noon,  E.S.T.
Wednesday
January 18,  1995

Summary  of Commentary  on

Current
Economic
Conditions

by Federal  Reserve  District

January  1995

SUMMARY  OF COMMENTARY  ON  CURRENT ECONOMIC  CONDITIONS

JANUARY  1995

TABLE  OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY 

........................................... 

First D istrict--Boston 

.................. 

.................. 

Second  District--New  York 

.................. 

Third District--Philadelphia 

.................. 

............... 

.............. 

Fourth District--Cleveland 

................................. 

Fifth District--Richmond 

.................. 

................. 

Sixth  District--Atlanta 

.................................... 

Seventh District--Chicago 

................................. 

Eight District--St.  Louis 

.................................. 

Ninth District--Minneapolis 

.......... 

................... 

.... 

i

I-1

II-

III-1

IV-1

V-

V I-1

VII-1

V III-1

IX-1

Tenth  District--Kansas  City 

......... 

........ 

... 

......... 

.. 

X-1

Eleventh  District--Dallas 

.................. 

................ 

Twelfth  District--San  Francisco 

................... 

......... 

XI-1

. XII-1

i

SUMMARY 1/

Summary.  Economic  expansion  remained  vibrant  around  much  of the nation  in recent  months,

and  conditions  seem to have  grown  more  uniform  among the Districts.  The  underlying  momentum in

consumer spending growth remained  quite  strong.  Manufacturers  continued  to offer some  of the brightest

reports  within the Districts, although  the  overall  pace  of expansion  in industrial  output  may have eased

somewhat.  Assessments  of auto  industry conditions  remained  upbeat.  Higher mortgage  interest  rates

appear to have  slowed  single-family  housing  activity,  but  multifamily  residential  and  commercial

construction  remained  relatively  strong.  Expansion  in bank  loans  slowed,  led by  weaker demand  for

home  mortgage,  home  equity, and  residential  construction  loans.  Production  responses  to  livestock price

declines are anticipated  to  bolster farm  income  in the current  year.  Labor markets  continued  to

strengthen,  with  most  reports  indicating  unchanged  to somewhat  higher  wage increases.  Price increases

seemed  somewhat  more  widespread  than  were  reported  in  early  December,  while  higher  inflationary

expectations  were  apparent  in  business  surveys.

Retail Sales.  Retail  sales  increased  at  a  moderate  pace  in the holiday  season.  Sales  gains  may

have fallen  modestly  below expectations  formed just after  the  Thanksgiving  weekend,  but  weather effects

and  other  factors  point to  stronger underlying  momentum  in  spending  growth.  Nearly  every  District

reported  continued  strength  in  sales  gains  for hard  goods  and/or big-ticket  items,  including  personal

computers,  other consumer  electronics  items,  home  furnishings  and  appliances.  Assessments  of auto

sales  remained  quite positive  in  much of the  nation.  Apparel  sales  were  weaker  in  normally cold  Districts

that experienced  relatively  warm winter  weather,  and  many  apparel  retailers  reported  heavier-than-

anticipated  discounting.  However, there  were  signs of underlying  strength  even in  the apparel  category.

Several  Districts  in  the northern  part of the country  noted that  apparel  sales  weakness  was  concentrated  in

outerwear,  while  retailers  in  the Atlanta  District noted  that warmer-than-usual  weather  held back  overall

holiday  sales gains,  except for apparel, which showed  relatively  strong  gains.

1 Prepared  at the Federal  Reserve  Bank of Chicago based  on  information  collected before

January  10,  1995.  This document  summarizes  comments received  from businesses  and  other contacts
outside  the Federal  Reserve  and  is  not a  commentary  on the views  of Federal  Reserve  officials.

Manufacturing.  Manufacturers  continued  to provide  some of the  strongest reports within  the

Districts,  although  the overall  growth  rate  may have  slowed  modestly.  Philadelphia's  survey  of

manufacturers  showed  output continuing  to  grow in  the fourth quarter,  although somewhat  more slowly

than  a strong  year-earlier  period;  looking ahead,  about twice  as many  respondents  expected

order increases  than decreases  during the  first  half of 1995.  Richmond's  mail  survey  also suggested  that

most manufacturers  expect  further gains  in output,  with  little change  in the pace  of current growth

reported  since the  last  survey.  Purchasing  managers'  surveys  in  the  Chicago  region  pointed  to vigorous

gains in industrial  output  as  1994 came  to  a close,  although  expansion  was  not  quite  so strong  as earlier in

the  year.

Production  and  orders  trends  in  durable  goods  industries  continued  to lead  growth  within  the

overall  manufacturing  sector.  Cleveland's  industrial  contacts  indicated that  orders  growth  remains  solid,

with  particular  strength  in  capital  goods  industries.  Automotive  contacts  reported  some  of the  strongest

sales gains  within  Boston's  manufacturing  sector.  Cleveland  and Chicago  reported  strength  in demand  for

steel,  with  Chicago  noting that steel  output  plans  for  the first quarter were  recently  increased  in response

to  stronger automotive  orders.  Auto parts  suppliers continued  to  announce construction  of new

production  facilities  in  the  Atlanta  region.  Increased  exports  to Europe  boosted  recent results  among

Cleveland's  manufacturing  contacts.  Uncertainty  over  Mexican  developments  clouded  expectations  in

several  regions,  however.

Construction and Real  Estate.  Higher  mortgage  interest  rates  appear to  have  slowed

homebuilding  and  residential  real  estate  activity  around  much  of the nation.  Seasonal  patterns  account  for

some  of the recent weakness,  but  home  sales  weakened  in  normally cold  regions  that  enjoyed  relatively

warm  and favorable  weather.  Multifamily  and commercial  construction  were  stronger  than  single-family

homebuilding  in nearly  every  District.  For example,  Dallas  reported  that  overall  demand  for

construction-related  products  edged  up;  lumber producers  reported  lower sales for  residential  building but

increased  orders for  commercial  construction,  and glass  producers  reported  record  sales partly  for the

same  reason.  Declining  commercial  vacancy  rates were  widely reported,  and  continued  growth  in

commercial  and  multifamily  development was  generally  anticipated  in  1995.  However, a  wider  group  of

iii

contacts  expressed  concern  about the future  impact of higher interest  rates  on real  estate and commercial

construction  activity.

Banking.  Expansion  in bank  loans  slowed, led by  weaker demand  for home  mortgage,  home

equity,  and  residential  construction  loans.  Most Districts indicated  that commercial  and  industrial  loan

demand  remains  relatively  strong.  "Outside  of housing,"  San  Francisco  noted,  "bank lending  activity  is

reported to  be brisk."  A number of Districts  reported  slower growth or declines  in business  loan demand,

however.  After a  relatively  strong  group of reports  in  December,  assessments  of trends  in consumer  loan

demand  were  mixed,  with  some  new  slowing apparent  even in  Districts  with  relatively  strong  retail sales

gains.  Wherever  noted,  delinquency  rates continued  to decline.  Philadelphia  characterized  loan officers'

outlooks  as  "positive but  cautious,"  with  overall  loan  growth  expected to  ease as  the year progresses.

Reports  of tighter  lending  margins  were  noted  in  several  Districts,  and Philadelphia  stated  that officers

may  review  future  lending  plans as a  result.  Agricultural  banks  in  the Kansas  City  District  reported  that

crop  loans  were  in  better  condition  than  a year  ago, while a  slump  in  hog  and  cattle prices  weighed  on

livestock loan quality.

Agriculture.  Production  responses  to  livestock  price declines  are anticipated  to  help bring some

recovery  in  farm  income  in  the current  year.  Kansas  City  reported  that  bankers  generally expect  farm

income  to improve  slightly  in  its region  during  1995,  assuming  normal  crop yields,  as livestock  prices  are

anticipated  to  return to  break-even  levels.  Chicago  noted  that hog  production  was  up only  marginally

from  last year and  well  short  of expectations.  Producers  in  the Chicago  region  account  for  a substantial

share  of national  output,  and they  have  made  sizable  cuts  in  planned  production.  Minneapolis  noted that

modest  recent  improvement  in  livestock  prices  have improved  producer  outlooks  for  1995,  and there  are

signs of increased  farmer  willingness  to invest  in  new  machinery.

Labor Markets.  Continued  strengthening  and/or increasingly  tight labor markets  were  widely

noted,  although  a  minority  of Districts suggested  that wage  pressures  may have  eased in  some

occupations.  Minneapolis  stated  that  "evidence  of tight labor markets  abounds."  Retailers  in  the St.

Louis and  Chicago Districts  reported  difficulty  meeting holiday  seasonal  labor needs, and  St.  Louis  found

that  retailers  were  actively  recruiting  personnel  from  other stores.  Strong  demand  for temporary  workers

was  reported  in  the Boston,  Atlanta,  and Dallas  Districts,  with  Dallas  also  noting  increasing  wage

pressures for  temporary  labor.  Chicago  reported  that shortages  of machine  tool  operators  caused some

production  bottlenecks,  and  prompted  some  capital  spending  delays  because workers  were  not available

to operate  new  machinery.  Reports  on  permanent  manufacturing  employment trends  were  mixed;  growth

was  noted by contacts  in Cleveland,  Chicago and  Richmond,  while employment  seemed  to remain

relatively  flat among  manufacturers  contacted  by Boston  and  Philadelphia.  At the same time,  Boston

reported a tighter market  for clerical  workers,  with  increased  opportunities  for  permanent  employment.

New York reported  significant job cut announcements  in  the financial  services  sector.

Increasing  wage  pressures  were  reported  more  frequently  in  the  Atlanta,  St. Louis,  Minneapolis,

Dallas,  and  San  Francisco  Districts,  while Kansas  City  stated  that tightness  in  markets  for skilled

manufacturing  and  construction  labor had eased.  Surveys  by compensation  consulting  companies  in the

Chicago  region  suggest  that  salary  increases  for exempt  salaried  employees  of large  firms  will  remain  in

line with  1994,  while  pay  varying  with  sales  growth,  profitability, customer  service,  or other

organizational  goals  will continue  to take  an  increased  share  of total  compensation.

Prices.  The pace  of price  increases  seemed  steady  to somewhat  higher since reports in  early

December,  while  higher  inflationary  expectations  were  apparent  in business  surveys  conducted  in  San

Francisco  and Chicago.  District  reports  continued  to  emphasize  shortages  and  increasing  input prices  in

manufacturing  and construction,  coupled  with  stability  in  most  retail prices.  Price discounting  during  the

holiday  season  ran  heavier than  many  retailers  had  anticipated,  particularly  in  apparel.

Manufacturers  continued  to report  strong  (but  perhaps  diminishing)  pressure  against  output  price

increases.  Boston stated  that  long-term  agreements  with  suppliers,  low  labor cost  increases,  pressure

from  customers  and  greater operating  efficiency  continue  to  limit many  manufacturers'  needs  for output

price  increases.  Reports  from  a  minority  of Districts  included  a  growing  set of exceptions  to this  rule,

however.

Retailers  in  Dallas  and  San  Francisco  noted higher  price  pressures from rising  packaging  costs.

Labor shortages  and  strong  demand  increased  price  pressures  among  service  firms  in the Dallas  region.

Agricultural  businesses  in  the San Francisco  region  expressed concern  about rising  labor, transportation,

packaging,  and  raw  materials  costs.

FIRST  DISTRICT  - BOSTON

Reports  from First  District businesses  in  early January were

similar to  those in October and November.  Manufacturers' gains  are

widespread, while  retailers'  results  vary considerably.  Prices  of

selected inputs  are  reportedly rising.

Retail

First  District retail  sales  results  were  highly varied during the

holiday season.  Two  "category" chains  reported sales  increases  of  15  to

30  percent compared to  year-earlier  levels.  Department  stores  and food

chains  cited more  modest  growth of less  than 5 percent.  And contacts  at

off-price  discount and  specialty  apparel  chains  experienced declines  in

December sales  of  3 to  6 percent, which they  attributed,  in part,  to

department  stores'  huge promotions  prior  to  Christmas.  Products  that

fared best were  hard goods  such as  electronics,  appliances,  audio

equipment, sporting goods,  and  furniture.  State  tourist agencies  report

exceptional  fall  and  winter tourism  in New England because of  increased

business  and international  travel.

Retail  contacts'  expectations  for  the  first half  of  1995  also  vary

widely, ranging  from 0 to  20  percent  sales  growth  from a year earlier.

Vendor and  retail  prices  remain fairly  level,  although the number  of

exceptions  is  growing, including plastics,  resin-based products,  paper,

and cotton.  Most  contacts  report  higher profits  in fiscal  1994,  and

only one mentioned  lower gross  margins because of holiday promotions.

Major  capital and  employment expansions  in 1995  are  limited to the top-

performing  large  category chain-stores.

Temporary Employment  Firms

Contacts  in the  temporary services  industry report  steady growth

in  business  in  the  fourth quarter of  1994.  The market  for clerical

I-2

workers  has  tightened, a development which personnel  firms  attribute  to

increased opportunities  for permanent  employment;  client  companies  are

encouraging more  temporary workers  to  "go  permanent" and hiring  new

staff  directly.  Temporary employment  firms  sense  an  overall upswing in

optimism among their  business  clients  and expect demand  for their

services  to  remain  strong.  Winter activity is  somewhat  weather-

dependent, as  weekday storms  can  force  workers  to  cancel  assignments.

Manufacturing

First  District  contacts  report  that  demand for manufactured goods

continues  to  increase,  with  variations  across  products  similar  to  the

recent  past.  Automotive and  computer-related  sales  show double-digit

increases  from a year ago,  while  electrical and paper  products  generally

show solid single-digit  growth.  Appliance  sales  reportedly  continue to

increase,  although more  slowly than in  early  1994.  Demand  for textiles

and medical  and  pharmaceutical  equipment remains  sluggish.

Manufacturers  report  significant  cost  increases  for paper  and

packaging, plastics,  steel,  polyester fibers,  and postage;  moderate cost

increases  for  chemicals;  unchanged costs  for  cotton  fibers;  and

declining costs  for  electronics  components.  Selling prices mostly are

flat  or  slightly higher  than  a year  ago.  Some contacts  report  that

their  industrial  customers  are  imposing  limits  on price  increases.  In

other  cases,  negotiated agreements  with suppliers,  a lack of labor  cost

pressures,  or  greater operating  efficiencies  are  limiting  the need for

price hikes.

At most  respondent  companies, U.S.  employment has  remained flat

or has  decreased at  a single-digit rate  over  the past year.  Only a

couple  of  smaller  firms  have  expanded their work  force  to  any

significant  degree.

I-3

Most manufacturers expect  good results  in 1995,  although  the

majority anticipate  a slowdown in U.S.  GDP  growth by the second half of

the  year.  Exports  are  projected  to be a bright  spot.  Several  contacts

say  that they will  try to  raise  prices  before  the anticipated  slowdown.

Residential  Real Estate

Contacts  report that  recent increases  in mortgage rates  are

starting to  depress  the  residential  real  estate market, particularly  for

existing homes,  but normal winter slow-downs  make  current trends  hard to

identify.  Respondents  in  the  three  southern New England  states  and

Maine  note  that  fourth quarter sales  of existing  homes  were  at  or below

year-ago levels.  By contrast,  newly constructed homes  in the middle and

upper price  ranges  are  selling well,  although more  slowly than  last

fall.  Housing prices  are  stable in most places.  Several  contacts

express  concern that higher interest  rates  will  further dampen  the

spring market.

Nonbank  Financial  Services

Respondents  at  insurance companies  report  increases  in  sales

between 2 and  20  percent  in the  fourth quarter  of 1994  compared  to  a

year  earlier.  Annuities  and variable  life  insurance  continue  to be

strong  sellers, while  whole life products  are  lagging.  A number  of

respondents  have added distribution  channels  for their products  or are

exploring  doing  so, particularly distribution through banks.

Employment was  flat  in the  fourth quarter at all  but  two  insurance

contacts  (who expanded slightly).  Half the  respondents  plan to  cut

employment  in  1995,  some significantly;  the  rest plan either  small

increases or  no  change.

II-1

SECOND  DISTRICT--NEW  YORK

Reports  on  District  developments  in  recent  weeks  by  and  large  indicated  some  improvement.

Most  retail  contacts  reported  that  holiday  sales  were  on  or  slightly  above  their expectations  and

office  leasing  activity  was  sufficient  to  reduce  the  vacancy  rates  in  several  parts  of  the  District.

District  unemployment  rates  fell sharply  in  December.  Homebuilding  activity,  though,  has  been

seasonally  slow.  Almost  90  percent  of the  senior loan  officers  surveyed  at  small  and  midsized

banks  reported  steady  or  lower  aggregate  loan  demand  compared  with  two  months  earlier.

Consumer  Spending

Most  District  retail  contacts  reported  that  holiday  sales  results  were  on  or  slightly  above

plan  though  their  own  targets  were  apparently  lower  than  many  analysts  saw  for the  industry  as  a

whole.  The  weak  sales  plans  were  at  least  in  part  based  on  lackluster  sales  of apparel  and

outerwear  during  much  of October  and  November.  As  a  result,  some  respondents  had  reduced  their

orders  for soft  goods  prior  to  Thanksgiving,  and  all  prepared  for  what  several  described  as  the  most

promotional  holiday  selling  season  they  could  remember.  As  a  result,  profit  margins  are  expected

to  have  suffered.

The  annual  survey  of the  Retail  Council  of  New  York  State  found  that  sales  gains

throughout  the  state  averaged  3 to  5  percent  above  the  1993  level  for  the  day-after-Thanksgiving

through  day-after-Christmas  period.  Household  durable  goods,  computers,  VCRs, jewelry,

accessories  and  in-line  skates  were  some  of the  best-selling  items.  Individual  retail  contacts  in  the

District  reported  over-the-year  changes  ranging  from  virtually  flat  to  +8  percent  during  December.

Inventories  were  generally  in  satisfactory  shape  by  year-end  with  most  contacts  expecting  to

eliminate  any  excess  amounts  during  January  clearance  sales.

Residential  Construction  and  Real  Estate

Homebuilding  activity  has  been  seasonally  slow  in  most  of the  District  recently.  Looking

ahead,  some  contacts  expressed  concern  that  higher  interest  rates  may  become  more  of a  deterrent

in  the  spring  (when  buyer  traffic  typically  picks  up  substantially)  than  they have  been  up  to  now.

Others  are  apparently  more  optimistic  as  witnessed  by the  fact  that  several  large,  long-stalled

projects  have  recently  been  revived  in  the  District.  These  include  waterfront  developments  in

Jersey  City  and  the  Bronx  as  well  as  a  townhouse  project  on  Staten  Island.

While  office  leasing  activity  has  reportedly  slowed  somewhat  from  earlier  months,  it  was

sufficient  to  reduce  the  vacancy  rates  in  several  parts  of  the  District  recently.  In  downtown

Manhattan  the  office  vacancy  rate  has  moved  down  in  each  of the  last  three  months  after  a jump  in

September,  while  in  midtown  Manhattan,  the  rate  in  December  was  a  full  percentage  point lower

than  three  months  earlier.  Among  other  areas  reducing  office  vacancy  rates  between  the  third  and

fourth  quarters  were  Fairfield  County,  Connecticut  and,  in  New  York  State,  Westchester  County,

where  the  rate  fell  more  than  two  percentage  points,  and  Nassau  County.  Office  vacancy  rates  rose

in  the  fourth  quarter  in  Northern  New  Jersey  and  Suffolk  County.

Other  Business  Activity

District  unemployment  rates  fell  sharply  in  December  as  New  York's  rate  dropped  to

5.4  percent  from  6.3  percent  in  November  and  New  Jersey's  declined  to  6.1  percent  from

6.6 percent.  State  unemployment  rates  are  very  volatile,  however,  and  could  bounce  higher  in  the

near  future.  There  have  been  several  recent  announcements  and  reports  which  point  to  future  job

cuts.  Chemical  Banking  plans  to  eliminate  3700  positions,  9  percent  of  its  staff,  and  further  layoffs

are  slated  in  the  brokerage  industry  as  well.  Cutbacks  and  reduced  profits  in  the financial  industry

have  been  cited  as  one  major  factor  in  the  recent  widening  of New  York  City's  budget  gap.

II-3

The  City,  New  York  State,  and  New  Jersey  all  face  budget  gaps  in  the  billions  of  dollars  which  at

best  will  mean  further  declines  in  services  and  could  involve  additional  employment  cutbacks.

Finally,  as  an  outcome  of the  Macy-Federated  merger,  A&S  will  close  its  executive  offices  in

Brooklyn,  laying  off some  650  employees  there.

On  a more  positive  note,  New  York  City  was  one  of six  cities  chosen  nationwide  as  urban

empowerment  zones,  each  of which  will  receive  $100  million  in  social  service  grants  and  tax

breaks  for businesses  located  in  the  zones.  In  addition,  KMart  recently  signed  a  lease  to  open  its

first  Manhattan  store--the  latest  of the  chain  stores  making  their  first  forays  into  the  borough  in

response  to  lower  rents  and  the  enticement  of population  density.

Financial  Developments

Almost 90  percent  of the  senior  loan  officers  surveyed  at  small  and  midsized  banks  in  the

District  reported  that  aggregate  loan  demand  was  either  steady  or  lower  when  compared  with  two

months  earlier.  The  residential  mortgage  and  refinancing  segments  saw  the  largest  declines  in

activity.  About  half  of  the  banks  experienced  less  residential  mortgage  demand  while  over  three-

fourths  experienced  lower  or  no  refinancing  activity.  The  commercial  and  industrial  loan  segment

was  the  strongest,  with  over  half  of  the  survey  participants  reporting  steady  demand  and  about  one-

fourth  reporting  higher  demand.

Loan  rates  are  mainly  higher  or  the  same  across  all categories  of  lending.  Almost  all  of the

respondents  noted  that  recent  increases  in  deposit  rates  resulted  in  no  change  or  a  narrowing  of  the

spread  between  the  average  lending  and  deposit  rates.  Of  the  senior  loan  officers  surveyed,  about

80  percent  maintained  and  about  20  percent  increased  their  willingness  to  originate  various  types  of

loans.  Very  few  banks  changed  their credit  standards,  and  almost  all  had  stable  or  lower

delinquency  rates.

III-1

THIRD DISTRICT  - PHILADELPHIA

Reports  from Third  District business  contacts  in  early January suggested

that  economic activity was  continuing on  an upward path, but  the rate  of growth

had  eased  somewhat  from the  pace  set  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  last  year.  On

balance, manufacturers reported increases in orders and shipments, but the gains

were not as  widespread in January as  they had been in December.  Retailers  gave

mixed  reports  for  the  Christmas  shopping period.  Sales  of  consumer electronic

goods  were  up  strongly  from  the  prior  year,  but  apparel  sales  were  below

expectations,  leading to widespread discounting to  clear out inventories  in the

weeks  after  Christmas.  Auto  dealers  said  sales  slowed seasonally  in December,

but  the  overall  trend continued to be up,  with  strong demand for certain models

leading  to  price  increases  and  waiting periods  for  buyers.  Bankers  generally

indicated  that  lending  continued  to  move  up  moderately  as  the  new  year  began,

with business  and credit card lending being the  strongest  categories of  credit.

Forecasts  for  the  new year  in  the  Third District are  generally positive,

although  guarded.  Manufacturers expect activity  to  continue  to  rise, but  they

anticipate just steady employment over the next six months.  Auto dealers expect

unit  sales  in  1995  to  exceed  those  in  1994,  but  other  retailers  say  it  is

difficult  to  make  a  forecast  for  the  year  at  this  time.  Bankers  expect  some

continued growth in lending in the months ahead, but some believe loan growth may

taper  off  in  the  second half.

MANUFACTURING

Reports  from Third District manufacturers  in early January indicated that

industrial activity continued on an upward trend, although the rate of growth had

III-2

slackened from the  final quarter of last year.  Slightly more than one-fourth of

the  firms  polled  reported that  they were receiving more orders  and making more

shipments  in  January  compared with  December,  while  about  half  indicated  that

orders  and  shipments  were  steady.  Gains  were  more  common  among  producers  of

metal products and equipment, while steady conditions or declining activity were

more  frequently noted by makers  of  nondurable goods.

Employment conditions were virtually steady at manufacturing plants in the

District.  While there were a few reports of  stepped-up hiring, three-fourths of

the  industrial  establishments  contacted  were  holding  employment  steady.  On

balance,  area firms  were  reducing working hours  slightly  in  early January.

Industrial prices in the region continued to move up as  the new year began.

More  than half of  the  firms  commenting on prices  said they paid more for  inputs

in January  than  they had in December,  and  there  were  very few reports  of price

declines.  About one-fourth of the manufacturers contacted said they were raising

prices  for  their  own products;  most  said they were holding prices  steady.

Looking  ahead,  Third District  manufacturers  expect business  to  continue

moving up  through  the  first  half  of  the  year.  About  four  in  ten of  the  firms

contacted for this  report forecast  increases in orders and shipments, and two  in

ten  anticipate  declining  demand  for  their  products.  Overall,  Third District

manufacturers  plan  to  hold employment  and working hours  steady,  and  to  reduce

inventories.  While most will  also keep  capital  spending on an even pace,  more

than one-fourth have  scheduled  increased investment  expenditures for  the  first

half of the year.

RETAIL

Retailers  in  the  Third  District  gave  mixed  reports  on  sales  for  the

Christmas  shopping period.  Stores  selling  consumer  electronic  items--personal

III-3

computers, large-screen televisions,  and camcorders--said  sales were well above

the year-ago period.  Home furnishings  were also  listed among the categories  of

merchandise that  sold well.  Apparel retailers  had disappointing results;  with

sales falling below expectations, they were prompted to offer deep discounts both

before and after  Christmas.  The  pace of retail  sales  in early January appeared

to  be  somewhat  subdued,  with  price  reductions  being  continued  in  efforts  to

reduce  inventories,  especially for  apparel.

Third District  auto  dealers  said sales  slowed seasonally  in December but

rose above  the level of December 1993.  In general, dealers  reported sales gains

for  1994  over  1993,  and they  expect  continued  increases  in unit  sales  in  1995.

Sport-utility vehicles continued to be in demand, and price increases and waiting

lists  were becoming  common for  these and some  other  popular models.

FINANCE

Third District commercial bank lending officers contacted in early January

said  loan volume  was  growing  moderately.  Several  mentioned modest  growth  in

commercial  and industrial  lending, with middle-market companies prominent among

new borrowers.  Bankers continued to describe the market for new business lending

as competitive.  In general, bankers also said consumer credit was growing, with

credit  card borrowing being  the  strongest  category of  personal  lending.  Some

bankers noted that while there were signs of increased  interest by institutional

investors  in  commercial  real  estate,  banks  in  the  District  did  not  plan  to

increase  their  exposure  in  office  or  industrial properties.

The outlook among the commercial bank officers  interviewed for this report

is  generally  positive  but  cautious.  While  most  expect  the  region's  economic

performance to be good, at least through the  first half of the year, they foresee

a slowdown  in  the  growth  of  consumer  spending  that will  limit  growth  in  total

111-4

business  activity  for  the  year  as  a whole.  In  line with  this  forecast,  they

expect overall loan growth to  ease as  the year progresses.  Several bankers also

noted that  loan profitability, for both business  and consumer lending, has been

coming under pressure  and that  they may review  their  own lending plans  for  the

year as  a result.

IV-1

FOURTH  DISTRICT - CLEVELAND

Summary

Business  activity in the District is  holding  steady at a high level, with  industrial

producers  reporting  continued  growth  in production  and  orders.  Employment  levels have

picked  up recently,  although not in all regions  or sectors.  Further, there  are few

indications  of any broad-based  wage  pressures, and price  pressures  remain  largely

centered  in industrial commodities.  District  retailers  indicate  sales were good over the

holiday  period,  and  undesired  inventory  accumulations  were  limited.  In fact,  area auto

dealers  continue to  complain about inventory  shortfalls  of 1995  models.

Lending is  active in  most institutions,  and  credit  margins are  still  narrowing.  Only

in the mortgage  area has  there been a  significant  drop-off in loan  growth  since the last

District  report.

Manufacturing

District  manufacturers  continue  to report  solid orders  growth,  and  the orders

backlog  in capital  goods industries  remains  unusually  long.  Export  orders are  also

reported  to be  holding  up well.  Chemicals,  plastics,  steel,  heavy truck,  and  some machine

tool  industries  are  reporting production  levels  near  historic highs.  Surprisingly,  capacity

constraints  in these  industries  are  not generally  seen  to be holding  down  production,  and

many  District  producers  anticipate  expanding  productivity  further to  meet  current demand.

Nevertheless,  resistance  to adding new  workers  seems to  have diminished  somewhat,  and

a few firms  here indicate  more willingness to add  to their permanent  staffs.

Capital  goods  producers  continue  to report a  further growth  in  orders, with  the

domestic  auto  industry a  heavy  source of demand.  Orders  for metal-cutting  and metal-

forming  machine  tools are  strong,  following  the upward  trend in steel  demand:  The orders

backlog  here extends  well  into  1995.  Export  orders  for capital goods  are  improving

IV-2

gradually for European  customers,  and District  manufacturers  expect sales to Europe  to

improve  further in  1995.  Small growth  in  the Japanese  market  is also hoped  for this year.

However, there  still is reported  to be little room  for substantial price increases  for finished

capital  goods,  despite  reports  of production  constraints by many  capital goods  producers.

Industrial  materials producers  also  note  strong business conditions,  especially  steel

and chemicals  suppliers.  Both industries  are also  reporting improved  sales  volume  in

Europe.  Industrial  materials  production  is reported  to be  near capacity, and  raw materials

prices  are  still increasing,  particularly  for steel  and  certain  industrial chemicals.  However,

plans to  increase employment  in  these areas  remain modest.

Retailing

Retail  sales  were strong  overall during  the holiday period,  but  activity is reported

to have  diminished  in  late December.  Some retailers  indicated  a small  inventory overstock

at period's end,  prompting  increased  discount activity  in early  January.  Indeed,

competitive  pressures  in  the retail  sector continue to  exert downward  pressure on  prices,

and at least  one  major retailer  noted  an easing  of prices  from suppliers.  In general,

though,  inventory  positions  appear to be in  line with  sales, with  a notable  exception  for

apparel  items, where  sales  performance  has  deteriorated  further  in the wake of

unseasonably  warm  temperatures  during  the  period.  Seasonal  employment  patterns in

retailing were  about  average,  and  no shortages  of temporary workers were  reported.

District auto  sales in  December  were also  average  for this  time of year, but some

vehicle types are  still  reported in  short  supply.  Most dealers  indicated  availability

problems  with the  1995  models,  particularly light trucks  and  utility vehicles.  There is a

presumption that  low  inventory  positions  dampened  dealers'  sales performance  in

December.

IV-3

Banking and Credit

Virtually  every respondent  reported  strong and growing  loan demand.  District

bankers  indicate  a particularly high level  of commercial  lending activity--presumably  a

response to inventory  floor plans,  although  most categories  of commercial  lending  activity

were  reported to be somewhat  stronger (notably  new construction  and expansion).

However,  credit  margins  are  narrowing,  particularly  for commercial  loans,  where one

District  banker  had  concerns  about  the erosion  of credit  quality.

Consumer  borrowing  remained  high during  the holiday  period,  and  revolving  credit

balances  are reported  to be substantially  above this time last year.  Mortgage  credit

activity has fallen off, and  although some  of this is typical  for  the season,  higher mortgage

rates are  presumed  to have  flattened  mortgage  refinancing.

V-1

FIFTH  DISTRICT - RICHMOND

Overview:  Economic  activity  in  the  Fifth  District  grew  moderately  in  late  November

and  December.  Areas  experiencing  growth  included  the  service-producing  sector,  state

revenues,  and  agriculture.  Strong  holiday  sales  boosted  consumer  spending.  Port  trends

were  mixed,  and  manufacturing  and  commercial  real  estate  activity  were  flat.  Loan  demand,

home  sales,  and  tourist  activity  declined.

Consumer  Spending:  Retail  associations  and  retail  analysts  contacted  by  telephone

reported  that  Christmas  sales  increased  between  8  percent  and  12  percent  from  last  year's

level  and  that  after-Christmas  sales  were  good.  They  also  said  that  retailers  offered  fewer

after-Christmas  discounts  than  they  did  last  year.  Analysts'  outlooks  for  early  1995  sales

were  mixed.  Those  expecting  weaker  sales  compared  to  1994  pointed  to  higher  consumer

debt  levels,  while  those  expecting  stronger  sales  pointed  to  last  year's  unusually  harsh

weather  that  kept  shoppers  at  home.

Service-Producing  Firms:  Preliminary  results  from  a  mail  survey  indicated  that

activity  in  the  service-producing  sector  increased  in  December.  Revenues  rose,  except  in

health  services,  where  they  decreased.  Wages  also  rose,  and  employment  changed  little.

Service  producers  indicated  that  prices  rose  0.5  percent  in  December.  They  expected

increased  demand  for  their  services  and  an  increase  of  1.3  percent  in  their  prices  during  the

next  six  months.

Manufacturing: 

Indicators  of  factory  activity  changed  little  in  December  from  their

November  levels,  according  to  preliminary  results  of a  mail  survey  of District  manufacturers.

Raw  materials  inventories  were  up  compared  to  six  months  ago,  and  respondents  expected  a

further  increase  during  the  next  six  months.  Manufacturers  expected  shipments  and

employment  to  increase  during  the  next  six  months,  but  they  anticipated  little  change  in  the

V-2

workweek.  Finished  goods  prices  increased  faster  in  December  than  in  November,  but at  a

rate  less  than the  general  inflation  rate.  Raw  materials  prices  increased  more  in  December

than  in  November,  and  at  a  rate  higher  than  the  general  inflation  rate.  In  December,

respondents  expected  prices  to  rise  more  during  the  next  six months  than  they  had  in

November.

Tourism:  A  telephone  survey  of hotels,  motels,  and  resorts  throughout  the  District

indicated  that  tourist  activity  generally  decreased  in  December  from  November.  December

activity  at  ski  resorts  was  below  its  year-ago  level  because  of  warmer  weather,  but  bookings

were  up  for  the  rest  of the  winter.  Contacts  expected  better-than-normal  business  and  slight

price  increases  during  the  next  six  months.

Ports:  Telephone  interviews  with  representatives  at  the  District  ports  of Baltimore

and  Hampton  Roads  (Norfolk)  indicated  that  import  and  export  levels  in  November  were

higher  than  those  of a  year  ago  but  were  mixed  compared  to  their  levels  in  October.

Charleston's  representative,  however,  reported  that  the  Charleston  port  experienced  one  of  its

busiest  months  ever.  Representatives  at  Charleston  and  Baltimore  expected  imports  and

exports  to  increase  during  the  next  six  months,  but  the  representative  at  Hampton  Roads

expected  both  to  decrease.

Finance:  District  financial  institutions  contacted  by  telephone  reported  that  loan

demand  continued  to  slow  during  late  November  and  December.  Consumer  and  commercial

loan demand  fell  moderately,  while  mortgage  loan  demand  declined  slightly.  Interest  rates

were  higher  on  consumer,  commercial,  and  mortgage  loans.  Many  District  lenders

expressed  concern  that  future  interest  rate  increases  might  dampen  loan  demand.  Most

consumer  and  commercial  lenders  in  North  Carolina,  however,  were  confident  that  loan

demand  would  remain  strong  in  that  state.

V-3

Residential  Real  Estate:  According  to  a  telephone  survey  of District  realtors  and

builders,  residential  real  estate  activity  declined  in  December.  District  home  sales  decreased

despite  increased  sales  of  lower-priced  houses.  Building  permits,  buyer  traffic,  and  housing

starts,  however,  were  unchanged.  Most  real  estate  agents  attributed  the  decline  in  home

sales  to  increased  mortgage  interest  rates.  Home  prices  remained  stable,  although  prices  of

nonlumber  building  materials  rose  slightly.

Commercial  Real  Estate:  District  contacts  reported  that  commercial  real  estate

activity  in  December  grew  at  the  same  pace  as  in  November.  Real  estate  contacts  reported

little  change  in  construction,  except  in  West  Virginia,  where  retail  outlet  building  activity

increased.  Posted  commercial  rental  rates  increased  throughout  the  District.  Commercial

vacancy  rates  remained  steady  except  in  North  Carolina  and  Virginia,  where  they  declined.

Leasing  agents  reported  that  the  availability  of prime  office  space  tightened,  especially

around  Washington,  D.C.

State  Revenues:  State  government  forecasters  said  that  tax  collections  grew

moderately  in  November  and  December.  Real  revenue  growth  was  strong  in  Maryland,

North  Carolina,  Virginia,  and  West  Virginia,  somewhat  weak  in  South  Carolina,  and  flat  in

the  District  of Columbia.

Agriculture:  Agricultural  conditions  were  better  than  a  year  ago,  according  to

District  farm  analysts.  Small  grains  were  in  good-to-excellent  condition  because

temperatures  were  above  normal  in  December  and  early  January.  Tobacco  prices  remained

strong,  and  farmers'  1995  production  quotas  rose  because  tobacco  companies  purchased

farmers'  excess  stocks  of tobacco.  Hog  and  poultry  output  rose  despite  sharply  lower  hog

prices  and  slightly  lower  poultry  prices.  One  contact  said  long-term  contracts  insulated

North  Carolina  hog  producers  against  plunging  prices  on  national  markets.

VI-1

SIXTH  DISTRICT  - ATLANTA

Overview:  According  to  contacts  around  the  District,  business  activity  in  the  Southeast

continued  to  expand  through  the  end  of  1994,  although  more  slowly  than  earlier  in  the  year.  Most

retailers reported  that the holiday  shopping season went well.  Sales generally met  expectations,  but many

contacts had to use more discounting than they would have liked  in order to generate business.  Auto sales

were reported  as  steady.  Tourism and business travel  contacts  say activity  remains  above year-ago  levels

in  most of the  District; however,  parts of the Florida tourism industry  have not yet fully recovered  from

their  year-long  slowdown.  Single-family  home  building  and  sales  have  continued  to  slow,  and  most

contacts  expect  a  moderately  slower  1995.  On  the  other hand,  commercial  real  estate  market  reports

continue  to improve.  District wages  and  prices were generally  steady;  however,  there  were an  increasing

number  of  reports  of tight  labor  markets  and  higher  materials  prices.

Consumer  Spending:  District retailers  reported  that sales  in  December  met  or exceeded  their

expectations;  however,  retailers  attributed  much  of  their  success  to  aggressive  promotions.  Several

merchants  stated  that unseasonably  warm  weather  held  sales down  a bit.  Once  again,  men's  apparel  and

home  products  were  strong  sellers  and  several  retailers  noted  substantial  improvements  in  women's

apparel  over  last  year.  Retailers  said  after-holiday  inventories  were,  for  the  most  part,  at  anticipated

levels.  Most  contacts  expect  year-over-year  sales  gains  to  continue,  although  some  are  concerned  that

the  credit  card  debt  incurred  during December  will  curtail  consumer's  purchases  more  than  usual during

the first  quarter  of  1995.

Manufacturing:  District manufacturers  reported ongoing  spotty growth  in December and  early

January.  Strength  in  orders  for  paper,  pulp,  metals,  and  industrial  chemicals  is keeping  plants  in  these

industries  operating  near  capacity.  Auto  parts  suppliers  continue  to  announce  construction  of  new

production  facilities 

in  the  region. 

Some  producers  of  electronics  for  cable  television  and  data

communications  report order backlogs  increasing  at double-digit  rates.  Producers  of home  textiles  such

as sheets  and  towels  are  optimistic that  business  will remain  strong.  However,  respondents  note that the

VI-2

market  has  softened  for  other products  linked  to  housing  such  as  building  products  and  heating  and  air-

conditioning  equipment.

Contacts in the apparel  industry continue to  report a shrinking factory workweek  and payrolls.

Temporary  help  firms supplying  personnel  for manufacturers  report that the pace of placements  remains

brisk.  Foreign orders for  military aircraft have brightened the outlook for Lockheed's  Marietta,  Georgia,

facility.  However,  recent  cancellations  or scalebacks  of U.S.  Department  of Defense  contracts  continue

to adversely  affect  many  defense-related  firms  in  the District.

The recent  peso devaluation  has  some  regional  manufacturers  concerned  that exports  of their

products  will  slow  as  U.S.-made  products become  more expensive  in Mexico.  A  broad  range of regional

industries has  posted significant gains in exports to  Mexico  since NAFTA  was  enacted  last January.  Most

industrial  contacts  remain  optimistic  about  the  near-term  outlook.

Tourism  and  Business  Travel:  Winter  bookings  and  occupancies  are  up  for  some  Florida

destinations;  however,  state  officials  are  concerned  that  rival  destinations  are  capturing  a  significant

portion  of the state's  market.  Weak  early  winter  cruise  bookings  are  expected  to  pick  up  in  February

following  an unusually  soft fall season,  partly attributed  to unseasonable  weather.  Although overall  casino

traffic  in  Mississippi  continues  to  grow  and larger  firms  continue  to expand,  contacts  report  that weaker

firms  are  laying off employees  or filing for  bankruptcy.  Interest  in  the  1996  Olympic  Games  is  sharply

increasing  foreign visits  to  Atlanta.

Construction:  A  majority  of  real  estate  contacts  reported  that  single-family  home  sales  and

construction slowed  slightly in  December.  However,  contacts  in the Miami  and  Nashville markets  stated

that December  sales  exceeded  year-ago  levels.  Most  real  estate  agents  and  builders continue  to anticipate

a  modest decline  in  home  sales  and  construction  in  1995.

Commercial  and  multifamily  real  estate  contacts  continue  to  report  improving  market

conditions.  The  apartment  market  is characterized  by  steadily  rising  rental  rates  and  high  occupancy

levels.  Contacts  say  that,  as  a result,  multifamily  construction  is on the rise in many  areas of the District.

VI-3

Commercial  realtors  also  report  declining  vacancy  rates  and  steadily  increasing  rental  rates.  While

commercial  construction  is  reportedly  accelerating,  the majority  of  current  construction  is  build-to-suit

with  most of the space leased prior  to building,  leaving very  little speculative space  available.  However,

builders  say  that shortages  of skilled  labor  continue  to  push  building  costs  up.  Realtors  anticipate  both

commercial  and  multifamily  markets  will  exhibit  continued  strong  growth  in  1995.

Financial  Services:  According  to  District  bankers,  overall  loan  demand  has  been  rising

modestly.  Most  contacts  reported  that business  loan  demand  was  up,  while  consumer  loan  demand  was

slightly  off.  Commercial  real  estate  lending  was  reported  to  be  fairly  active  by  several  contacts.

Weakness  in  consumer  loan  demand  was  accounted  for  mainly  by  auto  lending.  Residential  mortgage

lending  has  declined.  Commercial  and  consumer  default  rates  remain  low.

Wages  and Prices:  Reports of upward  pressures on wages are becoming more frequent among

contacts  surveyed.  Demand  in the areas  of skilled  construction  and  food  services  personnel  is  especially

strong  in parts of the District.  Manufacturers  report  that prices  of raw  materials  continue  to escalate,  and

more producers  expect  to  be  able  to  increase  final  product  prices.  Paper,  chemicals,  metals,  and  textile

contacts  continue  to  report  rising  raw  materials  prices.  Apparel  and  fabric  producers  are  coming  under

increasing  pressure from  raw materials  price  increases but are reportedly  not able to  raise finished  product

prices  because  of consumer  bargain  hunting  pressures  at the  retail  level.  A few  companies  report  that

higher  than  usual  inventories  at  the end  of  1994  are  designed  to  help  offset  anticipated  additional  price

increases  in  1995.  Residential  home  builders throughout  the District report that both  materials and  labor

costs have  stabilized,  generally  steadying  home  prices.

VII-1

SEVENTH  DISTRICT--CHICAGO

Summary.  The District economy expanded  at  a moderate  to vigorous  pace in recent

months.  The underlying momentum  in  retail sales  growth remained  strong during  the holiday

season,  and probably  exceeded  its third quarter pace  on a seasonally  adjusted basis.

Manufacturing  activity remained  robust for the time of year.  Labor markets  continued  to

strengthen, with little  sign of softening  in employers'  hiring  intentions  heading  into the  new year.

Transaction  price  increases  seem to  remain centered  in basic materials  and intermediate  goods,  as

retailers continued  to stress intense  competitive  constraints on pricing.

Retailing.  The underlying trend  in retail  sales growth  remained  quite  strong during  the

holiday season.  Sales  gains  reported by large  retail  chains  were generally  in line with or

somewhat better than  pre-season  expectations,  except  for apparel  sales,  where  relatively  warm

weather  held back  sales  prior to the  last week  of December.  Apparel  retailers  blamed  shifts in

consumption toward  hard goods, and not weakness  in total  consumption,  for their relative  sales

weakness.  Apparel  sales  have strengthened  in early January,  but as one retailer noted,  "a good

December is a heck  of a lot better than a good  January."

Most large  retailers  indicated  that  year-over-year  sales  gains improved  as  the season

matured, except  in apparel  sales.  For example, one  large  durable  goods retailer characterized

sales  in the last week  of the season as  "booming,"  with sales  gains  running  well ahead  of previous

weeks.  A number of retail  chains indicated  that  toy sales  gains  were  in line  with or stronger than

companywide  averages,  and  home entertainment  software  and computers  were  among  the

strongest  gift-giving categories.

Excluding  apparel  sales,  most  large retailers  reported better overall sales gains  in the

District  than their  national  average.  A late  December  survey  by an accounting  firm  suggested

that  Midwest  consumers  had higher planned  and  actual  spending levels than consumers  in any

other major Census  region.  Large  prospective  and  actual bonuses  in the auto  industry  boosted

retail  sales  in Detroit and  other areas  of the  District.

The District  has  experienced  large-scale  expansion in  retailing capacity  in recent years.

As a  result,  survey data, reported  same-store  sales gains,  and  anecdotal  evidence  on individual

store chain  results may  well  understate  the strength of aggregate  sales  growth.  Increased  retailing

VII-2

capacity  also helps explain why discounting  ran more  aggressively than many  retailers

anticipated  at the onset of the  1994 season,  in  spite of strong demand  and  customer traffic.  The

strongest  holiday  sales  gains  seem to have  arisen in products  where prices  have been declining

(such  as  computers  and electronics)  and  in outlets where  prices are relatively low.  Several

retailing  analysts  suggested  that discount  stores took a  larger share  of holiday  sales growth in  the

region during  1994,  as consumers turned more  aggressive  in their search  efforts  after a less-

cautious  shopping  season in  1993.  One large  outlet mall characterized  its holiday  sales season  as

"awesome."  Customer traffic was up nearly  30 percent based  on vehicle  counts,  and the number

of motor coach  trips to  the mall  were  up  36 percent.  Separately,  this contact  noted that charitable

gift giving  rose  markedly  from  1993.

Manufacturing.  District manufacturing  activity  remained  robust as  the year came to a

close.  The  composite production  index  for purchasing  managers'  surveys  in Milwaukee,  Detroit

and  Chicago  has eased  back  from  especially  high levels  in the  second quarter of 1994,  but in

December  still remained  at a  level  consistent with  vigorous  growth in  District industrial  output.

A  similar trend was  evident  in surveys  conducted  in Western Michigan.  Reflecting  continued

gains  in durable and  capital  goods  output, District  steel production  posted relatively  sharp

increases  in October,  November  and  December, in contrast  to  a normal  seasonal  slowing.

A large  automaker  stated that  dealer orders  and showroom  traffic  remained  stable or even

picked up  a  little  around  the industry  in recent  months,  on  a seasonally  adjusted  basis.  A large

steelmaker  stated that  first quarter production plans were  recently  raised  in response  to  modestly

higher auto  industry demand  than  originally anticipated.  An association  of machining  shops

reported that  production continued  to  trend  higher in  recent months,  with machine  tool purchases

among  its membership  surging  since the  industry trade  show  in September.  One machine tool

manufacturer stated  that customers'  capacity  expansion projects  accounted  for a  greater share  of

orders  growth in  recent months, joining continued  gains  in orders  for tools designed  more closely

for productivity improvement.

Labor Markets.  District  labor markets  continued  to tighten up, and there  was  little sign

of softening  in employer hiring  intentions  entering the  new year.  A  substantial  number of

retailers  expressed  difficulty  meeting  seasonal  labor needs  during the  holiday season,  although

this  experience  was  not universal.  An association  of machining  companies  stated  that skilled

VII-3

worker shortages  continue to  raise production bottlenecks,  although they haven't intensified

greatly since mid-1994.  In some cases  these shortages  have  even prompted capital spending

delays, as  firms postpone the  delivery of needed  equipment  because workers  aren't available to

operate  the machinery.  Staffing  services  firms have  suggested that labor shortages  and associated

wage pressures  are more  closely concentrated  in blue-collar than white collar labor.  Separate

surveys by two compensation consulting  companies  suggested that salary increases  in large firms

during  1995  will remain in line with  1994,  on average,  but variable pay  (contingent on sales

growth,  profitability, customer service  or other goals) will continue to  take an increased  share of

total compensation.

Agriculture.  Hog production during the  fall months was up  only marginally  from the

year before  and well  short of expectations.  Moreover,  producers  have made  sizable cuts  in both

the inventory  of foundation  stock and in the intended number  of litters to  be farrowed this winter.

As  a result,  analysts now believe the  gains  in pork supplies will end  early in the  second half.

Production  cuts have  been especially  apparent in this  District, which  normally accounts  for about

half of all  hogs raised  nationwide.

Prices.  Price increases  seem to  remain centered  in basic  materials  and intermediate

goods, as retailers  continued to  stress intense  competitive  constraints on pricing.  A  number of

large  retailers  indicated  that holiday  season discounting  and promotional  activity were more

aggressive  than expected  a few  months ago.  Inflationary  expectations  continued to  rise in the

industrial  sector, however.  The price  components  of District purchasing managers'  surveys

climbed  further in recent months,  pointing to faster industrial  price  inflation  even as  output

growth slowed  a little from  its extremely rapid pace earlier in  1994.  The price component of the

Chicago  survey  has climbed  steadily  this year, but remains  below levels  during the late  1980s.

The price  component of the Detroit survey has depicted  higher price increases  for most of the last

year, and in  December climbed  to  its highest level  since late  1987.  A large  share  of respondents

to  surveys in Western Michigan  continued to  express frustration  with shortages  and  lengthy lead

times.  Looking  ahead,  another regular survey of District businesses  showed a significant increase

in  the share  of respondents  expecting  higher inflation.  When  asked to name  the most serious

threat to  1995  business conditions,  rising  interest rates and  rising  inflation were the most

frequently  mentioned factors  in this  survey.

VIII-1

EIGHTH  DISTRICT  - ST.  LOUIS

Summary

District economic  activity,  buoyed  by  relatively  strong  holiday  sales,  continues  to

increase at a moderate pace.  Unseasonably  warm  weather  hindered  apparel  sales,  but big-

ticket  items  like jewelry  were  large  sellers.  While  a  recent  survey  of small  businesses

reveals  that  the  majority  expect  little  change  in  business  conditions  over  the  first  half of

1995,  one-fifth  anticipate  improving  conditions.  Tight  labor  markets  remain  a  major

concern  among contacts.  Firms in various  industries  report sales and employment growth.

Residential  construction  continues  to  slow  because  of higher  interest  rates,  and  average

single-family  home prices  are  up slightly.  Total  loans  outstanding  at  large  District  banks

continue  to  increase,  though  by  less  than  they  had  previously.

Consumer Spending

Most retailers  in  the District report that  holiday sales  were  up an  average  6  percent

to 7 percent  over last  year's  season.  Electronics,  jewelry  and  other  big-ticket  items  were

the strongest  sellers.  Apparel  sales were  well  below expectations  because of unseasonably

warm  weather;  however,  some retailers  in  Memphis credit it for their strong  holiday sales.

Many  retailers  discounted  apparel  before  Christmas  to  try  to  move  the  merchandise.

After-Christmas  sales  generally  met  expectations,  with  most  retailers  employing  their

normal  price  reductions  to  reduce  remaining  inventories.

Car  dealers  generally  report  increased  sales  in  December,  in  some  cases  of up  to

20 percent  over  last year,  although  some  dealers  lost sales because  of continued  shortages

of popular  models.  Many  cite  creative  leasing  programs  and  improved  local  economic

conditions  as  boosting  sales,  despite  slightly  higher  prices  on  1995  models.

Outlook

VIII-2

A  December  1994  survey  of 87 District  small businesses  shows  that  slightly  more

than  one-fifth expect a more favorable  outlook in general  business  conditions  over the next

six  months;  this  proportion  is  up  about  5  percentage  points  from  a  similar  survey

conducted  in  November.  More  than  half,  however,  expect  little  change  in  business

conditions  over  the next  six  months.  Slightly  more  than one-quarter  of respondents  plan

to  increase  prices  over  the  next  three  months,  compared  with  just  under  one-quarter  in

November.  Nearly  half plan  no  change  in  prices  in  the  next  three  months,  down  from

about  three-fifths  in November  who  indicated  a  similar  sentiment.

Manufacturing  and Other Business  Activity

Contacts  throughout  the  District  continue  to  report  that  labor  markets  are  the

tightest  they  have  seen  in  years.  Higher  starting  wages  and  increased  benefits  have  not

helped  many  firms  find  and  keep  qualified  employees. 

For  example,  a  nonprofit

organization  that  regularly  hires  seasonal  workers  to  aid  with  its  holiday  fund  raising  was

unable to  find  people,  which  translated  into  reduced  collections.  One contact  reports  that

retail  stores  were  actively  recruiting  employees  from  other  stores.

Growth  in  sales  and  employment  continues  around  the  District.  Farm  equipment

dealers  report  that  although  sales  were  down  slightly  in  the  most  recent  period,  1994  was

a record  year,  with sales  up about  12  percent  over the year  before.  Various  manufacturers

in western  Tennessee  and  eastern  Arkansas  report  sales  and  revenue  increases  of between

15  percent  and  40  percent  in  late  November  and  early  December  over  the  prior  month.

These  contacts report,  though,  that profit margins  are  much  tighter because of competition

and  rising  costs.

VIII-3

Reports  suggesting  that  many  firms  are  facing  capacity constraints  are  increasing.

For  example,  a  food  processor  reports  significant  overtime,  a printing  establishment  has

all plants running  at capacity,  and  a maker of packaging  products now operates  three  shifts

to meet increased  demand.  In addition,  announcements  of new plants come  from the Little

Rock  area,  northern  Kentucky,  central  Arkansas  and  northwest  Mississippi.  Each  will

bring  at  least  200 jobs into  their  areas,  most by June.

Construction  and Real  Estate

Contacts  in  most  parts  of the  District continue  to report  slowdowns  in  residential

construction  activity,  which  they  attribute  to  higher  interest  rates.  Northwest  Arkansas,

however, 

is  enjoying  an  extended  construction  boom; 

the  value  of  its  residential

construction  contracts  is  up  more  than  60  percent  from  a  year  ago.  Most  contacts  also

report  that homebuilding  in  the high end  of the market  is still relatively  strong;  east-central

Mississippi,  though,  sees  softening  in  this  market.  Single-family  home  sales are  down  in

Louisville and  western  Kentucky,  western  Tennessee  and  St.  Louis.  Average  home prices

are  up  slightly  in  most  parts  of  the  District;  contacts  in  Memphis  also  report  sharp

increases  in  apartment  rents.

Banking  and  Finance

Total  loans  outstanding  at  11  large  District  banks  rose  1.8  percent  from  mid-

October  to mid-December  after  increasing  2.2  percent  from  mid-August  to  mid-October.

All  major  loan  categories-commercial, 

real  estate  and  consumer-increased 

in  both

periods.  Although  commercial  loans  increased  more  in  the latter  period  than they  had  in

the former,  smaller  increases  in  consumer  and  real  estate  loans  from  mid-October  to  mid-

December  dragged  down  the increase  in  total loans.

IX-1

NINTH  DISTRICT--MINNEAPOLIS

As  1995  opens, the economy  of the Ninth District shows  robust growth in most sectors.  Manufacturing

is very strong.  Construction  is active for the winter season, with commercial projects  replacing residential

building as the focus of strength.  Iron mining expects its best year in over a decade  and other metal

mining  faces  favorable  conditions.  Forest product output remains  high, with  paper production continuing

to gain strength.  Modest recovery  in depressed  farm prices reportedly  is  fueling some  increases in farm

capital  spending.  Consumers are actively  buying vehicles,  and  sales of general merchandise  are generally

good.

But not all is favorable.  Winter tourist businesses  are having a slow year so  far, largely  due  to

unfavorable  weather  rather than lack of demand.  Residential building  remains below year-earlier  levels,

and sales of existing  housing have slackened.

Moreover, some problems associated  with strong economic  growth persist.  Urban labor markets  are

very tight and many  businesses have  difficulty in securing employees.  Businesses continue to report higher

wage increases than were common in recent  years.  Reports  of price  increases  in raw materials and

intermediate goods  are common  and  some such goods are  increasingly difficult to  secure.

Manufacturing

"Virtually  all of our manufacturing  customers are  doing very  well,"  reports  a small business lending

supervisor from a major Minneapolis  bank.  "It is  really a boom," he  adds.  Commercial  printers  and firms

manufacturing  circuit boards, other electronic components,  die castings,  building components  and

hardware  are  described  as doing particularly  well  across the district  A Japanese  firm  opened  a small

engine  plant in Wisconsin  citing the current dollar-yen  exchange  rate  as a key  factor.  A major window

manufacturer announced plans  for a new plant in Fargo, N.  D.  Two mainframe  computer manufacturers

did announce layoffs,  but these seem  to result  from  long-term changes  in that industry  and ongoing

restructuring in the particular companies  involved rather than any  overall weakness  in the economy.

Natural  resource  industries

"The  taconite industry  is on a roll,"  is how one newspaper described  iron mining in northeastern

Minnesota.  Production  was  about 42 million tons  in  1994  and  is  expected to vault  to 47.5 million tons  in

1995, the highest level  in over  15  years.  As an exception  to overall  brightness in this  sector, a Michigan

mine announced  a layoff as part of a consolidation  into one  site.  Copper and other non-ferrous  producers

IX-2

have  not expanded  output to  the extent that iron mines have, since  they had less slack capacity,  but

extremely  favorable prices are  allowing these operations  to replace  old or worn-out equipment.

Production of corrugated  cardboard  and  other packaging as well as printing paper continues to  increase.

Output of other forest products,  including lumber and building  board, continues  strong, and  Montana

timber employment  and  output have regained much of the ground lost  when a major mill closed  in  1993.

Construction  and real estate

"Office  glut lessens as businesses take up lots of space,"  is one recent Minneapolis  headline.  "People

have to  build, there just isn't any decent  commercial  space left,"  comments  a  suburban St. Paul  lender.

Commercial  projects  clearly have  passed up housing as the locomotive  for the construction  sector.  New

warehouses,  distribution centers and  other retail  facilities are  in particular demand.  "Retail is  to  the

1990s what office  buildings were  to the  1980s," comments  one  major national developer  and builder based

in Minneapolis.  Long  lead times on new commercial  buildings are  reported in  some areas.

However,  residential construction  clearly has  retreated  from  earlier highs  in many areas  of the  Ninth

District.  Single-family home permits  issued in  the Minneapolis-St.  Paul  area  were  somewhat  below year-

earlier  figures in October  and November,  and industry  spokespersons  indicate  that the same  will be true

when  the  December numbers  are  available.  A major home builder noted  that actual  slowing was less  than

originally  anticipated  and stated  that business was still good.  He  cited increasing  numbers of new home

buyers  opting for adjustable  rate mortgages  as the primary  reason  why residential housing  activity has not

slowed more  than it has.  This pattern,  of some slowing  from  year-earlier levels,  but of still maintaining

good levels  of activity  reportedly  is true in  other urban areas of the  district.

Markets  for existing homes are cool,  however.  A Minnesota  residential  realtor describes  sales of

existing homes  as depressed from  levels that  prevailed  in the two previous  winters.  Existing home  sales

reportedly  remain  strong in  rapidly growing urban  areas  such as Sioux Falls, S.D.,  and Billings, Mont.,  but

have  slowed slightly in other areas.

Agriculture

With  crop production  in  its mid-winter dead season,  Ninth District farmers  are focused on livestock

production  and on marketing  the  1994  crop.  Modest  improvements  in both crop  and livestock prices  have

reportedly  improved  producer outlooks for 1995,  and a few observers  see  increased farmer  willingness to

invest in new machinery  before the  1995  crop season.  Unseasonably  warm  weather  in December raised

IX-3

fears that stored, unprocessed sugar beets might spoil, but cold weather in early January has alleviated  that

threat, at least temporarily.  Lack of snow cover in  dairy areas  is causing concern about alfalfa survival.

Consumer spending  and tourism

"The  day after Christmas was phenomenal,"  according  to a manager  of a Montana  discount store.

Holiday retail  sales apparently  were  very strong  in Montana  and the Dakotas.  The Minneapolis-St.  Paul

area mimicked national  patterns:  Appliances  and  consumer electronics  sold briskly,  but apparel  sales were

disappointing.

Consumers  continue to  go for new vehicles.  North Dakota's  registrations  of new passenger vehicles  for

December were  nearly 5 percent above  the already  healthy sales experienced  a year earlier.  Reports from

registration  agencies  and dealers'  associations  in other states confirm  this  pattern.

Winter tourism  activity  was  slow  in parts of the  Ninth District apparently  due more  to  sparse snow

cover than to weak demand.  Officials in Michigan's  Upper Peninsula  and northwest  Wisconsin  report  a 50

percent  decline  for December  1994,  compared  to the  prior year.  Business  stayed  even for December at a

northern  Minnesota ski  resort,  while snowmobiling  dropped  from year-earlier  levels.  Despite unfavorable

exchange  rates  for Canadian  skiers, a  northwest  Montana  resort reports  a slight  increase  this season.

Employment.  wages  and prices

Evidence  of tight labor markets  abounds.  Help wanted  signs are  posted in  all  sorts of establishments

and classified  advertising  sections are  bulging.  Even temporary  agencies  are  scraping  the bottom of the

labor barrel,  the  CEO of a computer  manufacturer reports,  noting  that over of half of the  workers

forwarded by  agencies  fail a drug  screening  test,  up from  less  than 8  percent a  year ago.  Several

executives  of large Minnesota  firms who participated  in an economic  roundtable hosted by the

Minneapolis  Fed  cited  increasing  difficulty  in securing needed workers  and noted that they were  raising

wages much more  than in preceding  years.  And a  small Wisconsin firm  that produces  ribbon candy, a

holiday season  specialty,  was unable to  do so  because  it could not secure  the needed temporary  workers.

Both manufacturers  and building  contractors  report price  increases  for materials they need.  Some steel

uses still experience  delivery delays.  Precast concrete panels  also reportedly  are in short supply,  in spite of

plants  running seven-day  a  week,  24-hour schedules.  However, prices of petroleum  fuels continue  to drop.

TENTH  DISTRICT  - KANSAS  CITY

Overview.  The  pace  of economic  expansion  in  the  Tenth  District  remains  strong.

Holiday  retail  sales  increased  from  a year  earlier  and  manufacturers  continue  to  operate

at  high  levels  of capacity.  Construction  of  multifamily  residential  buildings  has  offset

slower  single-family  homebuilding.  Agricultural  bankers  report  improvement  in  the

condition  of  their  crop  loans but  a  deterioration  in  the  condition  of their  livestock  loans.

Tightness  in  markets  for  skilled  labor  has  eased,  and  there  is  little  evidence  of upward

pressure  on wages.  Retail  prices  have  remained  stable,  while  materials  prices  have

increased  in  both  the  manufacturing  and  construction  sectors.

Retail  Sales.  District  retailers  report  that  sales  improved  throughout  the  month

of  December  and  were  well  ahead  of year-ago  sales.  Despite  disappointing  sales  of

outerwear  due  to  unseasonably  warm weather,  sales  of basic  lines  were  strong  during  the

holiday  season.  Retailers  indicate  they  are  satisfied  with  current  inventory  levels.  Most

auto  dealers  report  slightly  declining  sales  over  the  past  month,  due  primarily  to  seasonal

factors,  but  expect  sales  to  be  strong  over  the  next  few  months.

Manufacturing.  Most  firms  continue  to  operate  at  high  levels  of capacity.

Shortages  of  skilled  labor,  however,  are  much  less  widespread  than at  the  time  of our

last  Beigebook  survey.  Manufacturing  lead  times  have  increased  but  are  expected  to

shorten  in the  second  half  of  1995.  Most  respondents  plan  to  trim inventories  in  the

near  term.

Energy.  Drilling  activity  in  the  district  fell  slightly  in  December.  As  a  result,  the

X-2

average  number  of drilling  rigs  operating  in  district  states  stood  somewhat  below  the

year-ago  level.  Despite  lackluster  performance  overall  in  the  region's  energy  industry,

parts  of  the  district  benefited  from  some  firming  in  natural  gas  prices  near  the  end  of the

year.

Housing.  Builders  report  a  slight  increase  in  housing  starts  from  both  last  month

and  a  year  ago  due  to  a  pickup  in  construction  of  multifamily  buildings.  Most

respondents  expect  building  activity  to  remain  stable  in  the  coming  months.  Sales  of new

homes  increased  slightly in  some  parts  of the  district  over the  past  month,  despite  higher

home  prices.  Most  builders  report  materials  are  available  with  few  delays.  Mortgage

demand  continues  to  decline  with  higher  interest  rates,  although  most  lenders  expect

demand  to  level  off or  increase  slightly  in  the  months  ahead.

Banking.  Loan  demand  rose  last  month  at  most  reporting  banks.  Most banks

report  higher  demand  for  commercial  and  industrial  loans  and  for  consumer  loans.

Demand  was  largely  unchanged  for  home  mortgage  loans  and  home  equity  loans,  flat  to

down  for  residential  construction  loans, and  up  somewhat  for  commercial  real  estate

loans.  Demand  for  agricultural  loans  was  mixed.  Loan-deposit  ratios  were  constant  to

up from  the  previous  month,  while  security  investments  were  unchanged.

Most  respondents  raised  their  prime  rate  last  month,  and  almost  all  expect  to

raise  the  rate  again  in the  near  term.  Consumer  lending  rates  were  increased  last

month,  and  almost  all  banks  anticipate  further  increases  in  the  near future.  Lending

standards  were  unchanged.

Bank  deposits  increased  slightly  last  month.  NOW  accounts,  money  market  deposit

X-3

accounts,  and  large  time  deposits  were  up  somewhat,  while  demand  deposits  and  small

time  deposits  were  little  changed.

Agriculture.  Agricultural  banks  in the  district  indicate  their  farm  loan portfolios

had  a mixed  performance  in  1994.  Most  crop  loans  are  in better  condition  than  a year

ago.  Crop  yields  were  up  significantly  from  1993,  more  than  offsetting  lower  prices.

Nearly  all  bankers  surveyed  report  weaker  livestock  loan  portfolios,  however,  due  to a

slump  in hog  and  cattle  prices.  Nevertheless,  most  bankers  have  been  surprised  that

livestock  loans  did  not fare  as  poorly  as  large  summer  losses  had  suggested.

The  district's  winter  wheat  crop  is  in  good  condition,  although  bankers  in  some

areas  are  concerned  that  the  1994-95  winter  may  be  too  warm  and  dry  to  support  a  good

wheat  stand  in  the  spring.  District  bankers  generally  expect  farm  income  to  improve

slightly  in  1995.  With  normal  crop  yields  in  1995,  incomes  for  crop  farmers  may  be

nearly  equal  to  those  of 1994.  Incomes  for  livestock  producers  should  improve  in  1995

as  input  prices  fall  and  livestock  prices  return  to  breakeven  levels.

Prices  and  wages.  Retailers  report  that  prices  remained  stable  in  December.

Manufacturers'  purchasing  agents  report input  prices  increased  in  the  past  month  and  are

higher than  a  year  ago.  Fewer  agents  report  tightness  in  markets  for  skilled  labor  than

in past  months,  and  none  report  upward  pressure  on  wages.  New  home  prices  rose  over

the  last  month.  Most  builders  report  that  prices  of materials  have  increased,  although

tightness  in  the  market  for  construction  labor  has  eased.

XI-1

ELEVENTH  DISTRICT--DALLAS

The  Eleventh  District  economy  continued  to  grow  at  a  solid  pace  in  late  November  and

December.  Increasing  strength  was  reported  in  the  service  sector,  and  manufacturing  orders  continued

to  rise at  a  steady  rate.  Strong  commercial  construction  activity  offset  a  further  decline  in the  single-

family  sector.  Retail  sales  growth  slowed  after  the  Thanksgiving  holiday  and  Christmas  sales  were

lower  than  expected.  Growth  in  loan  demand  continued  at  a  strong  pace,  but  competition  between

banks  for  customers  squeezed  margins.  District  energy  activity  remained  unchanged  but  was  slightly

below  last  year's  levels.  Year-end  agricultural  production  was  up.

Contacts  in  several  manufacturing  industries,  including  petrochemicals,  paper  and  steel,

reported  price  increases  resulting  from  strong  demand.  Apparel  and  food  contacts  said  that  higher

costs--especially  for  packaging--were  raising  price  pressures  in  their  industries.  Service  sector

respondents  reported  continued  wage  and  price  pressures  resulting  from  labor  shortages  and  strong

demand.  Retailers  said  competition  kept  prices  at  or below  last year's  levels.  Oil  prices  held  steady,

but  warm  winter  weather  depressed  natural  gas  prices.  Sharp  declines  in  livestock  prices  led  to  a

decline  in  a  regional  index  of agricultural  prices.

District  manufacturers reported  continued  growth  in  orders  with  strong  growth  in  the

demand  for paper  products,  electronics,  apparel  and  chemicals.  Orders  increased  modestly  for

construction-related  products.  Domestic  and  foreign  sales  of packaging  materials,  boxes  and  paper

products  continued  to  rise.  Prices  were  up for  all  types  of paper  products  and  contacts  expected

further  price  increases  in  1995.  Despite  additional  capacity,  electronics  orders  outpaced  supply

leading  to  lower  inventories.  Electronics  prices  were  reported  as  no  longer  falling,  resulting  in  higher

profits  for  manufacturers.  A  December  surge  in  orders  for jeans  led to  hiring  in  apparel

XI-2

manufacturing.  Demand  for  construction-related  products  edged up.  Lumber  producers  reported

lower  sales  of residential  lumber  but  increased  orders  from commercial  builders.  Demand  for concrete

and  cement  increased  with  improving  weather.  Glass  sales  were  at a  record  high due  to  rising

commercial  construction  and  robust  auto  production.  Orders  for  primary  and  fabricated  metals

accelerated,  and  producers  reported  that  demand  for  steel  had  picked  up  recently  in  anticipation  of

near-term  price  increases.  Food manufacturers  reported  steady  demand  and  had  increased  hiring

because  of strong  growth  earlier  in  the  year.  Petrochemical  orders  remained  extremely  strong,  and

despite  added  capacity,  inventories  were  low  and  prices  continued  to  rise.  Improved  business  overseas

kept  demand  for  oil  and  gas  machinery  steady  at  high  levels,  but  respondents  expressed  concern  over

low  domestic  natural  gas  prices.  Unseasonably  warm  weather  lowered  fuel  oil  costs,  reducing  refining

margins  to  record  lows.  Several  refiners  said  they  plan to  shut  in  capacity  until  margins  improve.

Demand  for business  services  grew  at  a  slightly  faster  pace.  Legal  firms  reported  a  pickup  in

demand  associated  with  real  estate  transactions,  mergers  and  acquisitions,  and  initial  public  offerings.

Growing  labor  market  tightness  for  experienced  accountants  increased  upper  level  salaries  in  the

accounting  industry.  Demand  accelerated  for temporary  placement  services.  Both  trucking  and

temporary  service  firms  continued  to  report  increasing  wage  pressures  associated  with  strong  demand

and  a  shortage  of qualified  workers.  Demand  for  business  communications  and  advertising  services

slowed  slightly  from  their  previous  fast  pace.

Seasonally  adjusted,  retail sales  growth  slowed  slightly  after  Thanksgiving  and  many  retailers

said  Christmas  sales  did  not  meet  expectations.  Holiday  sales  were  reported  to  be  strongest  for

electronics,  jewelry,  toys  and  other  hard  goods.  Sales  of fragrances,  cosmetics  and  most  fashion

apparel  were  less  than  expected.  Heavy  discounting  and  competition  kept  selling prices  unchanged  or

below  a year  ago.  Stores  along  the  Mexican  border  said  that  sales  dropped  following  the  peso

devaluation  and  are  not expected  to  pick  up  for at  least  3 to  4  months.  Contacts  in  the  auto  industry

XI-3

reported  that  sales  growth had  slowed  somewhat  in  December  after  an  extremely  strong  November.

Popular  car  models  were  said  to  be  in  short  supply.

Contacts  in  the  construction  and real  estate  industry  reported  that  higher  mortgage  rates

continued  to  cause  a decline  in  single-family  construction.  Commercial  construction--especially  for

retail  space--remained  strong,  but  contacts  voiced  uncertainty  about  the  year  ahead.  Demand  for

suburban  office  and  retail  space  remained  at  high  levels,  and  the  apartment  market  was  reported  to  be

tight  despite  a  number  of recently  completed  projects.

Bankers  reported  that  loan  demand  continued  to  increase  at  a  strong  pace,  but  said  higher

interest  rates  and  competition  had  squeezed  margins.  Consumer  lending  remained  very  competitive,

and  strong  demand  for  commercial  loans  had  offset  the  decline  in  residential  mortgage  lending

activity.

District  energy  producers  reported  that  activity  was  unchanged.  Strong  global  demand  kept  oil

prices  between  17  and  18  dollars  per  barrel,  but  warm  winter  weather  pushed  natural  gas  prices

below  last  year's level.  The  district  rig  count  was  slightly  below  that  of a  year  ago,  but  drilling

activity  in  the  Gulf of Mexico  was  still  at  good  levels,  according  to  contacts.

Most  district  agricultural producers  reported  higher  production  than  expected.  Livestock

conditions  were  reported  to  be  well  above  average  across  the  district.  Although  prices  for  cotton,

wheat,  sweet  corn  and  lettuce  were  higher,  lower  livestock,  corn  and  soybean  prices  pushed  the Texas

All  Farm  Products  Index  down  6.2  percent  from  a  year ago.

XII-  1

TWELFTH  DISTRICT  --  SAN  FRANCISCO

Summary

Economic  growth  in  the  District  as  a  whole  appears  to  be  accelerating  slightly,

bringing  higher  rates  of resource  utilization.  Strengthening  of activity  in  Arizona,  California,

and  the  Pacific  Northwest  appears  to  have  been  only  partly  offset  by  a  slight  moderation  in

the  fast-growing  states  of Idaho,  Nevada,  and  Utah.  Retail  sales  during  the  holiday  season

were  reported  to  be  moderately  strong  in  most  of the  District.  The  services  sector  continues

to  expand  noticeably.  Except  for  aerospace,  manufacturing  activity  generally  remains  at  high

levels  in  most  of the  District outside  California,  with  a  few  industries  reporting  capacity

constraints  and  large  price  increases.  In  response  to  higher  interest  rates,  home  sales  and

construction  appear  to  have  dropped  back  a  bit,  but  business  investment  continues  to  pick  up.

Outside  of housing,  bank  lending  activity  is  reported  to  be  brisk.

Business  Sentiment

Twelfth  District  business  leaders  generally  remain  optimistic  about  the  outlook  for  real

activity  in  the  nation  and  region.  Survey  respondents  expect  that  over  the  next  four  quarters

national  growth  will  exceed  the  long-run  historical  average  pace,  the  unemployment  rate  will

fall  further,  and  inflation  will  accelerate  slightly.  Within  the  region,  growth  in  most  states  is

expected  to  exceed  the  national  pace.  Among  regional  spending  components,  business

investment  is  expected  to  strengthen  further,  but  housing  starts  generally  are  expected  to  drop

back;  the  main  exception  is  California,  where  some  respondents  anticipate  a  slight

improvement  in  housing  construction  from  relatively  weak  levels.

Retail  Trade  and  Services

XII  - 2

Holiday  season  retail  sales  were  reported  to  be  moderately  strong  in  most  parts  of the

District  and  in  some  areas  to  be  substantially  stronger  this  season  relative  to  weak  levels  a

year  earlier.  Big-ticket  items  reportedly  sold  better  than  less  expensive  merchandise;  for

example,  sales  of  computer  peripheral  equipment,  software,  other  electronic  goods,  and

automobiles  generally  were  reported  to  be  robust,  but  lower-end  apparel  sales  were  weak,

leading  to  substantial  price  discounting  in  many  areas.  Within  California,  the  relative  strength

in  holiday  sales  was  particularly  noticeable  in  Central  and  Southern  California,  where  activity

last holiday  season  was  at  low  levels.  Retail  sales  in  Idaho  and  Utah  reportedly  were  boosted

by  the  addition  of  recent  domestic  in-migrants  to  the  pool  of shoppers  in  the  states,  with

furniture,  housewares,  and  other  items  used  in  new  homes  said  to  be  particularly  strong.

Respondents  from  the  border  region  of Arizona  noted  that  the  late-December  devaluation  of

the  Mexican  peso  noticeably  inhibited  trans-border  shopping  by  Mexican  residents,  but  this

devaluation  reportedly  had  less  immediate  effect  on  holiday  sales  in  the  San  Diego  area.

The  services  sector  continues  to  expand  moderately,  boosted  by  gains  in  tourism  and

business  services  and  less  of a  drag  from  restructuring  in  the  health  care  industry.  Hospitals

were  reported  to  be  more  willing  to  make  investment  purchases  recently.  Hotel  occupancy

rates  were  reported  to  be  high  in  most  of  California  and  Utah,  owing  in  part  to  convention

activity  and  a  strong  start  to  the  ski  season.  Among  business  services,  software  development

has  been  strong,  and  in  tight  labor  markets--such  as  in  Idaho--wages  for  computer

programmers  were  reported  to  be  increasing  rapidly.

The  government  sector  remains  weak,  and  new  concerns  about  budgetary  pressures

XII  - 3

have  been  expressed  in  some  areas.  In  Oregon,  wages  of state  government  employees  are

scheduled  to  be  cut  in  mid-1995. 

In  eastern  Washington,  expectations  of  a  significant

reduction  in  the  workforce  at  the  Hanford  site  this  year  are  dampening  the  business  outlook  in

that  area.  In  Southern  California,  respondents  expect  the  Orange  County  bankruptcy  and

investment  pool  losses  to  result  in  a  combination  of local  government  layoffs,  service  cuts,

infrastructure  project  delays  and  cancellations,  and  higher  "user  fees."

Manufacturing

Outside  of  aerospace,  manufacturing  activity  generally  remains  at  high  levels  in  most

of the  District  outside  California,  with  a  few  industries  reporting  capacity  constraints  and

large price  increases. 

In  the  Pacific  Northwest,  electronics  manufacturing  industries  were

reported  to  be  producing  at  high  levels,  but  growth  appears  to  have  slowed  somewhat

recently. 

In  the  pulp  and  paper  industry  group,  all  segments  were  reported  to  be  tight  now,

with  strong  demand  and  low  inventories.  Newsprint  prices  reportedly  jumped  20  percent  in

1994  and  are  expected  to  climb  about  25  percent  further  this  year.  A  major  food  retailer

noted  that  paper  and  other  packaging  costs  were  increasing  and  indicated  that  the  increases

will  have  to  be  passed  on  to  consumers.

Agriculture  and  Resource-Related  Industries

District  farmers  report  generally  good  conditions  but  express  concern  about  rising  costs

of labor,  transportation,  and  raw  materials.  Crop  and  cattle  grazing  conditions  generally  have

been  aided  by  high  levels  of precipitation;  water  levels  in  most  parts  of California  are  well

above  normal  so  far  this  winter,  and  an  Arizona  rancher  reports  enough  rain  to  let  cattle  feed

over  a  wider  than  usual  range.  In  California,  some  pressure  on  wages  was  reported,

XII  - 4

particularly  for  drivers  of trucks  containing  agricultural  products,  and  transportation  costs  also

have  been  boosted  by  an  increase  in  diesel  fuel  prices.  Several  agricultural  sector  respondents

noted  that  chemical,  water,  and  packaging  costs  are  increasing  rapidly.

Real  Estate  and  Construction

Homes  sales  and  construction  appear  to  have  dropped  back  a  bit  in  many  parts  of the

District  recently.  In  Central  and  Southern  California,  new home  construction  reportedly

weakened,  and  sales  of existing  homes  were  off. 

In  many  other  areas,  housing  sale  and

construction  activity  typically  are  at  seasonal  lows  this  time  of year;  changes  in  activity  were

less  discernible  in  the  thin  markets.

Financial  Institutions

Bank  lending  activity  is  reported  brisk,  but  margins  appear  to  be  shrinking  in  some

areas,  as  pricing  has  become  more  competitive. 

In  California,  some  banks  expressed

concern  about  the  effects  of  past  lending  to  businesses  that  sold  products  and  services  to

Orange  County  and  uncertainty  about  the  effects  of  the  Mexican  peso  devaluation.  However,

this  was  not  expected  to  slow  the  improving  economic  conditions  in  the  state  or  banking

industry  substantially,  and  community  banks  in  Northern  California  were  particularly  upbeat.

In  Utah,  banks  were  reported  to  be  experiencing  strong  deposit  growth  and  strong  demand  for

consumer  and  commercial  loans.

