Prefatory Note 

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 

available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain. 

Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 

gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.    

1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Confidential (FR)   Class III FOMC

Part 2                                                                                   January 23, 2002

CURRENT ECONOMIC
AND FINANCIAL CONDITIONS

Recent Developments

Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
by the staff of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

Confidential (FR)   Class III FOMC

                                                                                                    January 23, 2002

Recent Developments                         

Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
by the staff of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

                
Domestic Nonfinancial
Developments                         

Domestic Nonfinancial Developments


Overview 
Economic activity appears to have contracted a bit further in the fourth quarter 
after having dropped at an annual rate of 1.3 percent in the third quarter.  Final 
sales likely posted a moderate gain last quarter, as consumer outlays accelerated 
sharply and business purchases of equipment and software leveled off after two 
quarters of steep decline.  However, this pickup in final sales was met by a 
further deepening in the ongoing liquidation of inventories.  Looking ahead, 
some recent data suggest that the economy may be bottoming out.  In the 
manufacturing sector, production fell less steeply in December than in previous 
months, and the available indicators suggest that an upturn could be near.  More 
broadly, employment losses in December were much smaller than those earlier 
in the quarter, aggregate hours of production or nonsupervisory workers were 
unchanged last month, and initial claims for unemployment insurance have 
fallen significantly below their levels in late November.  Meanwhile, inflation 
has been held down by falling energy prices and widespread discounting of 
goods prices. 

Labor Market Developments 
The labor market deteriorated further last month, as private nonfarm payrolls 
dropped 187,000 and the unemployment rate rose 0.2 percentage point, to 
5.8 percent.  However, the decline in employment was less severe than in the 
preceding two months, and aggregate hours of production or nonsupervisory 
workers on private nonfarm payrolls held steady in December, the first month 
since May that hours did not decline. 

December’s level of aggregate hours was held up by an increase in the 
workweek, which after two consecutive monthly gains has climbed back to 
34.2 hours, a level last seen in July.  With a 0.4 hour jump in December, the 
manufacturing workweek, one of the Conference Board’s leading indicators, 
reversed its declines over the three preceding months and returned to its August 
level.  The rise in the factory workweek occurred in concert with a cut in 
manufacturing jobs of 133,000.  History indicates that the workweek in the 
manufacturing sector often begins rising from recessionary lows while 
manufacturing employment is still declining. 

Although the unemployment rate continued to climb in December, other 
indicators from the household survey were also hinting at a slowing in the pace 
of reductions in jobs and hours toward year-end.  The percentage of job losers 
unemployed for fewer than five weeks (a proxy for the layoff rate) fell for the 
second consecutive month in December after having peaked in October.  In 
addition, the proportion of employed persons working part-time for economic 
reasons has changed little since October after having risen precipitously during 
the preceding two months. 

II-2

II-3

II-4

II-5


Recent data on initial claims for unemployment insurance and the insured 
unemployment rate point to a further moderation in payroll employment 
declines in January.  The four-week moving average of initial claims (based on 
FRB seasonals) for the week ended January 12 was 404,000, nearly 34,000 
below the level a month earlier, and the insured unemployment rate for the 
week ended January 5 was 2.7 percent, 0.2 percentage point below the level in 
mid-December.1 

Other indicators of labor market activity have either leveled off or begun to turn 
up of late.  According to the preliminary Michigan Survey Research Center 
(SRC) survey, expectations of future employment prospects increased sharply in 
January, following increases in December reported by both the Michigan and 
Conference Board surveys.  The National Federation of Independent Business 
reported that hiring plans remained depressed in December but that the 
percentage of firms finding job openings difficult to fill ticked back up last 
month after having declined in November. 

Industrial Production 
Output in the industrial sector continued to contract in December, but the rate of 
decline was not as steep as in previous months.  Both total industrial production 
and manufacturing output edged down 0.1 percent last month after larger 
declines in October and November.  For the fourth quarter as a whole, industrial 
output dropped at an annual rate of 7.2 percent after declining 4.7 percent in the 
third quarter.  Production has fallen about 7 percent since the most recent peak 
in June 2000, 2-1/2 percentage points more than the 4-1/2 percent cumulative 
drop during the 1990-91 recession. 

The motor vehicle industry was one of several that showed an increase in 
production in December.  The output of motor vehicles and parts increased 
4.1 percent, as assemblies rose to an exceptionally high rate of 12.3 million 
units, more than a million units above the average assembly rate in October and 

1. As in years past, week-to-week changes in the level of seasonally adjusted initial claims 
around the Christmas and New Year holidays have been quite large.  Using seasonal adjustment 
factors developed by the Board’s staff helps to reduce this volatility because FRB seasonals are 
allowed to evolve more rapidly over time.  FRB-adjusted initial claims have fluctuated between 
385,000 and 420,000 over the most recent four-week period, while BLS-adjusted initial claims 
have fluctuated between 386,000 and 451,000. 

Recent week-to-week movements in initial claims may also have been influenced by an 
increase in unemployment benefits in California for those claimants filing after January 6.  The 
rise in benefits provided an incentive for some individuals to delay filing until after January 6, 
and may have held down initial claims before this date and increased them in the most recent 
week.  Using seasonal factors developed by the Board’s staff, seasonally adjusted initial claims 
rose 12,000 in California for the week ended January 12. 

II-6

II-7


November.  The strong pace of production in December likely was a response 
by the automakers to the surprisingly robust sales in the preceding two months. 

Production of Domestic Autos and Trucks 
(Millions of units at an annual rate except as noted; FRB seasonal basis) 

2001 

2002 

2001 

2002 

Q3 

Q4 

Q11 

Nov.  Dec. 

Jan. 1 

Feb.1 

11.6 
 4.7
 6.9

11.6 
 4.8
 6.8

11.9 
 5.3
 6.7

11.8 
 4.9
 6.9

12.3 
 5.1
 7.2

12.4 
 5.3 
 7.1 

11.9 
5.4 
6.5 

Item 

U.S. production 

Autos
Trucks

Days' supply2 
Autos
Light trucks3

 49.1 
 74.0 

38.3 
52.3 

n.a. 
n.a. 

37.7 
55.1 

47.4 
57.6 

n.a. 
n.a. 

n.a. 
n.a. 

n.a. 

Inventories4

 2.69 

2.27 

n.a.

 2.24 

2.27 

n.a. 

Note. Components may not sum to totals because of rounding. 
1. Production rates reflect Ward’s Communications’ latest estimates for November and 

schedules for December and the first quarter. 

2. Quarterly average calculated using end-of-period stocks and average reported sales. 
3. Excludes medium and heavy (classes 3-8) trucks. 
4. End-of-period stocks; excludes medium and heavy (class 3-8) trucks. 
n.a.  Not available. 

Another relatively bright spot in industrial production was the output of high-
tech goods, which rose 0.3 percent in December.  The increase was led by a 
pickup in the production of semiconductors; output of communications 
equipment continued to slide, while output of computers posted a moderate gain 
of 0.7 percent.  For the fourth quarter as a whole, production of high-tech goods 
ticked up slightly, the first quarterly increase in this category in a year and a 
sharp reversal from the double-digit declines recorded in each of the previous 
three quarters. 

Outside of high tech and motor vehicles, production cutbacks were widespread 
last month, with the most pronounced weakness evident in consumer 
nondurables and business equipment.  Within business equipment, the largest 
declines were in commercial aircraft and aircraft equipment, industrial 
machinery, and farm machinery and equipment.  Among the consumer durables 
categories not previously discussed, production of appliances, furniture, and 
carpeting rose for the second month in a row. 

II-8

II-9


Although manufacturing production fell sharply over the fourth quarter as a 
whole, there are some tentative indications that a recovery of sorts might be in 
the offing.  Real adjusted durable goods orders increased noticeably in October 
and November.  Moreover, the new orders index from the Institute for Supply 
Management (ISM; formerly the National Association of Purchasing Managers) 
survey, which has predictive power for near-term changes in manufacturing, 
increased sharply in December, moving into the region associated with an 
expansion in manufacturing activity for the first time in three months;2 the 
latest Business Outlook Survey from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
showed a similarly sharp rise in January. 

New Orders for Durable Goods 
(Percent change from preceding period; seasonally adjusted) 

Component 

Share, 
2001:H1 

2001 

Q2 

Q3 

Sept.  Oct. 

Nov. 

Total orders 
Adjusted orders1 
Computers 
Communications equipment 
Semiconductors and related 

devices 

Other capital goods 
Other2 

Memo: 
Real adjusted orders

Excluding high tech

100.0 
73.0 
5.0 
4.0 

4.0 
24.0 
37.0 

-2.3 
-4.2 
-14.0 
-26.3 

-19.4 
-2.8 
.5 

-5.1 
-5.7 
-19.4 
-16.6 

-3.4 
-5.3 
-3.4 

-9.2 
-9.8 
-7.0 
-39.8 

17.1 
-6.4 
-11.9 

12.4 
5.3 
18.7 
51.5 

-16.7 
-.3 
7.1 

 . . . 
 . . . 

-3.4 
-1.3 

-4.8 
-13.9 

-9.3 
-9.8 

5.5 
4.2 

-4.8 
2.2 
2.7 
.1 

2.3 
3.7 
1.4 

2.4 
2.1 

1. Orders excluding defense capital goods, nondefense aircraft, and motor vehicle parts. 
2. Includes primary metals, most fabricated metals, most stone, clay, and glass products, 

household appliances, scientific instruments, and miscellaneous durable goods. 

. . .  Not applicable. 

Weekly production data through January 19 suggest that the weekly aggregate, 
which makes up nearly one-fifth of the IP index, will contribute roughly 
0.2 percentage point to the change in total IP this month; in particular, weekly 
steel production and electricity generation were up noticeably in the first three 
weeks of the month.  Steel capability utilization rates have reached their highest 
level since the week ending September 8, 2000. 

2. In the ISM survey, index values greater than 50 typically are associated with an increase 

in manufacturing activity. 

II-10

II-11


Capacity utilization in manufacturing edged down to 72.8 percent in December. 
Despite the anemic rate of capacity expansion in 2001, utilization rates dropped 
precipitously throughout the year, and the average rate in the fourth quarter was 
its lowest since 1983; the drop in utilization has been sharpest in the high-tech 
sector.  In contrast to manufacturing, an increase in capacity at utilities in 2001 
was the strongest since 1974, reflecting producers’ response to the significant 
shortfall in generating capacity that had opened up in the western states over the 
past year or so.  Accordingly, capacity utilization at utilities in December was 
12.7 percentage points below the most recent peak, in December 2000. 

Motor Vehicles 
Purchases of light vehicles moved lower again in December, but the pace of 
sales—at an annual rate of 16-1/4 million units—was still above the third-
quarter average.  For the fourth quarter as a whole, sales of automobiles and 
light trucks rose to an annual rate of 18.4 million units—a historical high. 
Demand for motor vehicles has been bolstered in recent months by a continued 
high level of incentives.  Manufacturers scaled incentives back a bit last month, 
but they appear reluctant to cut them too substantially, likely because of 
concerns about the underlying strength of vehicle demand and the drop-off in 
sales volume that they presume would ensue if incentives abruptly returned to 
more normal levels.5  The Michigan Survey index of car-buying conditions shot 
up over the final months of last year—buoyed by highly favorable consumer 
assessments of motor vehicle prices and financing rates.  In early January, the 
index eased a bit as respondents expressed some dissatisfaction with current 
financing rates after automakers removed zero percent rates from many models. 

Most of the decline in light vehicle sales in December came in retail purchases, 
which had spiked in October and then dropped back some in November. 
However, confidential data from automakers indicate that fleet sales also moved 
lower in December and were down 1/2 million units (annual rate) in the fourth 
quarter.  With demand for travel down, some rental car companies have 
aggressively trimmed the size of their fleets.  In contrast, business purchases of 
medium and heavy trucks rose in the fourth quarter for the first time since the 
fourth quarter of 1999, and on a three-month moving average basis, net new 
orders for medium and heavy trucks ticked up in December. 

5. On January 2, GM ended zero percent financing and began offering rebates of $2,002 on 
many models.  Other models were eligible for reduced-rate financing plus a smaller cash rebate. 
These offers are scheduled to run through February 28.  Ford has extended its zero percent 
financing on thirty-six-month loans until March 5 and has offered cash rebates of $1,000 to 
$2,500 depending on the model.  DaimlerChrysler’s zero percent program ended on January 8. 
Currently, incentives on its vehicles vary by region and by model. 

II-12

II-13


With sales at record levels, inventories of light vehicles fell substantially in the 
fourth quarter.  Stocks of light vehicles are estimated to have declined to 
2-1/4 million units last quarter—the lowest level since the first quarter of 1992. 
The days’ supply of light vehicles stood at fifty-four days in December, 
relatively lean compared with desired levels of about sixty-five days. 

Although the Big Three automakers continue to expect sales to drop in the first 
quarter, their latest production plans call for a robust assembly rate of 
11.9 million units, a shade above the average for the fourth quarter.  If these 
schedules are maintained and sales fall back, inventories would likely move up 
sharply in the near term.6 

Consumer Spending 
Available data indicate that the pace of consumer spending was well maintained 
through the end of last year.  Real personal consumption expenditures are now 
expected to have risen at an annual rate of 4-3/4 percent in the fourth quarter, 
mainly on the aforementioned strength of motor vehicle sales.  Moreover, recent 
reports from chain stores suggest that their sales, which exceeded expectations 
in December, have also held up well through the first three weeks of January. 

Although total nominal retail sales declined 0.1 percent in December, spending 
in the nominal retail control category—which excludes auto dealers and 
building material and supply stores—edged up last month, and revised data for 
November show a noticeably smaller decline than had been previously 
estimated.  Within retail control, sales at stores in the GAF category (general 
merchandise, apparel, and furniture and appliance stores) posted another 
noticeable gain in December, despite rather gloomy reports from retail analysts 
during the Christmas season.  In contrast, nominal retail sales at gasoline 
stations fell further in December, likely because of lower retail gasoline prices. 
On the basis of these retail sales data and information showing substantial price 
declines for goods, we estimate that real PCE for goods excluding autos and 
trucks increased about 3/4 percent, on average, in November and December. 

According to the most recent data, outlays on services rose 0.2 percent in 
November, as increases in expenditures for medical services, personal business 
services, and recreation services more than offset a sizable drop in spending on 
energy services.  Although temperatures on balance remained unseasonably 
warm in December, they were down from November and likely led to higher 
spending on energy services last month.  In contrast, slight decreases in stock 

6. Ford recently announced a restructuring plan that involves closing at least three domestic 

assembly plants in addition to some parts plants.  No domestic assembly plant will be closed 
before the September 2003 expiration of the current labor contract with the United Auto 
Workers, but Ford could slow the line speed and drop some production shifts as early as March. 
Ford plans to close some parts plants within the year. 

II-14

II-15


market trading volumes last month probably served to damp expenditures on 
personal business services. 

On the income side, private wages and salaries appear to have advanced in 
December after a small decline in November.  Moreover, the overall rise in real 
disposable personal income last year was well above that seen in previous 
recessions, aided both by last summer’s tax cuts and by the rapid decline in 
consumer energy prices through the end of the year.  Meanwhile, the pickup in 
equity values over the fourth quarter is estimated to have raised the ratio of 
household net worth to disposable income to close to the level it registered at the 
end of 2000. 

Sentiment surveys also point to an improvement in the consumer outlook. 
According to the preliminary report, the Michigan Survey Research Center’s 
index of consumer sentiment moved up again in January after having posted a 
series of modest increases since mid-September, and the Conference Board’s 
index of consumer confidence popped up in December, interrupting a string of 
declines.  Although assessments of current conditions remain relatively 
pessimistic, both surveys have shown continued improvements since late last 
summer in consumers’ expectations about future conditions. 

Housing Markets 
The pace of homebuilding eased slightly last quarter.  Although single-family 
starts are estimated to have moved up in December to an annual rate of 
1.29 million units, the average pace of starts for the fourth quarter as a whole 
was down about 6 percent (annual rate) from the third-quarter pace.  Meanwhile, 
multifamily starts were down sharply in December from November’s elevated 
level, leaving the fourth-quarter pace little changed from that of the third.  The 
available building-permits data—which are typically less erratic than the starts 
data—painted a slightly softer picture of single-family activity but a somewhat 
stronger one of the multifamily sector. 

The underlying trajectory of starts has been obscured by the fallout from the 
terrorist attacks—which likely restrained building in October—and 
unseasonably warm and dry weather—which likely boosted activity in 
November and December.  The exact contributions of these events are 
uncertain, but it is clear that low mortgage rates helped keep the housing market 
relatively strong through the end of the year despite the weakening job market. 

Although the pace of starts was well maintained in 2001, the average nominal 
cost of newly started homes decelerated sharply over the year, contributing to a 
deceleration in the overall pace of both nominal and real residential investment. 
In particular, industry anecdotes suggest that at least part of the deceleration in 

II-16

II-17

II-18

II-19


the cost per single-family start owes to a shift away from construction of high-
end homes.7 

New and existing home sales remained brisk through November.  Although the 
terrorist attacks shook the confidence of both buyers and realtors, the effects 
were fleeting, with sales rebounding in October and November to their pre-
September levels.  Mortgage rates backed up somewhat in December, but they 
have since turned down again, retracing all of the December rise.  Indeed, the 
Mortgage Bankers Association reported that mortgage applications for a home 
purchase reached an all-time high in the week ended January 18.  In addition, 
respondents to the Michigan Survey continue to perceive homebuying 
conditions as relatively favorable in January. 

Business Fixed Investment 

Equipment and software.  Although the data are still incomplete, real 
expenditures on equipment and software appear to have leveled off in the 
fourth quarter, following substantial declines in both the second and third 
quarters.  Some of the improvement is attributable to a sizable bounceback in 
business purchases of motor vehicles.  Even excluding this erratic sector, 
however, declines in equipment spending seem to have been less pronounced, 
despite falling business output and weak corporate cash flow. 

Business spending on high-tech equipment and software looks to have 
registered a small gain in the fourth quarter—a marked turnaround from the 
steep drops posted in the second and third quarters.  In November, the latest 
month for which we have data, nominal shipments of computers and related 
products rose 2.2 percent (not at an annual rate), leaving the average pace for 
the October-November period 1.2 percent above that for the third quarter. 
Taking into account the ongoing steep declines in prices, real computer 
expenditures likely rose at a double-digit annual rate last quarter.  In contrast, 
declines in expenditures on communications equipment show no signs of 
abating.  Shipments fell again in November, the eighth consecutive month of 
decrease, and although orders were flat in November, the three-month moving 
average was down 3.5 percent, setting the stage for continued softness in this 
category. 

At this point, we estimate that business expenditures on aircraft were little 
changed in the fourth quarter.  Boeing and Airbus reportedly delivered 

7. The Census Bureau estimates the cost per start using new home prices for homes built for 

sale, contract prices for homes built for the owner, and an adjustment factor for the cost of land 
and land development. 

II-20

II-21

II-22

II-23


101 planes to domestic airlines last quarter, similar to the number of deliveries 
in the previous quarter.  However, most of the planes delivered last quarter 
were ordered in 2000.  Orders have fallen sharply since mid-2001, and given 
the long lags between orders and deliveries, shipments of aircraft are likely to 
be down substantially this year. 

Outside of the high-tech and transportation sectors, nominal shipments fell 
2.3 percent in November, and the October-November average was 2.7 percent 
(not at an annual rate) below the third-quarter pace.  Orders, however, rose 
3.7 percent in November, led by sizable increases in bookings of new 
machinery, electrical equipment, ships and boats, and furniture.  The three-
month moving average of orders fell less rapidly in November than in earlier 
months, perhaps signaling smaller spending declines in coming months. 

Nonresidential construction.  The incoming data point to another large decline 
in real spending on private nonresidential construction in the fourth quarter, 
November and December’s favorable weather notwithstanding.8  In particular, 
real outlays for private nonresidential buildings fell, on net, over the first two 
months of the fourth quarter, leaving the level of spending in November down at 
an annual rate of 14-1/4 percent from the third-quarter average.  By sector, 
spending has fallen precipitously in the industrial building category, reflecting 
low capacity-utilization rates and rising vacancies.  For office buildings, for 
which vacancy rates also moved up further in the fourth quarter, the level of 
construction in November was about 8 percent at an annual rate below the third-
quarter average.  In contrast, spending for other commercial construction— 
which includes retail, wholesale, and warehouse space—was down only about 
2 percent in November from the third quarter. 

Real spending on new drilling and mining structures declined at an annual rate 
of 5.3 percent in the third quarter, and given the decline in November and 
December in the number of oil and gas drilling rigs in operation, another drop 
seems to have ensued in the fourth quarter. 

Inventories 
The book value of manufacturing and trade inventories (excluding motor 
vehicles) fell at an annual rate of $99.9 billion in November following a 
$92.0 billion liquidation in October.  The average runoff for the two months was 

8. The level of spending in the third quarter was boosted by the lease in July of the World 

Trade Center by the Port Authority to the private sector.  The Bureau of Economic Analysis 
(BEA) treated the transaction as a purchase, raising the level of private nonresidential 
construction spending in the third quarter by $10.7 billion.  Reported spending growth in the 
fourth quarter will be restrained by an offsetting amount.  These accounting effects are exactly 
offset in the state and local government sector; total GDP is unaffected. 

II-24

II-25

II-26


nearly $30 billion greater than the pace of reduction during the third quarter and 
the fastest since the beginning of the series in the mid-1960s. 

In manufacturing, the pace of liquidation has been hefty since spring, but 
inventory-sales ratios have remained stubbornly high.  The ratios of inventories 
to shipments were still elevated in November at manufacturers of metals, 
minerals, lumber, furniture, computers and electronics products, machinery, and 
electrical goods, although in all but the last two of these categories, stock-sales 
ratios are down from their earlier peaks.  For manufacturing as a whole, the ratio 
appears to have declined somewhat in the first two months of the fourth quarter 
after having spiked in September. 

The pace of liquidation at wholesalers appears to have steepened in recent 
months.  The book value of distributors’ inventories (excluding motor vehicles) 
fell at an average pace of $37.3 billion in the October-November period, about 
twice the third-quarter rate of reduction.  As a consequence, the ratio of 
wholesalers’ stocks to sales has diminished.  Nonetheless, distributors in several 
sectors—such as furniture, hardware, machinery, paper, drugs, and chemicals— 
still appear to have a worrisome level of inventories relative to sales. 

The book value of retail inventories (excluding stocks held by auto dealers) 

fell at an annual rate of $20.5 billion in November after having declined 
$6.3 billion in October.  The average decrease for the two months, 
$13.4 billion, was steeper than the small liquidation posted in the third quarter. 
Despite fairly weak nominal sales, the inventory-sales ratio edged down 
further in November and appeared to be at a fairly comfortable level. 

Government Expenditures 

Federal sector.  The budget position of the federal government continues to 
deteriorate.  According to the Monthly Treasury Statements, the federal budget 
deficit for the November-December period totaled $28 billion, compared with a 
$9 billion surplus for the same period last year. 

The less-favorable budget outcome owes primarily to declines in revenue, 
although a strong increase in government outlays has also been a factor.  On the 
revenue side, receipts during the November-December period fell 5.2 percent 
relative to a year earlier.  Net corporate receipts continued their recent decline, 
falling 33 percent.  Individual tax receipts rose 1.5 percent, reflecting in part an 
extra Monday, a key day for payroll processing, in December.  According to the 
Daily Treasury Statements, non-withheld income tax receipts for January 2002 
are similar to those of last January. 

II-27

II-28


II-29


On the spending side, after adjusting for routine payment-timing shifts, outlays 
in the November-December period rose 6 percent over last year.  National 
defense outlays rose 8.3 percent, in part because of U.S. military activity in 
Afghanistan.  Health-related spending also rose rapidly, with increases of 
9 percent for Medicare and 17.8 percent for Medicaid.  In contrast, net interest 
payments have continued to fall, a result of both lower short-term interest rates 
and declines in the federal debt over the past year. 

After having failed to reach agreement in December on an economic stimulus 
package, Congress completed the appropriations process and adjourned.  These 
appropriations bills, which President Bush has signed, provide $684 billion in 
non-emergency budget authority for fiscal year 2002, up nearly 8 percent from 
fiscal 2001.  The largest category, defense, is slated to rise more than 8 percent, 
to $317 billion, in fiscal 2002.  In addition, Congress appropriated $20 billion in 
emergency funds, the second half of the $40 billion supplemental appropriation 
passed in September.  These funds are earmarked primarily for homeland 
security initiatives and disaster-related assistance for New York. 

The Congressional Budget Office has released a summary of “The Budget and 
Economic Outlook:  Fiscal Years 2003-2012.”  The full report will be published 
January 31.  The CBO now forecasts that in the absence of future legislation, the 
federal government will run small unified deficits in fiscal years 2002 and 2003 
before returning to surplus in fiscal 2004.  Over the coming decade (2002-11), 
the CBO projects a unified surplus of $1.6 trillion, a significant downward 
revision from the $5.6 trillion surplus projected in January 2001.  The $4 trillion 
downward revision is attributed to legislative changes ($2.4 trillion), changes in 
economic assumptions ($0.9 trillion), and technical factors ($0.7 trillion). 

State and local governments.  Despite deteriorating budget positions, real 
spending by state and local governments has been quite robust in recent months. 
Employment rose 55,000 in December, bringing the monthly average during the 
fourth quarter to 35,000, and real construction outlays jumped more than 
6 percent at a monthly rate in November following an even stronger surge the 
month before.  The strong construction activity in November, which was 
widespread across all major components, was probably facilitated by the 
unusually warm and dry weather. 

Most state legislatures begin their new sessions in January, and many states that 
have not yet acted will be forced to deal with projected gaps in their general 
fund budgets.  It appears that a variety of strategies will be adopted, including 
budget cuts, transfers from rainy-day funds and funds backed by tobacco-
settlement money, greater-than-expected use of tax-exempt debt offerings, and 
some tax and fee increases.  Major sources of budget pressures include 
heightened security, greater expenditures for Medicaid, and increased pension-

II-30

II-31


funding requirements resulting from poor equity market performance.  Adding 
to fiscal concern is the fact that welfare rolls in many states have begun to 
increase again after having dropped substantially during the 1990s.  Official 
statistics from the Department of Health and Human Services, available only 
through June of last year, indicate that the number of families on welfare rose in 
twenty-one states.  Many of these states are in the Midwest and Southeast, the 
same regions for which a slowing in tax receipts was first apparent last winter 
and spring.  Indications are that more states experienced growing welfare rolls 
as the economic weakness spread last year. 

Prices and Labor Costs 

Prices.  Inflation dropped back at year-end, reflecting widespread discounting 
and a further decline in energy prices.  With the plunge in energy prices in 
recent months, the twelve-month change in the consumer price index slowed to 
1.6 percent in 2001, a considerably smaller rise than the 3.4 percent increase in 
2000.  The core CPI rose 2.7 percent over the twelve months of 2001, a bit 
higher than the rate for 2000.  By contrast, the core PCE price index appears to 
have risen only about 1.6 percent last year (official estimates available 
January 31), down from 1.9 percent in 2000.  In December, the overall CPI fell 
0.2 percent, led by another drop in gasoline prices, while the core CPI edged up 
0.1 percent after jumping 0.4 percent in November. 

Consumer energy prices dropped 3.2 percent last month following even larger 
declines in the previous two months.  The prices of both motor fuel and 
heating oil fell about 6 percent in December.  However, survey data suggest 
that retail prices of gasoline turned up in early January.  Elsewhere, the index 
for natural gas declined 2.1 percent last month, nearly offsetting November’s 
rise, and electricity rates decreased for the fifth consecutive month.  For the 
year as a whole, overall consumer energy prices fell 13 percent, compared 
with a rise of more than 14 percent over 2000.  Among components, prices of 
petroleum-based products plunged last year, and natural gas prices dropped 
considerably but did not entirely reverse their run-up in 2000; only electricity 
rates increased on balance last year, reflecting higher coal input costs and tight 
generating capacity in the western region. 

Consumer food prices edged down 0.1 percent in December, the same as in 
November.  Prices of fresh fruits and vegetables dropped sharply, while 
moderate price declines were posted for many other categories of food at 
home, reflecting in part the pass-through of the sharp declines in farm prices 
last fall to the retail level.  The index for food away from home edged up 
slightly in December for the second month following large increases earlier in 

II-32

II-33


the year.  Over the twelve months of 2001, the overall index for food increased 
2.8 percent, the same as in 2000. 

The index for commodities other than food and energy fell 0.3 percent in 
December, continuing the see-saw movements brought about by large monthly 
swings in tobacco prices.  Over the twelve months of 2001, core goods prices 
moved down 0.3 percent, the largest twelve-month decline in core goods 
prices in forty years; excluding tobacco, core goods prices edged down in 
December and declined 3/4 percent last year.  Although discounting of goods 
was fairly extensive last month, prices for new motor vehicles increased for 
the third consecutive month and used vehicle prices turned up after having 
fallen for eight months.  As a result, increases in new vehicle prices in the last 
three months of 2001 offset nearly all of the decline posted during the first 
nine months.9 

The CPI for non-energy services rose 0.3 percent last month following 
November’s 0.5 percent increase.  This index has accelerated considerably over 
the past two years; indeed, the twelve-month change in 2001—at 4 percent— 
was the largest increase in eight years.  Owner's equivalent rent and renter’s rent 
rose another 0.4 percent in December; during 2001, these indexes were up 
4-1/2 percent and 4-3/4 percent, respectively, a marked pickup from their pace 
in 2000.  The index for lodging away from home also increased last month, but 
it remained slightly lower than its year-earlier level.  Elsewhere, airfares 
declined further in December and are nearly 4 percent lower than a year ago, 
while prices of medical services edged up 0.1 percent last month after having 
increased rapidly in the previous two months. 

In contrast to the CPI, changes in core PCE prices slowed last year because, 
unlike the CPI, PCE prices for non-energy services did not accelerate.  As a 
result, the gap between twelve-month changes in the core CPI and core PCE 
prices rose to 1.1 percentage points in 2001, from 0.7 percentage point in 2000. 
About half of this larger gap reflects the inclusion in PCE services of a number 
of non-market transactions, whose prices have decelerated markedly over the 
past year.  Much of the remainder reflects differences in weights—particularly 
for housing, which is more heavily weighted in the CPI and has accelerated 
sharply.  In addition, PCE prices for medical services, which are based on 

9. Although we cannot assign weights to the various factors affecting motor vehicle prices, 
some of the recent increases reflect the shift in the mix of the CPI sample toward 2002 models, 
which are less heavily discounted than 2001 models. Another factor is that the CPI may not fully 
capture the value of financing incentives, which have been large in recent months.  Financing 
incentives are reflected in the CPI only to the extent that these deals include an option for cash 
rebates.  While many of the recent incentive programs have also offered cash back, the cash 
rebates have not always been as generous as the financing incentives. 

II-34

II-35

II-36

II-37


producer prices indexes (PPIs), have not moved up as quickly as the CPI for 
medical services in recent years. 

Prices for capital goods as measured by the producer price index edged down in 
December and decelerated sharply in the last three months of the year, largely 
because of sizable declines in producer prices of motor vehicles.  Prices of many 
other capital goods have also softened in recent months.  The pace of computer 
price declines has eased a bit in recent months from the very rapid clip of 
summer.  Still, over the twelve months of 2001, the PPI for computers dropped a 
record 31 percent, more than twice the rate of decline in 2000. 

At earlier stages of processing, the producer price index for core intermediate 
materials declined another 0.2 percent in December.  Over the past twelve 
months, this index fell 1.6 percent, a marked reversal of the 1.6 percent rise 
recorded during 2000.  Meanwhile, the PPI for core crude materials dropped 
nearly 10 percent over the past year.  Since the last Greenbook, metal 
prices—particularly those for steel scrap—have turned up, but indexes of 
industrial materials prices (such as the Journal of Commerce and Commodity 
Research Bureau commodity price indexes) have remained unchanged or 
declined somewhat further. 

Near-term inflation expectations from the preliminary Michigan survey moved 
up somewhat in December and January after plunging in October and 
November.  The median expectation for inflation over the coming year rose to 
1.9 percent in January but remained well below the median recorded in 
September.  The mean of these expectations also moved above its October level 
but remained below September’s response.  The median expectation of inflation 
over a five- to ten-year horizon increased in December but fell to 2.6 percent in 
January, its lowest level ever. 

Labor costs.  Average hourly earnings of production or nonsupervisory workers 
on private payrolls rose 0.5 percent in both November and December after 
having increased only 0.1 percent in October.  These recent increases brought 
the twelve-month change in average hourly earnings to 4.1 percent in 
December, down only slightly from the change in 2000.  Wage increases in the 
construction and trade sectors slowed considerably last year, but the slowing 
was mostly offset by faster wage growth in other industries. 

In contrast to average hourly earnings, compensation per hour in the nonfarm 
business sector decelerated considerably last year.  Indeed, the BEA reported 
that third-quarter compensation per hour increased at a slower pace than average 
hourly earnings for the first time in more than two years, and, on the basis of 
October and November data on wages and salaries, we estimate that the rise in 
nonfarm compensation per hour will be considerably smaller than the rise in 

II-38

II-39


average hourly earnings in the fourth quarter as well.  Differences between these 
measures of labor costs may reflect the exclusion from average hourly earnings 
of white collar pay and non-wage benefits, such as health insurance, as well as 
various types of labor income, such as bonuses and stock option exercises. 
Although employer surveys suggest that health insurance costs have continued 
to rise more rapidly than wages, anecdotal reports suggest that bonuses and 
stock option exercises have declined.  In particular, for some large high-tech 
firms for which stock options are important, option exercises dropped 
substantially over the year ended in the third quarter of 2001.10 

10. In its construction of the wage and salary data in the national accounts, the BEA uses 

state unemployment insurance (UI) records as its primary source, but because these records are 
available only with a lag, the BEA uses information about average hourly earnings (AHE) to 
estimate changes in the most recent quarters.  When the BEA saw the UI records for the second 
quarter of 2001, reported earnings apparently were much lower than implied by the AHE data, 
suggesting that changes in the types of labor income that are missing from average hourly 
earnings might be holding down the change in overall compensation.  As a result, the BEA 
reduced the adjustment factor it applies to average hourly earnings when putting together its 
estimates of wages and salaries for the third and fourth quarters. 

Domestic Financial
Developments                         

Domestic Financial Developments

Overview
Economic data releases over the intermeeting period tended to be on the positive
side of expectations, but financial markets also had to absorb other more
negative signals of future economic activity.  In particular, speeches by Federal
Reserve officials that were interpreted as emphasizing the downside risks for the
economy, along with fading odds of a fiscal stimulus package, contributed to a
decline in yields on Treasury and investment-grade corporate bonds.  Moreover,
disappointing corporate announcements regarding prospects for the year ahead
kept equity prices in check and contributed to some widening of risk spreads on
speculative-grade bonds.

The fiscal position of the federal government moved into temporary surplus
over the intermeeting period, facilitating a net paydown of Treasury debt.  In
contrast, state and local governments tapped the credit markets in size, reflecting
in part continued deterioration in fiscal positions at the state and local levels.  In
the private sector, net debt issuance by nonfinancial corporations slowed, and
according to the January Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey, demand for bank
loans by businesses continued to weaken.   Household borrowing apparently
remained robust in December.

Policy Expectations, Interest Rates, and Stock Prices
The nearest-term fed funds futures quotes imply that investors attach about a 
20 percent probability to a quarter-point rate cut at the upcoming FOMC
meeting.  Looking beyond this meeting, futures quotes indicate that investors
now expect somewhat less policy tightening over the coming year than they did
at the time of the last FOMC meeting.  Uncertainty about the future path of
policy implied by options on interest rate futures dropped appreciably over the
period but remains elevated.

Consistent with the downward revision in policy expectations, Treasury coupon
yields fell 15 to 27 basis points over the intermeeting period.  The drop in
Treasury yields was reportedly amplified somewhat by a sense that the odds had
lengthened against the passage of a fiscal stimulus package.  In early January,
dealers reported that liquidity had improved relative to the end of last year but
remained depressed relative to levels prior to September 11.

Yields on investment-grade corporate bonds fell in line with those on Treasuries
over the intermeeting period, leaving risk spreads about unchanged.  In contrast,
spreads for high-yield bonds rose after disappointing earnings news for some
lower-rated firms, but they stayed well below their recent highs of September. 
Risk spreads on commercial paper, while retracing their typical year-end runup,
remained considerably above pre-September 11 levels.

III-2

III-3

Equity prices posted modest gains in December, with investors reportedly
encouraged by the positive tone to economic data.  But those gains were erased
in January, in part as investors reacted to pessimistic news from a number of
prominent corporations, especially in the technology sector, about expected
sales and earnings over the coming year.  On net, the Nasdaq Composite fell
more than 5 percent, while broad stock market indexes were down between 
1 and 2 percent over the intermeeting period.

Business Finance
Overall, net debt financing by nonfinancial businesses moderated in December
from the rapid pace set earlier in the fourth quarter, and the data so far in
January suggest another month of subdued borrowing.  Gross issuance of
investment-grade corporate bonds in December and January, while well below
the extraordinary November pace, was still reasonably strong, with firms
continuing to use bond proceeds to refinance long-term debt and to replace
short-term debt.  High-yield firms in a number of industries also issued bonds,
although new issues generally tended to be from corporations on the upper rungs
of the speculative-grade ladder.

Outstanding nonfinancial commercial paper rose on net in December and early
January but was more than offset by a decline in C&I loans at commercial
banks.  In the January Senior Loan Officer Survey, nearly half of the banks
reported that, over the past three months, they continued to tighten their terms
and conditions on C&I loans, mostly in response to the less favorable economic
outlook.  Just over half of the banks reported weaker demand for C&I loans,
down from three-fourths in the October survey.  Banks again cited reductions in
capital spending, diminished M&A activity, and inventory liquidation as reasons
for the weaker loan demand.

Gross equity issuance continued at a brisk pace in December but has slackened
since year-end.  Seasoned offerings in December were boosted by energy
companies issuing shares in an attempt to reduce leverage after the Enron
debacle prompted closer investor scrutiny of their books and downgrades by the
major rating agencies.  So far in January, seasoned offerings have slowed as
share prices have declined.  Initial public offerings picked up slightly over the
intermeeting period, but remained at only about a third the rate in 1999 and
2000.  Announcements of share repurchase programs slowed in the fourth
quarter, and cash-financed mergers and acquisitions were also subdued,
suggesting that actual equity retirements are likely to have fallen somewhat.

S&P earnings in the fourth quarter appear to be bleak, consistent with analysts’
expectations.  With about one-third of the companies reporting, S&P 500
earnings are expected to drop about 20 percent from a year ago.  Revisions of
analysts’ year-ahead forecasts of corporate earnings were generally small in 

III-4

III-5

III-6

III-7

December and the first half of January, coming on the heels of the sizable
negative revisions made in October and November.  Even with these downward
revisions, analysts currently project a substantial recovery in earnings in 2002. 
Given the current expectations, the ratio of year-ahead earnings to price remains
low—only slightly above the real long-term AAA-rated bond yield—implying
that stock valuations remain rich.

The twelve-month trailing average of the rate of junk bond defaults rose to an
all-time high in December, boosted by the $10 billion Enron failure.  The junk
bond default rate is likely to remain elevated in January, owing to the default of
K-Mart, the largest ever by a domestic retailer.  Ratings downgrades continued
at a rapid rate in December, with telecom companies disproportionately
represented, while very few upgrades were issued.  Despite these downgrades,
an estimate of one-year ahead defaults as a percent of firm liabilities dropped
further in December from its record high in October, reflecting higher firm
valuations.

Commercial Real Estate
Commercial mortgage debt is estimated to have grown a bit less rapidly in the
fourth quarter than in the third quarter.  Nevertheless, originations have been
strong for some time, and CMBS issuance in the fourth quarter totaled $22
billion, close to the record set in the second quarter of 1998.  The spread of BBB
over AAA CMBS yields narrowed a few basis points over the intermeeting
period, but remains somewhat elevated by historical standards. CMBS
delinquency rates increased in December to their highest level since early 1997,
perhaps reflecting the rise in office vacancy rates, which rose to nearly 
14 percent in the fourth quarter. 

Household Finance
Interest rates on thirty-year fixed-rate mortgages continued to rise through mid-
December from the low recorded in October, damping the elevated pace of
refinancing activity.  In January, however, mortgage rates have retraced their
increases last month, and refinancing activity again has ticked up.  Meanwhile,
the MBA purchase index moved up to a record level over the intermeeting
period.

Residential mortgage growth in the fourth quarter is estimated to have
moderated from its rapid third-quarter pace, while the growth in consumer credit
turned up smartly, stimulated by aggressive auto incentives.  The considerable
rise in debt, together with an unwinding of the boost to incomes from the tax
rebate, pushed the estimated household debt service burden to 14-1/2 percent in
the fourth quarter, close to its record high in 1986.

III-8

III-9

III-10

III-11

The most recent readings on household debt-servicing problems have been
somewhat mixed.  Although delinquency rates on auto loans at captive finance
companies dropped slightly in October and November, delinquency rates on
auto loans extended to nonprime borrowers remained on a sharp uptrend
through November.  Delinquency rates on credit card pools edged up, on net, in
October and November.  Personal bankruptcy rates—for which we have more
timely data—moved down in December and January, but remain high by
historical standards.  According to the January Senior Loan Officer Survey,
about 20 percent of banks, on net, tightened their standards for credit card and
other consumer loans, similar to the results from the October survey.

The ratio of household assets to disposable income rose in the fourth quarter. 
The rise reflects small gains in the equity market as well as the reduction in
disposable income from the unwinding of the third-quarter tax rebate.  Flows
into equity and bond mutual funds slowed late in the fourth quarter, as the
equity market stalled and rising rates reduced bond fund returns.  So far in
January, flows into mutual funds appear to have strengthened somewhat. 
Capital gains paid on long-term mutual funds totaled an estimated $73 billion in
2001, a sharp decline from previous years.

Government and Agency Finance
Somewhat stronger-than-expected tax receipts in December and January pushed
the Treasury’s budget position back into surplus over the intermeeting period. 
As a result, the Treasury paid down marketable debt over the period, with most
of the adjustment concentrated at the shortest maturities.  The influx of cash
pushed the Treasury’s balances held at commercial banks up to the capacity of
the Treasury Tax and Loan System in late January.  In order to improve its
ability to manage its cash flows the Treasury is finalizing the details of a
program that it intends to implement in early April, in which it will offer term
deposits at auction to depository institutions.1

Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae issued revised 2002 calendars for benchmark debt
issuance.  Both agencies have scaled back their planned issuance of thirty-year
bonds relative to recent years.  This development reportedly reflects their desire
to better manage the duration of their liabilities.  The GSE’s pullback from
thirty-year bond issuance in recent months seems to have affected market
liquidity.  Despite the Treasury’s cancellation of the long bond—which might
have been expected to strengthen the demand for long-term agency debt—yields 

1. Currently, the Treasury’s balances at depository institutions are held mostly in demand
accounts bearing an interest rate set at 25 basis points below the effective federal funds rate.  It is
expected that the new time deposits offered by the Treasury under this program will be attractive
to banks and give the Treasury more flexibility in managing its cash flows around tax payment
dates.

III-12

III-13

on thirty-year agency debt are greater than comparable swap rates, contrary to
the patterns for shorter maturities.

Gross issuance of long-term debt by state and local governments, both for new
capital and refundings, totaled a hefty $28 billion in December, down a bit from
the very rapid pace in November.  Partial data for January suggest some further
slowing.  Muni yields declined over the intermeeting period, but by less than
Treasuries, reflecting perhaps the large supply of recently issued debt, and
perceptions of more supply to come as states rely more on bond financing for
capital projects.  The credit quality of many state and local governments has
begun to erode as economic activity has weakened and tax receipts have
flagged.

Money and Bank Credit
In December, M2 grew just under 9 percent at an annual rate, down from its
pace in November, and below the average growth rate for 2001 as a whole.2
While the weaker economy likely exerted a drag on M2 growth, other
factors—including overseas demand for currency, an earlier surge in mortgage
refinancing, and continued stimulus from past policy easings—boosted its
growth.

Currency grew rapidly as the crisis in Argentina and continued demand from
Russia generated noteworthy overseas shipments.  Liquid deposits remained
strong in December, continuing to grow at a 20 percent annual rate.  The peak in
mortgage refinancings in mid-November likely contributed significantly to the
December growth in liquid deposits, as normal delays in the disbursement of
funds from refinanced mortgages underlying mortgage-backed securities caused
a swelling in demand deposit escrow accounts.  

In contrast, growth of retail money funds slowed in December, as money fund
yield spreads over bank deposit rates narrowed.  Small time deposits continued
to contract at a fairly rapid pace; low interest rates make these types of deposits
especially unattractive, given their relatively low liquidity.  Data for the first
week of January suggest some further slowing in M2, but it is too early to tell
how the month as a whole will shape up.

The rate of expansion of the non-M2 component of M3 slowed significantly in
December.  Institution-only money funds grew less rapidly, and large time
deposits continued to shrink.

2. These data incorporate the effects of the annual seasonal review and are confidential until

their release that is scheduled for January 31.

III-14

III-15

Bank credit growth slowed in December, falling to 2-3/4 percent at an annual
rate.  Total loans contracted at a 4-3/4 percent pace, pulled down by another
sharp reduction in business loans.  The runoff in business loans and commercial
paper last year was accompanied by a decline in inventories.  Changes in short-
term credit and changes in inventories have moved together over the past
decade, suggesting that the continued contraction in short-term credit in
December and early January signals that businesses were still liquidating
inventories.

Incoming reports for large bank holding companies show that fourth-quarter
earnings fell from levels a year ago, but only a few firms have reported
losses—in particular, those with heavy exposure to Enron and Argentina.  More
broadly, higher net interest income was offset by higher loan loss provisions.

III-16

International Developments

 
International Developments

U.S.  International Transactions

Trade in Goods and Services
In November, the U.S. trade deficit in goods and services was $27.9 billion,
down $1.4 billion from October (revised).  For October and November
combined, the trade deficit was $343 billion at an annual rate, up $35 billion
from the third quarter.  Excluding September’s one-time insurance payment
related to the events of September 11, the trade deficit in October-November
decreased about $10 billion at an annual rate from the third quarter.

Net Trade in Goods and Services
(Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted)

2000

Annual rate
2001
Q3

Q2

Q4e

Sept.

Monthly rate
2001
Oct.

Nov.

-399.1

-406.7

-411.0

n.a.

...

...

...

-375.7
-452.2
76.5

-362.2
-430.6
68.5

-308.8
-421.8
113.0

-343.3
-414.1
70.8

-19.0
-35.5
16.5

-29.3
-35.0
5.7

-27.9
-34.0
6.1

Real NIPA1
Net exports of G&S

Nominal BOP
Net exports of G&S

Goods, net
Services, net

1.  Billions of chained (1996) dollars.
e.  BOP data are two months at an annual rate.
Source:  U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureaus of Economic Analysis and Census.
n.a.  Not available.  ...  Not applicable.

The value of exported goods and services rose 0.7 percent in November
following a 1.1 percent increase in October, but remained 6 percent below the
average level in July and August.  The rise in exports in November was driven
by a 4½ percent increase in services receipts, which more than offset a ¾ percent
drop in goods exports.  A partial recovery of receipts in travel and passenger
fares from the lows of September and October accounted for the increase in
services exports, though receipts in these two categories, taken together,
remained 25 percent below their July-August average.  The value of goods
exports declined in most categories of trade in November, with the exception of
machinery, which rose.  For October and November on average, goods exports
were down 2¾ percent from the third quarter, with declines recorded in all major
categories of trade except agricultural products.

The value of imported goods and services decreased 0.8 percent in November
and was 5½ percent below the average level in July and August.  Excluding the
large drop in the value of imported oil (owing primarily to a lower price, but 

 
IV-2

U.S. International Trade in Goods and Services

Net Exports

Bil$, s.a.a.r.

Nominal
BOP basis

Real
NIPA basis
(1996$)

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

 Selected Exports

Bil$, s.a.a.r.

Machinery 2/

Industrial
supplies 1/

Consumer goods

Aircraft

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

1.  Excludes agriculture and gold.
2.  Excludes computers and semiconductors.

0

-50

-100

-150

-200

-250

-300

-350

-400

-450

220

200

180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

Contribution of Net Exports to Real GDP Growth
Percentage points, s.a.a.r.

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

Net trade in computers
and semiconductors

Bil$, s.a.a.r.

Net automotive trade
with Canada and Mexico

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4

20

0

-20

-40

-60

     Selected Imports
310

Bil$, s.a.a.r.     
290

290

270

250

230

210

190

170

150

130

110

90

70

Consumer goods

Industrial
supplies 1/

Machinery 2/

Automotive 3/
  (overseas)

1994

1996
1.  Excludes oil and gold.
2.  Excludes computers and semiconductors.
3.  Excludes Canada and Mexico.

1998

2000

270

250

230

210

190

170

150

130

110

90

70

50

2002

IV-3

U.S. Exports and Imports of Goods and Services
(Billions of dollars, s.a.a.r., BOP basis)

Levels

Amount Change1

2001

Exports of G&S

Goods exports

Gold
Other goods

Aircraft & parts
Computers
Semiconductors
Other capital gds

Automotive
to Canada
to Mexico
to ROW

Agricultural
Ind supplies (ex. ag)
Consumer goods
All other goods

Q3
973.7

695.3
2.4
692.9

53.1
44.5
38.9
168.4

77.4
40.3
15.6
21.5

54.9
140.4
86.0
29.2

2001

Q4e
-38.7

Q4e
935.1

676.8
2.7
674.1

52.4
41.8
38.7
159.4

75.2
39.0
18.3
17.8

57.6
136.4
84.7
28.0

2001

Oct.
931.7

Nov.
938.4

679.1
2.5
676.6

54.0
42.3
38.7
156.6

75.5
38.5
19.2
17.8

57.5
138.3
85.4
28.2

674.6
3.0
671.6

50.8
41.3
38.6
162.2

74.8
39.5
17.5
17.8

57.7
134.5
83.9
27.7

Q3
-63.5

-48.2
-5.2
-43.0

-2.0
-4.1
-7.5
-14.2

1.1
-2.0
-0.3
3.3

1.0
-7.2
-7.6
-2.5

2001

Oct.

10.4

11.9
0.9
11.0

3.0
-0.3
1.7
-2.8

-1.8
-0.1
2.7
-4.4

4.8
2.8
2.8
5.1

Nov.
6.8

-4.5
0.5
-5.0

-3.2
-1.0
-0.2
5.6

-0.7
1.0
-1.7
0.1

0.2
-3.8
-1.5
-0.5

-18.4
0.4
36.1

-0.7
-2.7
-0.3
-9.0

-2.2
-1.3
2.7
-3.7

2.7
-4.0
-1.4
-1.3

Services exports

278.5

258.2

252.6

263.9

-15.3

-20.2

-1.5

11.3

Imports of G&S

1282.5 1278.3 1283.6 1273.1 -116.9

-4.2

134.1

-10.5

Goods imports
Petroleum
Gold
Other goods

Aircraft & parts
Computers
Semiconductors
Other capital gds

Automotive

from Canada
from Mexico
from ROW

Ind supplies
Consumer goods
Foods, feeds, bev.
All other goods

1117.0 1090.9 1099.6 1082.2
78.5
2.8
1012.2 1001.3 1001.8 1000.9

102.7
2.2

95.0
2.9

86.7
2.9

-57.0
-11.6
-4.3
-41.2

-26.1
-16.0
0.7
-10.8

30.7
67.9
24.7
154.0

192.0
59.0
40.2
92.8

164.5
279.9
48.0
50.4

32.0
68.7
23.5
150.2

189.8
55.4
42.3
92.0

155.4
282.2
47.9
51.5

31.5
69.4
23.2
150.6

188.7
54.2
43.7
90.7

157.1
281.9
47.9
51.4

32.5
68.0
23.8
149.9

190.9
56.7
40.9
93.3

153.7
282.5
48.0
51.6

-0.3
-7.9
-6.1
-8.0

0.8
-2.0
-0.9
3.7

-12.7
-6.4
2.2
-2.6

1.3
0.8
-1.2
-3.8

-2.2
-3.6
2.1
-0.8

-9.1
2.3
-0.0
1.1

6.1
-7.7
0.6
13.1

4.7
5.8
-1.9
-1.3

1.5
-0.7
3.4
-1.2

-0.1
2.7
-0.0
1.9

Services imports

165.5

187.4

184.0

190.9

-59.8

21.9

128.0

-17.4
-16.5
-0.1
-0.8

1.0
-1.4
0.6
-0.7

2.2
2.4
-2.8
2.5

-3.4
0.6
0.0
0.2

6.9

Memo:
Oil quantity (mb/d)
Oil import price ($/bbl)

11.96
23.52

12.26
19.33

12.59
20.64

11.93
18.01

-0.96
-0.70

0.31
-4.20

0.94
-3.46

-0.66
-2.63

1.  Change from previous quarter or month.     e.  Average of two months.
Source:  U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureaus of Economic Analysis and Census.

IV-4

Prices of U.S. Imports and Exports
(Percentage change from previous period)

Annual rates
2001
Q3

Q2

Q4

Monthly rates
2001
Nov.

Oct.

Dec.

    ------------- BLS prices (1995 weights)-------------
                                                                                                                              -0.9
                                                                                                                              -6.3
                                                                                                                              -0.3

Merchandise imports
                                                                                                                          -1.4
                                                                                                            -2.3
                                                                                            -13.4
                                                                                -7.3
                                                                 -6.9
                                                               -10.9
                                                                                                                        -11.4
                                                                                                          -15.3
                                                                                            -64.0
                                                                              -12.3
                                                                                                                          -0.2
                                                                                                            -0.6
                                                                                              -4.0
                                                                                -6.3
                                                                 -6.4

Oil
Non-oil

Core goods*

                                                                                                                          -0.3
                                                                                                            -0.5
                                                                                              -3.8
                                                                                -6.2
                                                                 -6.1
                                                                 -0.6
                                                                                                                          -0.2
                                                                                                             0.2
                                                                                              -0.1
                                                                                -1.3
                                                                 -1.0
                                                                                                                          -0.1
                                                                                                             0.2
                                                                                               1.3
                                                                                -0.5
                                                                 -1.2
                                                                                                                          -0.1
                                                                                                            -0.2
                                                                                              -1.5
                                                                                -1.1
                                                                 -8.8
                                                                                                                            0.6
                                                                                                            -0.6
                                                                                               0.0
                                                                                -7.1
                                                                                                                          -0.8
                                                                                                            -2.3
                                                                                            -14.8
                                                                              -21.1
                                                               -18.1

                                                                                                                              -0.3
                                                                                                                              -0.3
Cap. goods ex comp & semi
Automotive products
                                                                                                                               0.1
Consumer goods
                                                                                                                              -0.1
Foods, feeds, beverages
                                                                                                                              -0.7
                                                                                                                              -0.9
Industrial supplies ex oil

                                                               -12.6
                                                                                                                            0.0
                                                                                                            -1.5
                                                                                            -12.5
                                                                              -13.5
                                                                                                                            0.0
                                                                                                             0.2
                                                                                              -0.6
                                                                                -1.1
                                                                 -6.2

                                                                                                                              -0.4
                                                                                                                               0.0

Computers
Semiconductors

                                                                                                                          -0.4
Merchandise exports
                                                                                                            -0.7
                                                                                              -4.3
                                                                                -2.8
                                                                 -2.1

                                                                                                                              -0.2

Core goods*

                                                                 -1.7
                                                                                                                          -0.4
                                                                                                            -0.6
                                                                                              -3.7
                                                                                -2.1
                                                                   1.3
                                                                                                                            0.1
                                                                                                             0.0
                                                                                               0.0
                                                                                -0.4
                                                                                                                          -0.1
                                                                                                             0.1
                                                                                               0.1
                                                                                 0.0
                                                                   0.5
                                                                 -1.0
                                                                                                                            0.1
                                                                                                            -0.1
                                                                                               0.7
                                                                                 0.7
                                                                 -2.9
                                                                                                                          -1.4
                                                                                                            -1.7
                                                                                              -8.5
                                                                                 6.1
                                                                                                                          -1.3
                                                                                                            -1.6
                                                                                            -10.9
                                                                              -10.9
                                                                 -6.3

                                                                                                                              -0.2
                                                                                                                               0.0
Cap. goods ex comp & semi
                                                                                                                               0.0
Automotive products
                                                                                                                               0.0
Consumer goods
Agricultural products
                                                                                                                               1.1
                                                                                                                              -1.2
Industrial supples ex ag

                                                                                                                          -0.6
                                                                 -4.9
                                                                                                             0.0
                                                                                              -5.7
                                                                                -8.1
                                                                                                                            0.0
                                                                 -7.1
                                                                                                            -4.5
                                                                                            -16.2
                                                                                -7.0

                                                                                                                              -1.9
                                                                                                                               0.3

Computers
Semiconductors

Chain price index
                                                                 -6.0
                                                                              -17.1
                                                                                -6.7
                                                                 -5.6
                                                                                -6.2
                                                                 -5.0

     ---Prices in the NIPA accounts (1996 weights)---
...
...
...

Imports of goods & services
Non-oil merchandise

Core goods*

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

...
...
...

...
...
...

Exports of goods & services

Total merchandise
Core goods*

                                                                 -1.0
                                                                                -1.7
                                                                 -1.5
                                                                                -2.2
                                                                                -1.5
                                                                 -1.0
*/  Excludes computers and semiconductors.
n.a.  Not available.    ...  Not applicable.

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

...
...
...

...
...
...

...
...
...

Oil Prices

Dollars per barrel       
40

Spot West Texas Intermediate

Import unit value

  1992

  1993

  1994

  1995

  1996

  1997

  1998

  1999

  2000

  2001

  2002

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

IV-5

also to a smaller quantity), goods imports declined only slightly.  A modest
decrease in imports of industrial supplies was mostly offset by increased
automotive imports (mainly parts).  Imports of capital goods and consumer
goods were little changed.  Services imports increased 3.8 percent in November,
resulting from a modest rebound in travel and passenger fares (receipts in these
two categories remained 30 percent below the July-August average).  For
October and November on average, non-oil goods imports fell 1 percent from
the third quarter.  The largest decline occurred in industrial supplies, which was
driven mainly by a drop in the value of imported natural gas. 

Prices of Internationally Traded Goods
Oil.  The BLS price of imported oil continued to fall in December, although not
as sharply as in the two preceding months.  For the fourth quarter on average the
price of imported oil was down more than 60 percent at an annual rate from the
third quarter.  The spot price of West Texas Intermediate has recently been
trading between $18 and $19 per barrel, down about $3 per barrel from early
January, but about unchanged from early December.  Oil prices generally moved
higher during December as OPEC and several non-OPEC producers worked out
a production restraint arrangement, with OPEC agreeing to cut its production
target 1.5 million barrels per day.  More recently, however, the spot price of WTI
has retraced those gains as increases in U.S. crude oil inventories, along with
doubts that OPEC will sharply cut production, have weighed on oil prices.

Non-oil imports.  The price of imported non-oil (and core) goods fell again in
December, the eleventh consecutive month of declining or unchanged prices. 
Among major categories of core goods, the largest decline was in prices for
industrial supplies and materials, particularly lumber and natural gas.  The price
index for food also fell sharply in December, reversing the previous month’s
increase.  The price indexes for imported capital equipment (other than
computers and semiconductors) and consumer goods both fell slightly in
December, while the price index for automotive products edged up.  For the
fourth quarter on average, the price of core goods was down nearly 4 percent at
an annual rate from the third quarter, somewhat less than the decline recorded in
the second and third quarters.   The price decline over this period was again led
by a decrease in the price of imported industrial supplies.  The price of consumer
goods showed a small decline in the fourth quarter, whereas prices for capital
goods excluding computers and semiconductors were little changed, and the
price for automotive products rose slightly. 

Exports.  Prices of U.S. goods exports (total and core) also fell again in
December, although the decline was not as steep as in November.  The decrease
in December was again led by sharp declines in prices of industrial supplies,
particularly for exported fuels.  Prices in other major categories were unchanged,

IV-6

with the exception of the price index for agricultural products, which  largely
reversed its November decline.  For the fourth quarter on average, the price of
exported core goods fell nearly 4 percent at an annual rate from the third quarter,
primarily reflecting declines in prices of industrial supplies and agricultural
products.

U.S. Current Account
In the third quarter of 2001, the U.S. current account deficit narrowed, for the
third consecutive quarter, to $380 billion at a seasonally adjusted annual rate. 
The $50 billion decline largely resulted from the one-time recording of estimated
foreign insurance payments related to the events of September 11, which
reduced reported service imports by $44 billion.  The remaining decline of $6
billion resulted from a non-insurance related decline in the trade deficit.

The trade deficit narrowed as the world economic slowdown, along with
transactions disruptions stemming from September 11, decreased exports less
than imports.   Income on investments also reflected sagging global conditions,
with declines in income receipts on U.S.-owned assets abroad (both portfolio
and direct) slightly exceeding decreases in income payments on foreign-owned
assets in the United States.   Unilateral transfer payments rose slightly, primarily
due to an increase in private remittances and other private transfers.

U.S. Current Account
(Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted annual rate)
Investment 

Goods and 
services,     

Other  
income and 
transfers, net

Current 
account 
balance

Period

Annual
1999
2000

Quarterly
2000:Q4
2001:Q1
Q2
Q3

net

-261.8
-375.7

-401.2
-380.1
-362.2
-310.3

income,      

net

-8.5
-9.6

7.9
-14.6
-14.6
-14.9

-54.0
-59.3

-72.0
-52.4
-53.5
-54.7

-324.4
-444.7

-465.3
-447.1
-430.3
-379.9

Change
Q4-Q3
Q1-Q4
Q2-Q1
Q3-Q2
     Source:  U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.

-14.6
19.6
-1.1
-1.2

-11.8
21.1
17.9
51.8

22.4
-22.5
0.0
-0.2

-4.1
18.2
16.8
50.4

IV-7

U.S. International Financial Transactions
Foreign private net purchases of U.S. securities set a record in October and
remained at a high level in November, in sharp contrast to the unusually low
level of net purchases recorded in September (line 4 of the Summary of U.S.
International Transactions table).  Through November, foreign net purchases
have already exceeded the record level set in 2000.  The pattern of foreign net
purchases suggests some flight-to-quality after the events of September 11th.  
Net purchases of Treasuries (line 4a) in October-November were the highest for
any two-month period since November-December 1998.  Net purchases of
agency securities (line 4b) were also strong, with record purchases in October,
perhaps fueled in part by an unusually high level of new issuances by Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac.  Of note in October were large net purchases from Japan
of both Treasury ($10 billion) and agency securities ($14 billion).  In November,
most of the activity in Treasury securities was through the Caribbean financial
centers.  Foreign net purchases of corporate debt (line 4c) continued strong and
foreign net purchases of equities (line 4d) returned to their pre-September trend
levels after net sales were recorded in September for the first time since
September 1998.

U.S. residents made modest net purchases of foreign securities in October-
November (line 5) following large net sales in the third quarter, especially in
September.  Purchases of foreign equities (line 5b) returned to approximately
their pre-September levels in October, but were largely offset by net sales in
November.  U.S. residents made small net purchases of foreign bonds in
November following seven straight months of sales totaling $35 billion.

Foreign official assets held in the United States (line 1) increased in both
October and November.  Gains were recorded over the period for Japan ($12
billion) and Venezuela ($5 billion) that exceeded a decline in Argentina’s
holdings ($5 billion).  While increases in official Japanese holdings in the
United States over the September-October period were significantly less than the
reported size of the Japanese intervention late in the third quarter, published
Japanese reserve data show an increase in foreign securities holdings on the
order of the intervention, indicating a substantial amount of foreign securities
were acquired from non-U.S. sources.  To the extent that private Japanese
supplied these securities, part of the large inflow attributed to private Japanese 
purchases of Treasuries and agencies could represent replenishment of their
holdings.  (The U.S. reporting system will not capture the official/private
transactions outside the United States and will thus overstate private holdings
and understate official holdings.)  Partial data from FRBNY indicate that in
December foreign official assets decreased by $2 billion.

IV-8

There were large net banking inflows (line 3) in both October and November,
resulting primarily from deposits and other interoffice activity with Caribbean
branches of both U.S.-chartered and foreign-based institutions. 

In the third quarter, U.S. direct investment abroad (line 6) was the highest ever
recorded and exceeded foreign direct investment in the United States (line 7) for
the first time since the first quarter of 2000.  U.S. direct investment abroad was
bolstered by $20 billion in retained earnings and the $13 billion Citigroup
takeover of a Mexican bank.  Foreign direct investment in the United States was
unusually low, reflecting a reduced level of foreign acquisitions of U.S. firms in
the quarter.

The statistical discrepancy in the third quarter was positive $58 billion,
following a negative $47 billion discrepancy in the second quarter.

IV-9

Summary of U.S. International Transactions
(Billions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted except as noted)

 1999

2000

2000
Q4

Q1 

Q2 

2001
Q3

Oct.

Nov.

Official financial flows

55.0

39.3

-5.4

4.8

-21.3

13.2

8.7

1. Change in foreign official assets

in the U.S. (increase, +)
a.  G-10 countries
b.  OPEC countries
c.  All other countries

2. Change in U.S. official reserve

assets (decrease, +)

Private financial flows
Banks

3. Change in net foreign positions
of banking offices in the U.S.1

Securities2

4. Foreign net purchases of U.S.

46.4
49.7
2.0
-5.3

39.6
12.3
10.7
16.6

-4.0
-.8
.6
-3.8

4.6
-5.5
.8
9.2

-20.0
-6.1
-2.1
-11.8

16.8
-5.6
-4.7
27.0

8.6
321.7

-.3
404.0

-1.4
119.2

.2
98.8

-1.3

-3.6
175.7    23.5

8.3
10.4
1.3
-3.4

.4
...

7.4

7.2
3.5
2.4
1.3

.1
...

-12.4

-6.7

13.4

-79.4

29.1

-12.1

31.7

54.2

securities (+)
a. Treasury securities
b. Agency bonds
c. Corporate and municipal bonds
d. Corporate stocks3

333.2
-19.9
71.9
158.8
122.4

435.7
-52.4
111.9
182.1
194.0

5. U.S. net acquisitions (-) of

foreign securities
a. Bonds
b. Stock purchases
c. Stock swaps3

-112.9 -101.1
-4.1
-13.1
-84.0

-5.7
15.6
-122.9

Other flows (quarterly data, s.a.)

6. U.S. direct investment (-) abroad
7. Foreign direct investment in U.S.
8. Foreign holdings of U.S. currency
9. Other (inflow, + )4

-155.4 -152.4
287.7
301.0
1.1
22.4
-60.2
-54.2

117.8
-10.1
38.3
50.8
38.8

-17.8
3.3
3.6
-24.7

-39.1
84.7
6.2
-46.1

149.0
.7
38.8
68.9
40.7

-21.0
-2.0
-16.4
-2.6

-40.9
52.5
2.3
36.3

125.8
-8.5
29.4
70.4
34.5

-44.1
8.8
-18.7
-34.2

-41.1
65.2
2.8
38.0

74.0
-9.3
33.1
37.3
12.9

19.2
25.4
-6.1
.0

-52.1
26.4
8.2
-40.1

U.S. current account balance (s.a.)
Capital account balance (s.a.)5
Statistical discrepancy (s.a.)

-324.4 -444.7 -116.3 -111.8 -107.6
.2

.7
.7

.2
2.4

.2
8.1

-95.0
.2 
-47.0      58.1

-3.5
-48.8

67.2
15.2
25.3
19.6
7.1

-2.8
.3
-3.1
.0

...
...
...
...
...

...
...

50.1
8.0
11.0
18.0
13.1

1.8
-.9
2.7
.0

...
...
...
...
...

...
...

NOTE.  The sum of official and private financial flows, the current account balance, the capital account balance, and the
statistical discrepancy is zero.  Details may not sum to totals because of rounding.

1.  Changes in dollar-denominated positions of all depository institutions and bank holding companies plus certain
transactions between broker-dealers and unaffiliated foreigners (particularly borrowing and lending under repurchase
agreements). Includes changes in custody liabilities other than U.S. Treasury bills.

2.  Includes commissions on securities transactions and excludes adjustments BEA makes to account for incomplete
coverage; therefore does not match exactly the data on U.S. international transactions published by the Department of
Commerce.

3.  Includes (4d) or represents (5c) stocks acquired through mergers.
4.  Transactions by nonbanking concerns and other banking and official transactions not shown elsewhere plus
amounts resulting from adjustments made by the Department of Commerce and revisions in lines 1 through 5 since
publication of the quarterly data in the Survey of Current Business

5. Consists of transactions in nonproduced nonfinancial assets and capital transfers.

n.a. Not available.    ...  Not applicable.  

IV-10

Foreign Exchange Markets

The major currencies index of the exchange value of the dollar has risen
2 percent on balance since the December FOMC meeting.  This gain was due, in
large part, to a 6 percent appreciation versus the yen.  Market participants have
interpreted an absence of objections from Japanese officials while the yen was
falling as an implicit endorsement for a weaker yen.  The moribund state of the
Japanese economy also continued to weigh on the yen, particularly as optimism
in the market waned that the Koizumi administration would undertake many of
the sweeping structural changes called for during the election campaign last
year.  Even the Japanese government, which has perennially been more
optimistic than private forecasters, expects Japan’s economy to stagnate over the
coming fiscal year which begins in April.  The Bank of Japan decision to
increase its target for balances held at the BOJ to around ¥10 trillion-15 trillion
at its policy meeting on December 19 may also have helped to weaken the yen. 

Exchange Value of the Dollar

December
FOMC

Index, December 10, 2001 = 100

103

Daily

Other Important
Trading Partners

Broad

Major Currencies

October

November

December

January

102

101

100

99

98

97

The dollar appreciated ½ percent, on balance, against the euro over the
intermeeting period.  At the turn of the new year, the euro rose against the dollar
after the successful introduction of the notes and coins.  These gains were
retraced, however, as the focus in the market shifted back to the character of the
global recovery, with a firm consensus believing that the U.S. economy will
come out of this slowdown sooner and more forcefully than the euro area.  

IV-11

The U.S. dollar has appreciated 2 percent, on net, against the Canadian dollar
since the December FOMC meeting, eclipsing the previous record high reached
last year.  On January 15, the Bank of Canada lowered its overnight target rate
25 basis points, to 2 percent.

The index of the exchange value of the dollar in terms of the currencies of our
other important trading partners rose 1 percent over the intermeeting period, in
part due to the Argentine peso, which depreciated sharply against the dollar after
Argentine authorities ceased to support one-to-one convertibility between the
peso and dollar.   In early January a dual exchange rate system was created, with
a fixed exchange rate of 1.40 pesos per dollar for some foreign trade and
government-sanctioned transactions, and a floating exchange rate for other
transactions.  On January 11, trading at the floating rate began, and the currency
immediately weakened to a value below that of the fixed rate.  

 .  Nonetheless, the floating peso has

weakened to as much as 2 pesos per dollar.  Other Latin American currencies
appeared to be little affected by these developments.  The Brazilian real
depreciated 2 percent, the Chilean peso weakened slightly, and the Mexican peso
appreciated ½ percent.  The Korean won depreciated 4 percent against the dollar
amid comments from Chinese and Korean officials expressing
 concern over the yen’s weaker level and warning of potential domino effects
from competitive devaluation. 

Financial Indicators in Major Industrial Countries

Three-month rate

Ten-year yield

   Equities

Jan. 23
(Percent)

Percentage
Point
Change

Jan. 23
(Percent)

Percentage
Point
Change

Percent
Change

2.01

.04

3.36

3.91

1.65

4.31

1.73

-.11

.01

.00

-.05

-.04

.00

-.08

5.35

1.44

4.84

4.86

3.51

5.88

4.89

-.17

.08

.01

-.08

.00

.05

-.28

-.01

-4.70

-2.00

-.46

-.58

1.88

-1.81

2.02

-.03

4.54

-.04

n.a.

Country

Canada

Japan

Euro area

United Kingdom

Switzerland

Australia

United States

Memo:
Weighted-average
foreign

NOTE.  Change is from December 10  to January 23 (10 a.m. EDT).
 n.a.  Not available.

 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
IV-12

Long-term interest rates in the foreign industrial countries, as measured by the
yield on ten-year government bonds, were little changed, on average, over the
intermeeting period.  The yield of the Canadian government ten-year bond fell
17 basis points, largely mirroring movements of Treasuries.  Japanese equities
were among the worst performing of the industrial countries over the period,
with the broad-based Topix index setting a new post-bubble low, falling to a
level last seen in 1985.  A wide range of sectors declined over the period, with
retailers hurt the most.  The Japanese banking sector was among the worst
performers throughout 2001, with share prices falling to a new 17-year low over
the period as investors appeared to grow impatient with the slow pace of
financial reform.  Prime Minister Koizumi suggested that further capital
infusions into the banking sector could be forthcoming.  Amid these discussions,
the yield on the benchmark Japanese government bond rose 8 basis points.

Financial Indicators in Latin America, Asia, and Russia

Currency/
 US dollar

Short-term
 Interest rates1

Dollar-denominated
 bond spread2

Equity
 prices

Economy

Jan. 23

Mexico

Brazil

Argentina3

9.15

2.39

1.40

Chile

667.70

China

Korea

Taiwan

Singapore

Hong Kong

Malaysia

Thailand

8.28

1331.50

35.08

1.84

7.80

3.80

44.20

Indonesia

10395.00

Philippines

Russia

51.25

30.57

Percent
Change

Jan.22/23
(Percent)

Percentage
Point
Change

Jan.22/23
(Percent)

Percentage
Point
Change

Percent
Change

-.44

1.81

40.14

.48

-.01

3.81

1.74

.33

.00

.01

.71

1.66

-1.16

1.53

6.74

18.90

 6.75

5.54

n.a.

4.15

2.58

 .88

1.81

2.90

2.13

17.55

 7.25

n.a.

.72

-.15

-4.75

-.89

n.a.

.00

.02

-.06

-.04

.00

-.88

-.23

-2.56

n.a.

2.94

8.34

43.65

2.36

1.50

1.17

...

...

...

1.64

3.66

5.22

4.70

6.03

-.24

-.45

...

.21

.02

-.16

...

...

...

-.04

-.25

.23

-.23

-.99

7.57

-3.12

89.64

-3.21

-17.37

11.04

8.43

3.51

-8.68

3.22

7.52

16.08

17.54

23.88

NOTE.  Change is from December 10 to January 22/23.
1.  One month interbank interest rate, except Chile: 30-day deposit rate; Korea: 1-week call rate.

No reliable short-term interest rates exist for China or Russia.

2.  Spread over similar maturity U.S. Treasury security yield.  Mexico, Brazil, Argentina, Korea,
the Philippines and Russia:  EMBI+ yield.  Chile and China:  Global bond yield. Malaysia:  Eurobond
yield.  Thailand and Indonesia:  Yankee bond yield.  Taiwan, Singapore, and Hong Kong do not have
outstanding sovereign bonds denominated in dollars.

3.  The fixed exchange rate in Argentina’s dual rate system used for some trade and government transactions.

It was set at 1.40 pesos/dollar in early January.  The Argentina sub-component of J.P. Morgan’s EMBI+
index was reweighted on December 31, reducing the spread and making a precise comparison over the
intermeeting period difficult.

n.a.  Not available.    ...  Not applicable.

IV-13

Optimism over an impending global recovery helped share prices in Asia,
particularly in the countries with substantial exports of information technology
goods.  A sharp rebound in the price of semiconductor memory chips helped lift
shares on the Malaysian, Taiwan and Korean stock markets 3 to 11 percent,
continuing a rally that began in late September.  Share prices performed even
better in Indonesia and the Philippines, rising more than 15 percent over the
period.

Owing primarily to uncertainty over changing banking and exchange rate
regulations and a lack of liquidity with which to conduct transactions, the stock
market in Argentina was closed for much of the intermeeting period.  It reopened
last week to soaring gains, as Argentine residents sought protection from a
depreciating peso, particularly in light of the government’s announcement that
dollar deposits will be converted to pesos at a rate that has yet to be determined.  
Following the default on some of its debt, the prices of Argentina’s bonds,
which were at distressed levels before the December FOMC meeting, have fallen
even further.  Thus far, there has been little sign of spillover to other markets
from the default and devaluation in Argentina.  Share prices have declined about
3 percent in Brazil and Chile since the December FOMC meeting and have risen
more than 7 percent in Mexico.  The yield spread over Treasuries of Brazilian
and Mexican debt has narrowed a bit, while Chilean debt widened a touch.

The price of gold rose 3 percent, on balance, over the intermeeting period.  A
short squeeze in the silver market had driven 1-month silver lease rates above 20
percent for a couple of weeks, but more supply came on the lease market,
sending silver lease rates back below 5 percent.

 .  The Desk did not intervene during the period for the accounts of

the System or the Treasury.

 
 
 
 
IV-14

Developments in Foreign Industrial Countries

The latest GDP data confirm that activity in foreign industrial countries was
weak in the third quarter and indicators point to a slightly weaker fourth quarter. 
In Japan, third-quarter real GDP declined sharply, and more recent data suggest
the economy continued to deteriorate in the last three months of the year.  Euro-
area data suggest that fourth-quarter activity may have contracted, while the
United Kingdom’s rate of expansion likely slowed.  Canadian activity is
recovering from a steep fall in September, but remains below third-quarter
levels, suggesting a contraction on average in the last three months of 2001.

Inflation continued to decline, primarily reflecting lower oil prices.  The twelve-
month rate of consumer price inflation fell below the Bank of Canada’s target
range in the fourth quarter, while retail price inflation in the United Kingdom
remained below the Bank of England’s 2½ percent target.  Euro-area inflation
retreated to 2.1 percent, just above the European Central Bank’s (ECB) target
ceiling.  Deflation continued in Japan.

Data released late in the previous intermeeting period revealed that Japanese
real GDP declined 2.2 percent (s.a.a.r.) in the third quarter of last year, following
a revised 4.8 percent drop in the second quarter.  Personal consumption dropped
markedly, as households curtailed spending amid rising unemployment and
falling real income.  A sharp rundown in inventories subtracted ½ percentage
point from growth.  Private investment showed surprising strength, however,
with business fixed investment rising about 4 percent.  Residential investment
also rose about 4 percent, albeit from depressed levels.  Public investment
rebounded following a steep drop in the second quarter, adding about ¾
percentage point to growth.  Both exports and imports continued to slide, with
net exports making a slight positive contribution to growth. 

Indicators suggest that the economy continued to deteriorate in recent months. 
The all-industry index fell 1 percent in October and November on average from
the third quarter, with industrial production declining 2.8 percent over the same
period.  On average, core machinery orders in October and November were
roughly 10 percent below their third-quarter average level.  Shipments of
machinery declined 2.1 percent in November.  Residential and nonresidential
building starts also posted declines in October and November on average
compared with the third-quarter.  Personal consumption presents a mixed
picture, with household expenditures up about 3½ percent on average in October
and November from the third-quarter, while new passenger car registrations
ticked up in October but were still down slightly from their average third-quarter
pace.

IV-15

Japanese Real GDP
(Percent change from previous period, except as noted, s.a.a.r.)

Component

20001

Q3

Q4

Q1

2000

2001

Q2

Q3

GDP

2.3

-2.9

1.1

4.1

-4.8

-2.2

Total domestic demand

Consumption

Private investment

Public investment

Government consumption

Inventories2

Exports

Imports

Net exports2

1. Q4/Q4.

2.2

.3

11.0

-3.0

-5.4

5.3

2.9

2.6

4.9

7.7

12.8

-11.3

-3.6

-4.3

3.8

-2.4

-6.6

4.4

-11.3

-11.8

-17.3

40.5

-35.4

13.5

4.1

.1

9.7

10.7

.1

.7

-.2

4.1

4.3

.1

.4

.2

-1.0

19.0

-1.7

4.5

.1

-6.9

-1.7

-.6

6.4

-.0

-18.4

-10.0

-1.2

.4

-.5

-12.4

-17.1

.2

     2. Percentage point contribution to GDP growth, s.a.a.r.

Conditions in the labor market also worsened.  The unemployment rate rose to a
record 5.5 percent in November, and the job-offers-to-applicants ratio fell to
0.53, its lowest level since March 2000.  Prices have continued to decline.  Core
consumer goods prices in the Tokyo area (which exclude fresh food but include
energy) were down 1 percent in December from a year earlier.  Deflation in
wholesale prices for domestic goods has intensified, in part owing to lower
energy prices.  The merchandise trade surplus (customs-clearance basis)
widened  in November, as exports ticked up and weakening domestic demand
continued to push imports lower. 

The Bank of Japan’s Tankan index of business conditions worsened further in
December, with the diffusion index for all enterprises falling to -40 from -36 in
September.  Survey respondents project a further decline in the index for March. 
The deterioration in December was broad based, with similar declines recorded
in the manufacturing and non-manufacturing sectors.  Other indicators from the
Tankan survey suggest that deflationary conditions are expected to persist. 
Expectations for sales growth in FY2001, which ends in March 2002, were
revised down and profits are now expected to slump 18.7 percent in FY2001,

IV-16

worse than the 9.2 percent fall expected in September.  Capital investment is
expected to fall about 6 percent in FY2001, roughly unchanged from projections
in September.

Japanese Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period, except as noted, s.a.)

Indicator

Industrial production1

All-industry index

Housing starts

Machinery orders2

Machinery shipments

New car registrations 

Unemployment rate3

Job offers ratio4

Business sentiment5

CPI (Core, Tokyo area)6

Wholesale prices6

2001

Q2

Q3

Q4

Sept.

Oct.

Nov.

Dec.

-4.1

-2.0

-2.9

1.1

-7.2

1.7

4.9

.61

-27

-1.3

-.7

-4.3

-1.9

5.4

-5.7

-5.3

-.3

5.1

.59

-36

-1.2

-1.0

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

-40

-1.0

-1.3

-2.9

-.9

-3.4

-.2

-.5

-3.0

-1.7

.4

8.0

-13.2

-10.1

14.9

-5.7

-13.7

5.3

.57

...

-1.2

-1.1

.0

1.2

5.4

.55

...

-1.0

-1.1

-2.1

n.a.

5.5

.53

...

-1.0

-1.4

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

...

-1.0

-1.4

1. Mining and manufacturing.

      2. Private sector, excluding ships and electric power.

3. Percent.
4. Level of indicator.
5. Tankan survey, diffusion index.
6. Percent change from year earlier, n.s.a.
n.a.  Not available.  ...  Not applicable.

On December 19, the Bank of Japan (BOJ) voted to ease monetary policy,
raising its target for the outstanding balance of financial institutions’ accounts
held at the BOJ to ¥10 trillion-15 trillion from "above ¥6 trillion." Since then,
the balance has been around ¥14 trillion-15 trillion.  As part of the effort to ease
policy, the BOJ voted to increase the monthly amount of outright purchases of
long-term JGBs from ¥600 billion to ¥800 billion.  In addition, the BOJ decided
to increase the amount of commercial paper it will accept under repurchase
agreements.  The BOJ also announced measures to broaden the range of
instruments that can be used in open-market operations to include asset-backed
commercial paper and real-estate backed securities.  The BOJ cited the

IV-17

"deterioration in the financial environment", including a tightening in credit
conditions, as the explanation for its decision.  On January 16, the BOJ voted to
expand the range of government bonds eligible for outright purchase to include
bonds issued within the past year, excluding the two most recent issues. 
Previously, the BOJ only bought bonds that had not been issued within the past
twelve months.  

The Cabinet approved the draft budget outline for FY2002 on December 24. 
The budget was submitted to the Diet in late January, with final approval
expected in March.  The budget implies a slightly contractionary stance, even
when FY2001's second supplementary budget (the spending from which will not
occur until FY2002) is included.  Expenditures would be reduced 1.7 percent
(about ¼ percent of GDP) relative to FY2001's initial budget.  Public works
spending is slated to decline about 10 percent, while outlays to public
corporations would be cut roughly 20 percent, reflecting the government’s
efforts to streamline such corporations.  Tax revenues are projected to decline
about 5½ percent from recently revised FY2001 estimates, although an increase
in non-tax revenues is assumed.  The budget will require new bond issues
totaling ¥30 trillion, consistent with Prime Minister Koizumi’s pledge to cap
new bond issuance at that amount.

In the euro area, economic activity likely contracted in the fourth quarter of last
year following third-quarter GDP growth of only ½ percent.  Industrial
production declined 1.4 percent in October and a further .8 percent in
November; for the two months on average, production was 1.8 percent below the
average in the third quarter.  The purchasing managers index (PMI) for euro-area
manufacturing edged up in December, but remained below its third-quarter
average, and signaled contraction in the manufacturing sector for the ninth
consecutive month.  Service sector PMIs recovered more vigorously in
December to slightly below September levels, but for the fourth quarter on
average are also consistent with contracting activity.  

More forward-looking indicators provide tentative signs of improvement.  The
volume of German industry orders picked up in November for the first time
since August.  Foreign orders recovered more than 2 percent but domestic orders
weakened a bit further.  Although euro-area economic sentiment remains at
relatively depressed levels, it edged up in December, the first monthly
improvement in a year.  In the industrial survey, production expectations edged
up slightly although levels of inventory stocks appear to remain high.  In the
consumer survey, the outlook for the general economic situation also improved
somewhat.

IV-18

Labor market data for the euro area as a whole continue to show only slight
deterioration, as the harmonized unemployment rate edged up to 8.5 percent in
September and remained at that rate in October and November.  National
statistics show more pronounced increases in the French and German
unemployment rates, while the Italian unemployment rate moved a bit lower.

Euro-Area Economic Indicators1
(Percent change from previous period except as noted, s.a.)

2001

Indicator

Industrial production2

Retail sales volume

Unemployment rate3

Consumer confidence4

Industrial confidence5

Mfg. orders, Germany

CPI6

Producer prices6

M36

Q2

Q3

Q4

Sept.

Oct.

Nov.

Dec.

-1.0

.2

8.5

-1.7

-5.3

-1.5

3.1

3.9

5.4

-.6

.3

8.4

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

-.6

.0

8.5

-1.4

-1.1

8.5

-.8

n.a.

8.5

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

-7.7

-10.7

-9.0

-10.0

-12.0

-10.0

-10.0

-17.0

-11.0

-16.0

-18.0

-17.0

-2.7

2.7

1.7

6.8

n.a.

2.2

n.a.

n.a.

-4.1

2.5

.9

6.8

-.4

2.4

-.5

7.4

.7

2.1

-1.1

8.0

n.a.

2.1

n.a.

n.a.

1. Euro-area indicators include Greece only from January 2001.
2. Excludes construction.
3. Euro-area standardized to ILO definition.  Includes Eurostat estimates in some cases.
4. Diffusion index based on European Commission surveys in individual countries;
Averages of responses to questions on financial situation, general economic situation, and
purchasing attitudes.

5. Diffusion index based on European Commission surveys in individual countries;

Averages of responses to questions on production expectations, orders, and stocks.

6. Eurostat harmonized definition, 12-month percent change.     
n.a.  Not available.

The twelve-month rate of euro-area consumer price inflation moved down to 2.1
percent in November and remained at that rate in December, just above the
ECB’s 2 percent target ceiling.  Core consumer price inflation (which excludes
food, energy, alcohol and tobacco) edged up to 2.3 percent in December on a
twelve-month basis.  Producer prices continued to move lower, declining  in
October and November from their year-earlier levels.

IV-19

The introduction of euro notes and coins is proceeding smoothly.  The ECB said
that by mid-January almost 95 percent of all cash transactions were conducted in
euros.  The ECB also stated that by January 17 the value of euro banknotes in
circulation rose to 58 percent of the total value of all banknotes in circulation,
including the national banknotes issued but not yet redeemed by national central
banks.  For most euro-area countries, the change-over period, during which old
national currencies can continue to be used, extends through the end of February.

Usage of cash machines in the euro area was two to four times the normal
volume in the first few days of the new year, and banks experienced long lines of
customers.  At the same time many people instead spent their remaining old
currency notes at retail establishments, which were supposed to give change in
euros, and for that reason the number of cash transactions was higher than
normal in many countries while credit card and debit payments declined,
contrary to forecasts.  While the new euro notes are being introduced mainly by
banks and their ATMs, retailers have borne the burden of introducing the bulk of
the euro coins and retiring the national currency coins.  Large retailers generally
had prepared well in advance and reported few difficulties.  Smaller retailers, on
the other hand, were generally less well prepared and faced some initial
difficulties, including occasional shortages of euros for change.

Recent data for the fourth quarter in the United Kingdom are mixed.  British
consumers continued to spend, as retail sales rose 1.3 percent for the quarter,
though December sales were disappointing.  Although service sector growth has
been robust in recent quarters, the latest surveys suggest growth in this sector
slowed in the fourth quarter.  In contrast, the manufacturing sector continues to
be very weak with industrial production declining substantially in recent months.

Indicators for the current quarter remain mixed.  Both December consumer
confidence and January manufacturing business confidence recovered from
recent lows to levels closer to their September values.  This recovery indicates
manufacturing firms remain relatively pessimistic about the future, but suggests
that the manufacturing sector may have bottomed out after declining for the past
year.

Notwithstanding the recent slowing in activity, labor market conditions remain
tight.  The official claims-based unemployment rate remained at 3.2 percent in
December, while the labor force survey measure of the unemployment rate
remained at 5.1 percent for the three months centered in October.  Both
unemployment rates are near record lows.

The twelve-month rate of retail price inflation (excluding mortgage interest
payments) rose slightly to 1.9 percent in December but still remains well below

IV-20

the Bank of England’s official target of 2.5 percent.  Growth in average earnings
dropped to 3.9 percent in November, below the 4.5 percent rate (from a year
earlier) that the Bank of England believes to be compatible with its inflation
target.

U.K. Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period except as noted, s.a.)

Indicator

Q2

Q3

Q4

Oct.

Nov.

Dec.

Jan.

2001

2002

Industrial production

Retail sales

Unemployment rate1

      Claims-based

      Labor force survey2

Business confidence3

Retail prices4

Producer input prices5
Average earnings5

-1.1

1.7

3.2

5.0

-.7

2.3

4.4

4.7

-.8

1.5

3.1

5.1

-6.0

2.4

-3.4

4.4

n.a.

1.3

3.2

n.a.

-1.5

.2

3.2

5.1

-.3

1.1

3.2

n.a.

n.a.

-.4

3.2

n.a.

-24.0

-23.0

-21.0

-28.0

2.0

-9.1

n.a.

2.3

-9.0

4.4

1.8

-10.8

3.9

1.9

-7.5

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

-13

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

1. Percent.
2. Three-month average centered on month shown.
3. Percentage of firms expecting output to increase in the next four months less percentage

expecting output to decrease.

4. Excluding mortgage interest payments.  Percent change from year earlier.
5. Percent change from year earlier.
n.a.  Not available.

In Canada, indicators for the fourth quarter have been mixed. GDP declined 0.3
percent in October from its average third-quarter level, but rebounded somewhat
from September’s depressed figure.  Industrial production followed a similar
pattern in October, partially recovering from September’s steep fall but
remaining 1.4 percent below the third-quarter average. In November
merchandise exports increased 1.3 percent from October, ending a seven-month
string of declines.  Imports fell slightly, reaching a level last seen in September
1999.  Manufacturing shipments increased 1.7 percent in November, ending a
five-month period of negative or flat manufacturing sector indicators. 
Encouraged by local “zero-percent financing” incentives, motor vehicle sales
surged 8.5 percent in November, with preliminary industry data indicating
further increases in December.  Retail sales excluding motor vehicles increased
1.1 percent in October, more than reversing September’s fall.  In November,
however, the large increase in auto sales masked a 0.6 percent decline in non-

IV-21

auto sales.  Residential construction, driven by low vacancy rates and low
financing costs, remained strong in the fourth quarter with December housing
starts reaching the highest level since 1991.  

Canadian Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period except as noted, s.a.)

Indicator

GDP at basic prices

Industrial production

New mfg. orders

Retail sales

Employment

Unemployment rate1

Consumer prices2

Consumer attitudes3

Business confidence3

2001

Q2

Q3

Q4

Sep.

Oct.

Nov.

Dec.

.2

-.1

1.2

2.1

.3

7.0

3.6

-.4

-2.3

-3.4

-.8

-.1

7.1

2.7

113.1

108.0

131.6

93.0

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

.1

7.6

1.1

n.a.

n.a.

-.8

-2.3

-1.4

-1.5

.1

7.2

2.6

...

...

.3

.2

-4.0

1.8

.0

7.3

1.9

...

...

n.a.

n.a.

2.7

1.4

.1

7.5

.7

...

...

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

-.1

8.0

.7

...

...

1. Percent.
2. Percent change from year earlier, n.s.a.
3. Level of index, 1991 = 100.
n.a.  Not available.  ...  Not applicable.

Labor market conditions softened dramatically in December as the
unemployment rate jumped to 8 percent, reflecting both declining employment
and a large increase in the labor force.  The fall in employment was the largest
monthly decline since 1998, and the first sign of reversal in what previously had
been a remarkably resilient labor market.

The twelve-month rate of consumer price inflation declined to 0.7 percent in
November, and remained at that level in December.  This places the rate of
inflation slightly below the Bank of Canada’s 1 to 3 percent target range.  The
drop primarily reflects lower energy prices, though other prices decelerated a bit
as well.

On January 15, the Bank lowered its policy rate 25 basis points to 2 percent,
bringing the cumulative reduction since the beginning of last year to 375 basis
points.  The accompanying statement cited weak business confidence both in

IV-22

Canada and abroad as the motivation for the latest cut, while also stating that the
move was consistent with returning the rate of inflation to its target level.

Country
and balance

Japan
Trade
Current account

Euro area
Trade1
Current account1

Germany
Trade
Current account

France
Trade
Current account

Italy
Trade
Current account1

United Kingdom
Trade
Current Account

Canada
Trade
Current Account

External Balances
(Billions of U.S. dollars, s.a.a.r.)

2001

Q2

Q3

Q4

Sep.

Oct.

Nov.

Dec.

50.3
67.0

55.6
97.8

n.a.
n.a.

72.1
119.8

37.3
118.0

55.9
132.9

26.4
-39.9

66.1
-8.0

-.5
1.5

6.5
-5.4

61.5
-3.7

87.4
.1

.9
5.6

-1.5
9.3

n.a.
n.a.

48.7
-14.2

104.0
1.1

n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.

73.8
-4.1

89.4
50.7

.3
3.2

2.8
n.a.

10.9
-2.7

n.a.
25.0

-52.8
-26.0

-46.0
-11.7

n.a.
n.a.

-39.6
...

-40.3
...

59.0
n.a.

49.6
1.4

3.5
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
...

44.2
23.4

32.2
14.3

n.a.
n.a.

33.1
...

31.0
...

34.4
...

n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
...

n.a.
...

1. Not seasonally adjusted.
n.a.  Not available.  ...  Not applicable.

IV-23

Industrial Production in Selected Industrial Countries

Japan

1994=100

1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001

France

1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001

Italy

1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001

140

130

120

110

100

90

140

130

120

110

100

90

140

130

120

110

100

90

Germany

1994=100

1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001

United Kingdom

1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001

Canada

1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001

140

130

120

110

100

90

140

130

120

110

100

90

140

130

120

110

100

90

IV-24

Consumer Price Inflation in Selected Industrial Countries
(12-month change)

Japan

Germany

Percent

1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001

France

Percent

1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001

Italy

Percent

1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

Percent

1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001

United Kingdom

Percent

1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001

Canada

Percent

1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

IV-25

Economic Situation in Other Countries

Economic conditions in Latin America remain unfavorable.  Continued political
turmoil in Argentina has taken a further toll on the country’s already collapsing
economy, and indicators point to stagnant growth in Brazil and Mexico.  In the
Asian developing countries, conditions are mixed.  Growth in China remains
robust, while Korea and the ASEAN countries are beginning to show signs of
recovery from last year’s economic downturn.  In Hong Kong and Taiwan,
however, indicators suggest continued weakness.

The situation in Argentina worsened considerably over the intermeeting period. 
The implementation of capital controls, including limits on bank account
withdrawals, in early December led to widespread protests and violence that
brought down the de la Rua government on December 21.  Three presidents
followed in quick succession before the current president, Eduardo Duhalde, was
elected by a national assembly to serve out the final two years of de la Rua’s
term.  One of the first acts of the new government was to suspend Argentina’s
currency board and establish a temporary dual exchange rate system comprised
of a fixed exchange rate of 1.4 pesos per dollar primarily for trade and
government transactions and a floating rate for other transactions.   The
government has indicated its intention to remove the exchange rate peg within
six months and implement a single floating exchange rate system.  

Following the resignation of de la Rua, the government announced the
suspension of debt payments to its private creditors.  Payments to the
international financial institutions have so far been met, however.  To relieve
some of the financing burden, the IMF board voted in mid-January to approve
Argentina’s request for a year deferment of a $900 million repayment due under
the Supplemental Reserve Facility.  The IMF has sent several advisory teams to
Argentina to help the new government, but formal negotiations regarding a new
IMF program have not yet begun.

Amid changes in leadership and domestic unrest, the government has yet to
submit a 2002 budget for discussion.  The Duhalde government has lessened
only slightly the significant restrictions placed on bank accounts.  Tension over
the importance of placating angry depositors versus protecting the financial
sector led to the resignation of the central bank president.  Public protests
targeted at banks continue, and the political situation in the country remains
highly volatile.

IV-26

In tandem with the political upheaval has come severe economic disruption. 
International transactions, including trade, have all but ceased over the past
month.  Domestic output has also been impeded as payment systems have
broken down.  There is some evidence that prices are already moving up in the
aftermath of the exchange rate depreciation.

Incoming data, which generally reflect conditions prior to the resignation of
de la Rua, are uniformly bad–imports fell 40 percent from their year-earlier level
in November, tax revenues were abysmal for December, and prices dropped
1.5 percent over the twelve months ended December.  Argentine foreign-
currency-denominated sovereign debt is trading at about a quarter of its face
value.  The local stock market was closed from January 4 through January 16. 
Since reopening, the market is up about 25 percent, on balance, as Argentine
residents seek to switch from cash to other assets.  Transactions on the foreign
exchange market, which opened on January 11, have so far been very limited but
have pushed the floating exchange rate toward 2 pesos per dollar, despite
intervention by the central bank.  

Argentine Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period, s.a., except as noted)

Indicator

2000

2001

2001

Q3

Q4

Oct. Nov.  Dec.

Real GDP1 

Industrial production 

Unemployment rate2

Consumer prices3 

Trade balance4

Current account5

-1.9

-1.8

15.1

-.7

2.6

-8.9

n.a.

n.a.

17.4

-1.5

n.a.

n.a.

-14.1

-3.1

...

-1.1

9.5

-3.3

n.a.

n.a.

18.3

-1.6

n.a.

n.a.

...

-2.9

18.3

-1.7

10.7

...

...

-.9

...

-1.6

12.5

...

...

n.a.

...

-1.5

n.a.

...

1. Annual rate.  Annual figures are Q4/Q4.
2. Percent, n.s.a.  Data are released for May and October only.  Figures for Q4 reflect data

for October.

3. Percent change from year-earlier period, except annual figures, which are Dec./Dec.
4. Billions of U.S. dollars, annual rate.
5. Billions of U.S. dollars, n.s.a., annual rate.
n.a.  Not available.    ...  Not applicable.

In Mexico, weak external demand continued to sap the economy, although
production data provided some tentative signs of an improvement.  Overall
economic activity (a monthly proxy for real GDP) declined in October and
exports fell over 3½ percent in November.  However, industrial production rose
more than 1 percent in November.  The trade deficit widened considerably in

IV-27

November as imports fell much less than exports.  Inflation continued on its
downward trend; the twelve-month inflation rate for December was around
4½ percent–half the rate in 2000 and well below the government’s 2001
year-end target of 6½ percent.

In early January, the Mexican congress passed the fiscal budget for 2002 and
approved new tax measures.  The fiscal deficit for this year is targeted at
0.65 percent of GDP.  This is the same as last year’s deficit and indicates a
continued commitment to fiscal discipline.  The new tax package is estimated by
the government to bolster tax revenues by over 1 percent of GDP, but it falls
well short of the tax reform bill proposed by the government last April and fails
to address the fundamental issue of how to improve tax collection.  In early
January, the Mexican government issued $1.5 billion in 10-year global bonds at
a spread of just 270 basis points above comparable U.S. treasuries.

Mexican Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period, s.a., except as noted)

Indicator

2000

2001

2001

Q3

Q4

Oct. Nov. Dec.

Real GDP1

Overall economic activity

Industrial production 

Unemployment rate2

Consumer prices3 

Trade balance4

Imports4

Exports4

Current account5

5.2

6.7

6.4

2.2

9.0

-8.0

174.5

166.5

-18.1

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

2.4

4.4

n.a.

-.9

-.3

-.6

2.4

6.0

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

2.8

5.2

...

-.7

-1.0

3.0

5.9

...

n.a.

1.2

2.6

5.4

-9.5

n.a.

-10.7

-14.3

n.a. 165.6

n.a. 164.0

162.0

n.a. 156.1

n.a. 153.3

147.6

n.a.

-12.6

n.a.

...

...

...

n.a.

n.a.

2.8

4.4

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

1. Annual rate.  Annual figures are Q4/Q4.
2. Percent; counts as unemployed those working one hour a week or less.
3. Percent change from year-earlier period, except annual figures, which are Dec./Dec.
4. Billions of U.S. dollars, annual rate.
5. Billions of U.S. dollars, n.s.a., annual rate.
n.a.  Not available.    ...  Not applicable.

In Brazil, incoming data point to continued weakness in the fourth quarter. 
Industrial output rose 1.4 percent in November, reflecting the end of the
Petrobras strike, but was down significantly from year-earlier levels.  The
unemployment rate edged up to 7 percent in November.  Inflation nevertheless
ended the year at 7.7 percent, up from 6 percent in 2000, and above the 6 percent

IV-28

upper limit of the government’s target range for inflation.  The rise reflected, in
part, the strong depreciation of the currency through the third quarter of 2001. 
The depreciation, as well as weak activity, contributed to an improvement in the
trade balance, which shifted from a small deficit in 2000 to a surplus of about
$2½ billion in 2001. 

So far, Brazil has been affected relatively little by the turmoil in Argentina, with
asset prices boosted by good news on the fiscal front and the improving trade
balance.  The primary (non-interest) fiscal balance for the combined public
sector in 2001 through November was over 4 percent of GDP.  Although a
public sector deficit is anticipated for December, for the year as a whole, the
primary fiscal surplus is expected to be over the country's IMF program target of
3.4 percent of GDP.  The central bank has nevertheless kept its benchmark
overnight interest rate at 19 percent to curb inflationary pressures.  In early
January, the Brazilian government issued $1.25 billion in 10-year bonds in
global markets at a spread of 750 basis points above U.S. Treasuries. 

Brazilian Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period, s.a., except as noted)

Indicator

2000

2001

2001

Q3

Q4

Oct.

Nov. 

Dec.

Real GDP1

Industrial production

Unemployment rate2

Consumer prices3

Trade balance4

Current account5

4.3

6.6

7.1

6.0

-.7

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

7.7

2.6

.5

-1.8

6.1

6.6

6.3

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

7.5

9.2

...

-1.8

6.8

7.2

8.0

...

1.4

7.0

7.6

10.0

-24.6

n.a.

-16.3

n.a.

-29.2

-19.1

...

n.a.

n.a.

7.7

9.7

n.a.

1. Annual rate.  Annual figures are Q4/Q4.
2. Percent.  “Open” unemployment rate.
3. Percent change from year-earlier period, except annual figures, which are Dec./Dec.  Price

index is IPC-A.

4. Billions of U.S. dollars, annual rate.
5. Billions of U.S. dollars, n.s.a., annual rate.
n.a.  Not available.    ...  Not applicable.

Indications are that Venezuelan GDP for 2001 likely rose at a rate well below
the almost 6 percent registered in 2000.  Inflation remained relatively subdued,
coming in at 12.3 percent for the year ended December.  Government revenues
have been declining in step with oil prices, and projections are for a sizable
fiscal imbalance in 2002.  In response, President Chavez proposed tax increases
in January, including the imposition of a bank transaction tax.  With the

IV-29

weakening economy and heightened political uncertainty, capital continues to
leave the country and the exchange rate is coming under increasing pressure. 
For 2001, reserves (including the macroeconomic stabilization fund) fell
$2 billion.  In the first few weeks of January, the decline was almost $1 billion. 
The rate of crawl of the peg has been adjusted to 10 percent in 2002 compared
with 7 percent last year.

Venezuelan Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period, s.a., except as noted)

Indicator

2000

2001

2001

Q3

Q4

Oct.

Nov.

Dec.

Real GDP1 

Unemployment rate2

Consumer prices3

Non-oil trade balance4

Trade balance4

Current account5

5.7

13.4

13.4

-10.8

18.0

13.4

n.a.

n.a.

12.3

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

1.3

13.4

12.7

n.a.

n.a.

3.2

n.a.

n.a.

...

n.a.

...

n.a.

...

n.a.

12.4

12.3

12.7

12.3

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

...

n.a.

n.a.

...

n.a.

n.a.

...

1. Annual rate.  Annual figures are Q4/Q4.
2. Percent, n.s.a. 
3. Percent change from year-earlier period, except annual figures, which are Dec./Dec.
4. Billions of U.S. dollars, annual rate.
5. Billions of U.S. dollars, n.s.a., annual rate.
n.a.  Not available.    ...  Not applicable.

In Korea, recent indicators suggest that activity has continued to move up. 
Industrial production increased strongly in November, more than reversing the
decline of the previous month.  Department store sales and producers’ shipments
also rose in November, as the inventory to shipments ratio declined further. 
Production has held up this year despite a substantial fall off of exports.  This
divergence between production and exports–unusual in Korea’s history–has
reflected the strength of domestic demand.  Domestic demand has been
surprisingly robust this past year, with demand shifting in recent months from
consumption to construction investment and government spending.  Both
business and consumer sentiment moved up smartly in November, the latter
probably boosted by a further decline in the unemployment rate.

IV-30

Korean Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period, s.a., except as noted)

Indicator

2000

2001

2001

Q3

Q4

Oct.

Nov.

Dec.

Real GDP1

Industrial production

Unemployment rate2

Consumer prices3

Trade balance4

Current account5

5.2

17.0

4.1

3.1

16.9

11.4

n.a.

n.a.

3.7

3.2

n.a.

n.a.

5.1

1.6

3.5

4.3

11.9

3.8

n.a.

n.a.

3.4

3.4

n.a.

n.a.

...

-1.5

3.5

3.5

6.6

3.0

...

1.9

3.5

3.4

12.0

8.3

...

n.a.

3.3

3.2

n.a.

n.a.

1. Annual rate.  Annual figures are Q4/Q4.
2. Percent.
3. Percent change from year earlier, except annual changes, which are Dec./Dec.
4. Billions of U.S. dollars, annual rate.
5. Billions of U.S. dollars, n.s.a., annual rate.
n.a.  Not available.    ...  Not applicable.

Since the last Greenbook, data from the ASEAN region indicate that last year’s
steep economic downturn may have ended in the fourth quarter.  Recent
industrial production data have been positive in much of the region, and for
Malaysia and Singapore–the countries hit hardest by last year’s economic
swoon–the surge in production has been particularly strong.  Recent trade data
have been mixed, with trade surpluses in Indonesia and Malaysia, the region’s
net oil exporters, shrinking somewhat in November, and surpluses widening in
the rest of the region.  Inflation has slowed in every country in the region except
for Malaysia, where it is still at a very low level.

IV-31

ASEAN Economic Indicators:  Growth
(Percent change from previous period, s.a., except as noted)

Indicator and country

1999

2000

2001

Q2

Q3

Sept.

Oct.

Nov.

Real GDP1
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Singapore
Thailand

Industrial production2 
Indonesia3
Malaysia
Philippines
Singapore
Thailand

6.4
11.5
5.1
8.0
6.4

-.9
9.1
3.6
13.9
12.5

5.7
6.4
3.9
11.0
3.1

11.6
19.1
14.9
15.3
3.2

6.2
-8.5
6.4
-9.7
.8

3.1
-5.3
-1.1
-6.3
-.3

-1.0
1.0
2.7
-11.1
.9

-1.9
1.2
5.2
-8.5
.3

...
...
...
...
...

-.4
-1.3
-6.6
-4.8
-.1

...
...
...
...
...

2.4
.2
1.1
7.7
1.5

.5
3.1
n.a.
7.7
1.0

1. Annual rate.  Annual figures are Q4/Q4.
2. Annual figures are annual averages.
3. Staff estimate.
n.a.  Not available.    ...  Not applicable.

ASEAN Economic Indicators:  Trade Balance
(Billions of U.S. dollars, s.a.a.r.)

Country

2000

2001

Q3

Q4

Indonesia

Malaysia

Philippines

Singapore

Thailand

n.a.  Not available.

28.6

16.0

6.7

3.3

5.5

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

5.8

n.a.

27.8

15.0

-.1

4.7

3.7

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

6.5

n.a.

2001

Oct.

29.8

13.0

6.0

2.0

1.6

Nov.

Dec.

23.2

11.4

6.2

8.4

1.9

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

9.0

n.a.

IV-32

ASEAN Economic Indicators:  CPI Inflation
(Percent change from year earlier, except as noted)

Country

20001

20011

2001

Q3

Q4

Oct.

Nov.

Dec.

Indonesia

Malaysia

Philippines

Singapore

Thailand

9.3

1.3

6.7

2.1

1.3

12.5

12.8

12.6

12.5

12.9

12.5

1.2

3.9

n.a.

.8

1.4

6.4

.8

1.6

1.2

4.6

n.a.

1.0

.9

5.4

.2

1.4

1.5

4.4

-.2

1.0

1.2

3.9

n.a.

.8

1. December/December.
n.a.  Not available.

In China, recent indicators point to continued growth.  China's GDP rose
7.5 percent in 2001 supported, in part, by fixed-asset investment by state-owned
enterprises and inflows of foreign direct investment (FDI).  Indicators of future
inflows of FDI remain strong.  Industrial production edged up in December, but
consumer prices declined modestly in November and December, largely as a
result of a government freeze on school fees and a price liberalization, which
lowered the cost of some services.  Exports and imports fell in December, but
both were up significantly relative to a year earlier.

Chinese Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period, s.a., except as noted)

Indicator

2000

2001

2001

Q3

Q4

Oct.

Nov.

Dec.

Real GDP1

Industrial production2

Consumer prices2

Trade balance3

8.0

11.4

1.5

24.1

7.5

8.9

-.3

23.1

7.1

8.5

.8

8.3

7.1

8.5

-.1

...

8.8

.2

...

7.9

-.3

...

8.7

-.3

36.3

30.6

42.4

35.9

1. Annual rate.  Quarterly data estimated by staff from reported four-quarter growth rates. 

Annual figures are Q4/Q4.

2. Percent change from year earlier.  Annual figures are year over year.
3. Billions of U.S. dollars, annual rate.  Imports are c.i.f.
...  Not applicable.

IV-33

China announced that, in light of the expected pickup in investment following
entry into the WTO, it plans to abolish the favorable tax treatment granted to
foreign firms for the past two decades.  Foreign firms currently pay 15 percent in
income tax, as compared with 33 percent for domestic firms.  Various proposals
are under consideration, but the most likely would be to raise the corporate tax
rate for foreign firms while lowering the rate for domestic corporations.

Data received since the last FOMC meeting suggest that economic conditions in
Hong Kong have deteriorated.  The unemployment rate increased to 6.1 percent
in the fourth quarter, the highest level since 1999.  The index of retail sales
volume was up nearly 2 percent in November, but remains well below the level
at the end of the summer.  The trade deficit widened in November as exports and
imports both declined modestly, and consumer prices fell 3.5 percent over the
twelve months ended December.

Hong Kong Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period, s.a., except as noted)

Indicator

2000

2001

2001

Q3

Q4

Oct.

Nov.

Dec.

Real GDP1

Unemployment rate2

Consumer prices3

Trade balance4

6.6

5.1

-2.1

-11.0

n.a.

4.9

-3.5

1.6

5.3

-1.0

n.a.

-14.0

n.a.

6.1

-2.1

n.a.

...

5.5

-1.2

-9.9

...

5.8

-1.4

-11.8

...

6.1

-3.5

n.a.

1. Annual rate.  Annual figures are Q4/Q4.
2. Percent.  Monthly numbers are averages of the current and previous two months.
3. Percent change from year-earlier period, except annual figures, which are Dec./Dec.
4. Billions of U.S. dollars, annual rate.  Imports are c.i.f.
n.a.  Not available.    ...  Not applicable.

Indicators released over the past month for Taiwan were negative, on balance. 
The unemployment rate edged up to 5.3 percent in November, industrial
production fell 3.7 percent in December, and consumer prices declined in
November and December from a year earlier.  However, the trade balance
improved with exports and imports both registering significant increases in
December, and the Council of Economic Planning and Development’s index of
leading indicators rose in November.  

 
IV-34

Taiwan Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period, s.a., except as noted)

Indicator

2000

2001

2001

Q3

Q4

Oct.

Nov.

Dec.

Real GDP1

Unemployment rate2

Industrial production

Consumer prices3

Trade balance4

Current account5

3.8

3.0

7.4

1.7

8.3

8.9

n.a.

n.a.

-7.5

-1.7

15.7

n.a.

-3.1

4.9

-1.6

.0

11.7

17.9

n.a.

n.a.

1.8

-.6

...

5.2

8.0

1.0

21.3

16.4

n.a.

...

...

5.3

-1.3

-1.1

21.9

...

...

n.a.

-3.7

-1.7

25.6

...

1. Annual rate.  Annual figures are Q4/Q4.
2. Percent.
3. Percent change from year-earlier period, except annual figures, which are Dec./Dec.
4. Billions of U.S. dollars, annual rate.  Imports are c.i.f.
5. Billions of U.S. dollars, n.s.a., annual rate.
n.a.  Not available.    ...  Not applicable.

