Prefatory Note 

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1
versions text-searchable.2
employed, some imperfections may remain. 

 and then making the scanned 
   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 

Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 

1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 

2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff. 

Content last modified 6/05/2009. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
 
 
Confidential (FR)   Class III FOMC

Part 2                                                                              September 18, 2002

CURRENT ECONOMIC
AND FINANCIAL CONDITIONS

Recent Developments

Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
by the staff of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

Confidential (FR)   Class III FOMC

                                                                                                September 18, 2002

Recent Developments                         

Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
by the staff of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

                
Domestic Nonfinancial
Developments                         

Domestic Nonfinancial Developments


Overview 
The data that have become available since the August Greenbook show 
significant crosscurrents in the economy.  The continuing boost from large 
incentives pushed motor vehicle sales even higher in August, and consumer 
spending on other goods also posted solid gains in July and August.  Housing 
starts remained at a high level through July.  Shipments of nondefense capital 
goods rose briskly in July, although anecdotal reports have not been as upbeat as 
the recent data.  In contrast to the spending data, readings on the labor market 
suggest that conditions remained tepid in August, and industrial production 
edged down.  Meanwhile, core inflation stayed low during the summer. 

Labor Market 
The labor market has yet to gain significant forward momentum.  In August, 
private nonfarm payrolls were flat; aggregate hours, which recovered only 
partially from July’s large decline, remained below the second-quarter average. 
The unemployment rate moved down 0.2 percentage point, to 5.7 percent in 
August—a decline that does not accord with other information we have received 
recently on labor market conditions.  Indeed, initial claims for unemployment 
insurance have risen in the past few weeks, and the recent level of claims 
suggests that employment growth probably remained quite weak in early 
September. 

Manufacturing employment declined 68,000 in August—the largest drop in this 
category since the winter.  However, that drop may overstate the weakness in 
factory hiring because employment in the help-supply sector, which provides 
many of its workers to manufacturing firms, rose 51,000.  Employment in retail 
trade also declined last month, by 55,000.  Services outside of help supply added 
49,000 jobs, after making similar gains in the previous several months, and 
construction posted its largest employment advance in more than a year. 
Nonfarm payroll employment was also boosted by the addition of 41,000 jobs in 
federal and in state and local government.  Of the new federal jobs, 16,000 were 
airport security jobs created by the Transportation Security Administration.1 

A 0.3 percent gain in aggregate hours of production or nonsupervisory workers 
in August only partly reversed the 0.7 percent drop in July.  Average weekly 
hours ticked up 0.1 hour, but the workweek of 34.1 hours stands below its level 
in the spring. 

1. Eventually, all airport security workers will be federal employees; attaining that goal 
entails a shift of employees from the private to the public sector.  However, in any given month, 
an increase in federal airport security employment may not be completely offset by a decrease in 
private employment.  In August, employment in the detective, guard, and armored car services 
industry (which includes private-sector airport security workers) declined 9,000. 

II-2

II-3

II-4

II-5


The household survey showed the unemployment rate declining 0.2 percentage 
point in August to 5.7 percent.  A broader measure of joblessness, which 
includes individuals who are out of the labor force but want a job as well as 
those who are unemployed, also fell a bit in August.2  The unemployment rate is 
little changed from its level in December 2001, even though nonfarm payroll 
employment has declined, on balance, this year.  We believe that this unusual 
combination may have occurred because some workers who were pulled into the 
work force during the late 1990s by strong demand and tight labor markets may 
have formed only a marginal attachment to the labor force, and therefore did not 
report themselves as unemployed after losing their jobs, but instead moved 
directly out of the labor force.  Indeed, the labor force participation rate has 
fallen from 66.8 percent to 66.6 percent since December of last year. 

Moreover, the reported decline in the unemployment rate is not consistent with 
the weakness suggested by many other labor market indicators.  For example, 
the four-week moving average of initial claims for unemployment insurance has 
moved up 20,000 since the August survey week, to 410,000—a level consistent 
with little, if any, net increase in employment in September.  The four-week 
moving average of insured unemployment stood at 3.54 million in the week 
ended August 31, up 20,000 from the August survey week.  The exhaustion rate 
(the number of individuals who exhausted their benefits without finding a job, 
expressed as a share of the individuals who began receiving unemployment 
benefits six months earlier) increased to 47.2 percent in July (seasonally adjusted 
by the FRB staff), a level similar to the peak in 1993. 

Layoff announcements edged up in August, reversing their July decline, and 
participants in the Manpower Survey reported no change in their hiring plans in 
the fourth quarter.  However, respondents to the National Federation of 
Independent Businesses (NFIB) survey became more upbeat, reporting the 
highest level of net hiring expectations since August 2001.  Consumers’ views 
of the labor market also appear to be mixed.  In the Conference Board’s August 
survey, the proportion of households reporting jobs plentiful ticked down for the 
third month in a row, to its lowest level in this business cycle.  The proportion of 
August respondents finding jobs hard to get was unchanged from July, 
remaining at the highest level in this cycle.  In addition, these respondents 
reported slightly lower employment expectations in August than in July.  On the 
other hand, respondents to the preliminary Michigan survey for September 
reported improved expectations following the recent lows of July and August. 

2. We generally place more weight on the data from the establishment survey, which are 
gleaned from company records, than on the data from the household survey, which are based on 
self-reporting by individuals.  According to the BLS, the standard error of the one-month change 
in the unemployment rate is 0.1 percentage point. 

II-6

II-7


We now estimate that second-quarter productivity growth in the nonfarm 
business sector was 1.7 percent at an annual rate, a bit faster than the BLS 
estimated in its preliminary release.  Over the four quarters ended in 2002:Q2, 
productivity is estimated to have advanced 4.9 percent, following a 0.2 percent 
rise over the preceding four-quarter period.  Output per hour in the nonfinancial 
corporate sector is estimated to have increased at an annual rate of 5.0 percent in 
the second quarter.  Over the four quarters ended in 2002:Q2, this measure of 
productivity advanced 6.0 percent, up from the 0.4 percent rise posted in the 
previous four quarters. 

Labor Output per Hour

(Percent change from preceding period at compound annual rate;

based on seasonally adjusted data)


Sector 

19991  20001  20011 

2001 

2002 

Q3 

Q4 

Q1 

Q2 

Nonfarm businesses 

All persons2 
All employees 

Nonfinancial corporations4 

3.0 
2.4 

1.8 

2.1 
1.7 

1.8 

1.9 
2.0 

3.3 

2.1 
2.0 

3.2 

7.3 
7.6 

10.8 

8.6 
7.3 

5.1 

1.73 
1.63 

5.0 

1. Change is from fourth quarter of the preceding year to fourth quarter of the year shown. 
2. Includes non-employees (published definition). 
3. Staff estimates. 
4. The nonfinancial corporate sector consists of all corporations doing business in the United 

States with the exception of banks, stock and commodity brokers, and finance and insurance 
companies.  The sector accounts for about two-thirds of business employment. 

Industrial Production 
Output in the industrial sector declined 0.3 percent in August, following an 
upward revised gain of 0.4 percent in July.  Motor vehicle assemblies decreased 
last month, and electricity generation fell back after a heat-related run-up in July. 
Manufacturing production excluding motor vehicles was flat for a second 
month, after sizable increases in the first half of the year.  The factory operating 
rate slipped to 74.4 percent in August, 1-1/2 percentage points above its recent 
low in December 2001, but still 6-1/2 percentage points below its 1967 to 2001 
average. 

The August decline in motor vehicle assemblies directly shaved 0.1 percent off 
total IP.  Fourth-quarter schedules call for production at an annual rate of 
12.5 million units—high by historical standards but still 1/2 million units lower 
than third-quarter schedules.  If realized, the resulting decline in the value-added 
of the motor vehicle and parts industry would directly reduce growth of total 

II-8

II-9


industrial output in the fourth quarter by around 3/4 percentage point at an 
annual rate. 

Output in the high-tech sector rose 1.6 percent in August after a small increase in 
July.  Semiconductor production was boosted in August by sharp gains in the 
production of semiconductors other than microprocessors (MPUs).  The 
Semiconductor Industry Association attributes the non-MPU strength to demand 
for consumer products such as DVD players, video games, and digital cameras. 
The production of MPUs has lagged behind the output of other chips because of 
relatively weak demand from computer manufacturers:  U.S. computer 
production increased in August for the first time since March, though by only a 
modest 0.8 percent.  Intel, which makes about 80 percent of the MPUs produced 
worldwide, recently marked down its forecast for third-quarter revenue a touch 
and noted that the outlook for personal computers and notebooks is a little 
weaker than it had previously anticipated.  Last month’s CIO Magazine survey 
of information officers showed that buying plans for computer hardware and 
related items have been scaled back since the previous survey in July, but they 
are still consistent with near-term increases in the level of outlays.  The 
production of communications equipment fell 1.1 percent in August after a 
4.4 percent plunge in July.  Despite persistent production cuts over the past two 
years, stocks of communications equipment remained high relative to the recent 
pace of sales. 

Aircraft production contracted 1.4 percent in August because of another decline 
in the output of commercial aircraft.  Since its recent peak in November 2000, 
the production of commercial aircraft has been cut in half. 

provided by the company suggests that prospective declines in production will 
be relatively small. 

 .  Beyond that cut, however, the information 

Production changes across the rest of the industrial sector have been mixed.  The 
output of business equipment other than transportation and high-tech bounced 
back from a decrease in July, and the output of construction supplies moved up. 
However, the production of business supplies and industrial materials declined. 
The output of consumer goods aside from motor vehicles and high-tech dropped 
0.3 percent in August, pushed down by a drop in the production of furniture and 
appliances and by a decrease in the output of nondurables.  Data from the staff’s 
flow-of-goods system imply that, relative to sales, stocks of consumer goods 
excluding motor vehicles had already moved down from uncomfortable levels, 
suggesting that the recent softness in consumer goods production has not 
stemmed from an inventory overhang.  More broadly, according to the flow-of-
goods 

   
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
II-10

II-11


system, inventories do not appear to be high, and indeed, purchasing managers 
continue to report that their customers’ inventories are too low. 

Indicators of near-term manufacturing activity have been mixed.  Real adjusted 
durable goods orders surged in July and pushed up the three-month average by 
1.9 percent.  In contrast, the new orders index from the Institute for Supply 
Management slipped a little further in August to 49.7, after having declined 
10 percentage points in July.  Several regional diffusion indexes of orders also 
stepped down over the summer. 

New Orders for Durable Goods 
(Percent change from preceding period except as noted; seasonally adjusted) 

Component 

Share, 
2001: 
H1 
(percent) 

2002 

Q1 

Q2  May 

June 

July 

Total orders 

100.0 

1.5 

-.4 

.4 

-4.5 

9.2 

Adjusted orders1 
Computers 
Communication equipment 
Other capital goods 
Other2 

MEMO 
Real adjusted orders

Excluding high tech

71.0 
4.0 
3.0 
23.0 
37.0 

 . . . 
 . . . 

2.6 
-1.4 
6.3 
.8 
3.9 

3.0 
2.9 

.5 
-5.0 
-3.3 
2.4 
.3 

-.2 
3.5 
-2.8 
.5 
-.8 

-4.9 
-9.7 
-18.2 
-4.1 
-3.7 

10.8 
13.8 
11.6 
7.7 
12.3 

.9 
.8 

-.2 
-.4 

-4.8 
-5.0 

11.2 
11.4 

1. Orders excluding defense capital goods, nondefense aircraft, and motor vehicle parts. 
2. Primary metals, most fabricated metals, most stone, clay, and glass products, 

household appliances, scientific instruments, and miscellaneous durable goods. 

. . .  Not applicable. 

Motor Vehicles 
Sales of light vehicles have been extremely strong during the past two months. 
Automakers brought back zero percent financing and boosted cash incentives in 
early July; light vehicle sales jumped 1.8 million units that month to an annual 
rate of 18.1 million units.  In August, sales rose further to an 18.6 million unit 
pace.  Although most of the increase in July and August was in retail sales to 
consumers, fleet sales to businesses also moved up over this period. 

Industry sources indicated confidentially earlier this month that they were 
expecting light vehicle sales in September of about 17-1/2 million units—down 

II-12

II-13


a little from the August level owing, in part, to some trimming of incentive 
programs.5  In early September, GM announced new incentives that were less 
generous on balance than those available in July and August, but the company 
did include zero-rate financing on 36-month loans for the purchase of 2003 
model-year vehicles.  In response, Ford and Chrysler announced programs 
similar to GM’s.6 

The current round of incentives provides an offset to announced price increases 
for new model-year vehicles.  Chrysler and Ford have announced that average 
prices for their 2003 vehicles will be up 0.5 percent and 0.4 percent, 
respectively, relative to comparably equipped 2002 vehicles.7  GM has not 
announced an average figure.  Consumers apparently have not noticed any 
deterioration in the pricing environment:  Car-buying attitudes improved in the 
preliminary September Michigan Survey, to the highest level since last 
December. 
With sales of light vehicles running ahead of manufacturers’ expectations in July 
and August, inventories of light vehicles are apparently below desired levels. 
Inventories declined 130,000 units in August to 2.5 million, while supply 
dropped to about 51 days when evaluated at last month’s elevated sales pace, 
and to about 54 days when evaluated at the average sales pace over the past 
twelve months; both figures are well below the industry target of around 
63 days.  Nevertheless, manufacturers have scheduled a step-down in production 
to an annual rate of 12.5 million units in September and a continuation at that 
level in the fourth quarter.  These schedules suggest that producers anticipate 
some softening in sales in coming months. 

Domestic fourth-quarter production could be disrupted severely if the Canadian 
Auto Workers (CAW) union strikes Ford or Chrysler.  On September 17, the 
CAW reached a tentative agreement on a new contract with GM, and the union 
will use this contract as the pattern agreement for upcoming negotiations with 
the 

5. The recent history of these projections suggests that the early-month forecasts have a 

standard error of 1 million units. 

6. GM’s previous program expired on September 3.  In its new program, consumers may 
receive zero percent financing for up to three years on model year 2002 or 2003 cars; reduced-
rate financing is available for longer maturities.  Cash rebates of up to $1,500 are also available 
in lieu of reduced-rate financing.  In the program that just expired, only model-year 2002 
vehicles were eligible, but zero percent financing was available for up to five years, and cash 
rebates of up to $5,000 were offered.  GM’s program expires on October 31, while Ford’s and 
Chrysler’s current programs expire on September 30. 

7. These figures translate into an average increase of about $125 per vehicle for Chrysler 

and $120 for Ford. 

II-14

II-15


Production of Domestic Autos and Trucks 
(Millions of units at an annual rate except as noted; FRB seasonal basis) 

Item 

2002 

2002 

Q1 

Q2 

Q31 

June 

July 

Aug. 

Sept.1 

U.S. production 

Autos
Trucks

12.2 
 5.2
 7.0

Total days’ supply2 

57.5 

12.4 
 5.2
 7.2

62.7

12.9 
 5.2
 7.6

12.7 
 5.3
 7.4

13.2 
 5.4
 7.8

 n.a. 

63.1 

55.7 

Inventories3

 2.44

 2.68

 n.a.

 2.68

 2.66 

12.9 
 5.1
 7.8

50.6

2.53

12.5 
 5.2 
 7.3 

 n.a. 

 n.a. 

Note. Components may not sum to totals because of rounding. 
1. Production rates reflect Ward’s Communications’ latest estimates for Q3 and September. 
2. Quarterly average calculated using end-of-period stocks and average reported sales. 
3. End-of-period stocks; excludes medium and heavy trucks (classes 3-8). 
n.a.  Not available. 

other automakers.  Job security is the most important issue, and negotiations 
with Ford may prove difficult; Ford has announced plans to shut an Ontario 
truck plant and to lay off between 1,000 and 1,500 workers (roughly 10 percent 
of Ford’s unionized workforce in Canada).  A strike against Ford in Canada 
would quickly shut down the company’s assembly and parts plants in the United 
States.  The last strike by the CAW was in 1996, when the union clashed with 
GM over outsourcing. 

Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending on goods aside from motor vehicles appears to be increasing 
at a moderate pace in the third quarter.  In August, nominal retail sales in the so-
called control category of stores, which excludes sales at motor vehicle dealers 
and building supply outlets, rose 0.3 percent.8  Spending moved up noticeably at 
furniture and home furnishing stores and at general merchandise outlets but 
declined at electronic and appliance stores and at clothing and accessory outlets. 
We estimate that real PCE for the control items advanced 0.2 percent in August 
after slightly larger increases in the preceding two months. 

Outlays on services rose 0.3 percent in July (the most recent available data); the 
gain was led by a surge in estimated expenditures on brokerage and investment 

8. The increase in nominal retail control was revised down 0.2 percentage point in both 

June and July. 

II-16

II-17


counseling.  However, the jump in brokerage spending was likely reversed in 
August given that month’s drop in trading volumes.  Outlays on energy services 
were little changed in July, and weather data for August suggest that electricity 
demand declined last month. 

Real disposable personal income was about unchanged in July, and the latest 
employment report points to little gain in the wage and salary component of 
household income for August.  However, gains in real disposable income over a 
longer period remain sizable; they have been boosted in part by the decline in 
income tax payments associated with last year’s tax legislation and a reduction 
in capital gains realizations owing to the weak stock market.  The twelve-month 
change in real DPI in July was 4 percent. 

With income roughly unchanged in July, the considerable rise in spending led to 
a 0.8 percentage point decline in the saving rate, to 3.4 percent.  Still, the saving 
rate remains near the high end of the range seen in the past three years, a pattern 
consistent with the sharp decline in household wealth.  In the second quarter, the 
ratio of household net worth to disposable personal income fell to its lowest 
level since 1996, and the stock market’s decline since the end of the second 
quarter has likely further reduced this ratio. 

Both the Michigan Survey Research Center’s index of consumer sentiment and 
the Conference Board’s index of consumer expectations edged down in August, 
and the Michigan index ticked down further in early September.  Both measures 
are now close to the levels seen last December and close to their averages over 
the past twenty years. 

Housing Market 
Housing activity remained robust in early summer, though a bit less so than 
during the spring.  In the single-family sector, the pace of starts declined about 
2-1/4 percent in July to an annual rate of 1.32 million units.  Issuance of permits 
to build new single-family homes—adjusted for starts that occurred in areas 
where permits are not required—was only a touch below the pace of starts; the 
permits figure is consistent with little change in starts for the remainder of the 
current quarter.  In the multifamily sector, new homes were started at an annual 
rate of 328,000 units in July, a pace just a bit below the average recorded during 
the past year and a half. 

Mortgage rates have fallen during the past several months, with the average rate 
on a thirty-year fixed-rate mortgage standing at 6.18 percent in mid-September, 
and the average initial rate on a thirty-year adjustable-rate mortgage at 
4.32 percent.  Consumers’ rating of homebuying conditions in the Michigan 
Survey and the Mortgage Bankers Association’s index of mortgage application 
volume both remained elevated in early September, a pattern suggesting that low 

II-18

II-19

II-20

II-21


mortgage rates have continued to support housing activity despite stagnant 
employment and declining household wealth. 

Sales of new homes rose 6-3/4 percent in July to an annual rate of just over 
1.0 million units, a record high, and the inventory of unsold homes remained 
low.  Sales of existing homes, as published by the National Association of 
Realtors (NAR), increased 4-1/2 percent in July to an annual rate of 5.33 million 
units; the gain partly offset June’s 11 percent drop.  However, this large swing 
mainly reflected NAR’s seasonal adjustment procedures and is not apparent in 
the estimate produced with the Board staff’s seasonal factors which, unlike those 
of the NAR, include an adjustment for the number of business days each month.9 
July’s sales pace—which was about the same using either set of seasonal 
factors—was below the record highs seen earlier this year and back in line with 
the average pace of the past four years. 

Although house prices continued to move up through the second quarter, some 
indicators suggest that the pace of increase has slowed recently.  The four-
quarter rise in the median purchase price of new homes was about 2 percent last 
quarter, down from the 9-3/4 percent increase registered during the previous 
year.  A deceleration in prices also is evident using the Census Bureau’s quality-
adjusted measure—from a 4-3/4 percent gain during the four quarters ending in 
2001:Q2 to a 2-3/4 percent increase over the most recent four quarters.  The 
repeat-sales index for existing homes—which controls for some of the changes 
in the composition of homes sold that can affect the median price—has also 
decelerated about 2 percentage points, to a 6-1/2 percent pace.  In contrast, the 
median purchase price of existing homes has shown no sign of deceleration.  It 
was up 7-1/2 percent last quarter from a year earlier, compared with a 
6-1/2 percent increase over the previous year. 

The repeat-sales price index has decelerated in most, but not all, metropolitan 
areas.  The most dramatic change has been in the San Francisco Bay area; in San 
Francisco itself, prices increased almost 15 percent in 2001 but have held about 
steady in 2002.  Many other metropolitan areas (such as Boston and 
Minneapolis) have experienced a mild deceleration in prices, but some areas 
(including New York and Washington) have not. 

Equipment and Software 
On balance, business spending on equipment and software appears to be 
advancing at a solid clip in the third quarter, buoyed by an increase in motor 

9.  The NAR seasonal factor exaggerated the decline in sales in June because it did not take 

account of the fact that June had five weekends instead of the usual four.  With fewer business 
days, one would expect fewer house-purchase closings. 

II-22

II-23


vehicle purchases and a stabilization in aircraft expenditures that followed large 
declines earlier in the year.  Excluding the volatile transportation sector, 
however, outlays seem to be expanding at a moderate pace, as in the first half of 
the year.  Business output growth, rising corporate cash flow, and the user cost 
of capital are likely providing some impetus to investment, but anecdotal reports 
suggest that firms are hesitant to ramp up capital expenditures substantially. 

Business spending on aircraft looks poised to move up a bit in the third quarter, 
but such a move would reverse only a small portion of the considerable decline 
recorded in the second quarter.  The recent low levels of aircraft expenditures 
reflect the sizable drop in air traffic owing to the recession and the terrorist 
attacks, factors that are only now being fully reflected in the purchase of new 
airplanes. 

Business demand for motor vehicles has firmed recently, but near-term prospects 
vary greatly by class of vehicle.  Fleet sales of light vehicles increased in each of 
the past three months, and the level of fleet sales in August was the highest since 
March 2001.  Sales of medium and heavy trucks increased in both July and 
August.  For heavy trucks, the recent pickup in sales reflects businesses’ desire 
to take delivery in advance of new EPA regulations for class 8 trucks that go into 
effect in October.  Sales are likely to be much weaker in the near future, as net 
orders for heavy trucks have fallen sharply since May.10  In contrast, orders for 
medium trucks (classes 5 to 7) have gradually moved higher this year, and they 
rose again in August. 

Nominal shipments of computing equipment surged 13.9 percent in July (not at 
an annual rate) after a sharp decline in the second quarter.  However, several 
major computer manufacturers have reported that they are expecting fairly flat 
nominal sales for the quarter as a whole.  This anecdotal evidence—along with 
the extreme volatility of the shipment series—suggests that the July gain is likely 
to be at least partially reversed in August and September.  Still, with computer 
prices apparently falling more rapidly than in the second quarter, the available 
data suggest that real computer expenditures will probably pick up this quarter. 
Software spending, which we estimate to have risen at an annual rate of 
11.5 percent in the second quarter, tends to move roughly in line with hardware 
expenditures and thus seems likely to increase again in the current quarter. 

10. The trucking industry remains in the doldrums.  Consolidated Freightways Corporation, 

the nation’s third-largest long-distance freight hauler, filed for bankruptcy on September 3. 
Disruptions due to the closing are expected to be small, according to press reports, because of 
excess capacity in the industry. 

II-24

II-25

In contrast, the near-term outlook for real spending on communications
equipment continues to be grim.  
ments of communications equipment fell
Ship
3.2 percent in July after a large drop in the second quarter.   ookings increased
11.6 percent in July but are down more than 50 percent since mid-2000. 
According to statements by manufacturers of communications equipment,
telecommunications service providers are still slashing capital
expenditures—particularly for equipment not used in their wireless segments. 

B

Apart from the high-tech and transportation sectors, nominal shipments rose
2.2 percent in July after a 1.3 percent decline in June.  
above shipments for the first time since early last year, and the backlog of
unfilled orders edged up.  
measuring and controlling devices (a grouping that includes MRIs, volt meters,
air conditioning controls, and watches) have been especially strong of late.  
Real
business spending in these categories expanded at a rapid pace in the second
quarter, and the most recent shipments data suggest ongoing gains.

of construction machinery and of

The level of orders moved

Shipments 

Nonresidential Construction  
A decline in nominal spending for construction of nonresidential buildings in
 moved
July extended the downward trend that began in early 2001.  
lower in every major category except office buildings.   n the industrial sector,
outlays 

Spending

I

II-26

II-27


dropped 4-1/4 percent in July and now stand at the lowest level in twenty-five 
years.  Spending in the other commercial sector—which includes retail and 
wholesale space—has dropped sharply during the past several months after 
having shown resilience through all of 2001 and part of 2002; July’s level was 
almost 15 percent below that of the first quarter.  In contrast, outlays for utilities 
and other private construction rose about 8 percent in July after a 2-3/4 percent 
increase in June.11 

Other indicators also suggest that the deterioration of conditions in the office 
sector may be easing a bit.  Although vacancy rates in this sector moved up 
again last quarter, from 15.4 percent to 15.6 percent, the increase was the 
smallest in almost two years.  In addition, office property values fell less on a 
year-over-year basis than they have in almost a year.  In contrast, the weakening 
in the industrial sector showed no signs of abating in the second quarter, with the 
vacancy rate moving up significantly further to nearly 11 percent.  Property 
values in the warehouse sector fell again last quarter, but retail property values 
were about unchanged. 

The number of natural gas drilling rigs in operation rose sharply through mid-
September, a gain more than offsetting the slight decline in the number of 
petroleum rigs in operation.  These data suggest that spending on the 
construction of drilling structures has increased so far this quarter. 

Business Inventories 
The book value of manufacturing and trade inventories excluding motor vehicles 
increased at an annual rate of $28.6 billion in July, the second straight monthly 
gain following declines in every month since February 2001.  But gains in sales 
and shipments further drove down the inventory-sales ratio in July to a very low 
level. 

Manufacturers’ inventories decreased at an annual rate of $5.0 billion in book-
value terms in July after a drop of $12.8 billion in the second quarter.  The 
decline resulted from a sizable liquidation at producers of transportation 
equipment and likely reflected a large drawdown of inventories held in the early 
stage of processing in the aircraft industry.  Excluding the volatile aircraft sector, 
inventories rose in July as manufacturers of chemicals, petroleum products, and 
rubber and plastics accumulated inventories on a book-value basis—a gain that 
perhaps partly reflected higher prices for inputs into those goods. 

11. According to confidential data from the Census Bureau, almost all of July’s increase in 
spending in this sector resulted from a sharp rise in outlays by electric power utilities.  Spending 
in this subsector now stands at about the same level seen early last spring; we have no good 
explanation for May’s and June’s weak figures. 

II-28

II-29


A rise of $18.1 billion (annual rate) in the book value of wholesale inventories 
(excluding motor vehicles) in July followed a $7.7 billion pace of liquidation in 
the second quarter.  The bulk of the accumulation reflected stockbuilding at 
distributors of farm products, machinery, and miscellaneous nondurables—a 
category that includes farm supplies, books, flowers, tobacco, and paint.  Most 
other categories registered small inventory changes. 

Retailers (excluding automotive dealers) accrued inventory stocks at an annual 
rate of $15.5 billion in July after having built inventories at a $9.0 billion pace in 
the second quarter.  An accumulation at general merchandisers accounted for 
more than half of the July buildup.  The ratio of inventories to sales ticked 
up—especially at stores carrying furniture, electronics, and appliances—but 
remains at a fairly low level. 

Federal Government 
The Federal budget continues to deteriorate, albeit at a slower pace than earlier 
this year.  A supplemental spending bill for fiscal 2002 was enacted in August, 
but little progress has been made on appropriations for fiscal 2003.  The 
Congressional Budget Office’s mid-year update of the budget outlook indicated 
that the budget will move back to balance over the next five years under the 
baseline assumption that no new spending initiatives or tax cuts are enacted. 

Over the twelve months ending in July, the budget recorded a deficit of 
$192 billion, compared with a surplus of $227 billion over the previous twelve 
months.  This swing of more than $400 billion reflects the slowdown in 
economic activity, policy actions, and an unusually sharp deterioration in 
personal tax receipts relative to income. 

Total receipts in July 2002 were 5 percent above the year-earlier level. 
However, receipts had been held down in July 2001 by the issuance of refund 
checks.  Abstracting from those checks as well as from calendar-related 
variation, July receipts declined on a year-over-year basis, in part because of the 
lower withholding schedules embodied in last year’s tax act.  In recent months, 
withheld taxes have been a bit softer than we would have expected given the 
new tax law and the BEA’s estimates for wages and salaries.  Net corporate 
income tax collections over the twelve months ending in July were 32 percent 
below their level in the previous twelve months, compared with a 4 percent 
increase in economic profits shown in the NIPA data for the year ending 
2002:Q2 compared with the year ending 2001:Q2.  This difference partly reflects 
the partial expensing provision and other tax law changes enacted in March. 
Daily Treasury data indicate that corporate collections rebounded sharply in 
September. 

Federal government outlays in July were 11 percent above their year-earlier level 
(adjusted for regular shifts in payment timing).  Over the twelve months ending 
in 

II-30

II-31

II-32

II-33


July, outlays adjusted for timing shifts were 7-1/2 percent higher than a year 
earlier, as noninterest outlays rose more than 10 percent—the fastest rate of 
increase in a decade.  This increase has been propelled by double-digit gains in 
defense and nondefense discretionary spending as well as by surging 
expenditures for health programs including Medicaid and Medicare. 

In August, President Bush signed into law a $24 billion supplemental 
appropriations bill for fiscal 2002.  The bill included an additional $5 billion in 
budget authority that was contingent upon the President agreeing to the 
emergency designation made by the Congress; the President did not agree to this 
designation, preferring to fund some of the affected programs out of regular 
fiscal 2003 appropriations.  Progress on fiscal 2003 appropriations bills has been 
hampered by the lack of a congressional budget resolution and disagreement 
about the overall level of appropriations.  Thus, the Congress likely will need to 
enact a continuing resolution to provide temporary spending authority for many 
programs when the fiscal year begins October 1.  Indeed, as has been the case 
frequently in recent years, the appropriations process may extend well into the 
fall.  The possibility of a lame-duck session after the elections has already been 
mentioned by the Senate leadership. 

The Congressional Budget Office’s mid-year update of the budget outlook 
indicated that the budget will record a deficit of $157 billion in fiscal 2002 and a 
similar deficit in 2003 if no new spending initiatives or tax cuts are enacted.  The 
baseline deficit projection includes the effects of the supplemental 
appropriations bill enacted in August, but the resulting level of discretionary 
spending for fiscal 2003 and beyond is still a bit below the Administration’s 
request.  The baseline budget is projected to move back into surplus by 2006. 
The CBO’s budget projections were based on an economic forecast that 
envisioned the economy growing about 3 percent on average during the next five 
years and the unemployment rate falling to 5.2 percent (the CBO’s estimate of 
the NAIRU) by 2005. 

State and Local Governments 
State and local government employment increased about 20,000 in both July and 
August.  Employment at state universities and colleges was flat, whereas it 
averaged an increase of 6,000 per month during the same months in 2000 and 
2001, suggesting that these public institutions have felt the effects of state 
budget cuts this summer.  In contrast, hiring was quite strong at public 
elementary and secondary schools, probably because of continuing enrollment 
increases and greater availability of teachers and support staff.  Construction 
spending rose 1-1/2 percent (monthly rate) in July. 

While most state budgets have eroded over the past year, the fiscal condition of 
many cities has remained quite strong.  According to the National League of 

II-34

II-35


Cities’ most recent annual survey, property tax collections have held up well in 
recent years, and they are expected to rise another 6 percent during fiscal 2002.12 
Property taxes are the mainstay of most cities’ budgets, accounting for nearly 
30 percent of cities’ own-source revenue.  However, a fair number of cities 
depend to a significant extent on income and sales taxes; these revenues came in 
below expectations at the end of calendar 2001 and the beginning of 2002, and 
they were projected to increase only about 1 percent for fiscal 2002 as a whole. 
As a result, the rise in overall tax receipts was projected to be significantly 
smaller than in the previous  fiscal year.  With general fund expenditures 
expected to move up substantially, ending balances measured as a share of 
expenditures were projected to decline a little from their record high in fiscal 
2001. 

Prices 
Price inflation edged up in August, but the average inflation rate during the past 
several months remained below the pace seen last year.  Through the August 
readings, the twelve-month rate of increase in both the CPI and the PCE price 
index was about 3/4 percentage point less than its year-earlier reading.13 
Although much of the past year’s slowdown in inflation has occurred in the 
volatile food and energy sectors, core inflation has eased as well. 

Consumer energy prices rose 0.6 percent in August, following an increase of 
0.4 percent in July.  In August, the price of natural gas fell further, but prices for 
fuel oil, gasoline, and electricity increased.  Much of the rise in gasoline prices 
this summer reflected the pass-through of increases in crude oil prices from their 
mid-June trough; these increases now cumulate to about $5 per barrel. 
However, gasoline inventories are plentiful, and from mid-July through mid-
September, refiners apparently have been forced to squeeze their margins rather 
than fully pass along the increases in crude oil cost.  Although the CPI for 
natural gas has been declining all summer, spot prices have turned up a bit since 
mid-August as a surplus of natural gas inventories diminished slightly.  The 
recent erosion of this inventory glut may reflect, in part, the protracted drought 
along the eastern seaboard and in some western states, which has forced some 
utilities that typically depend on hydroelectric generation to turn to higher-cost 
coal and natural gas. 

Prices for consumer foods fell 0.1 percent in August.  Although a drought this 
summer in many agricultural regions has boosted crop prices considerably, it 
also 

12. The National League of Cities began collecting city fiscal data in the mid-1980s.  The 
recent survey was conducted in March and April.  For about 40 percent of cities, the fiscal year 
corresponds to the calendar year; for another 40 percent, the fiscal year ends on June 30; among 
the remaining 20 percent of cities, most end their fiscal year September 30. 

13. The PCE price index for August will be released on September 30; the statements in the 

text refer to estimates by the Board staff based on published CPI and PPI data. 

II-36

II-37


has contributed to a selloff of livestock that has pushed down prices for meat and 
poultry.  Over the twelve months ended in August, consumer food prices rose 
1.2 percent; they were up 3.1 percent in the previous twelve-month period. 

Consumer prices for items other than food and energy rose 0.3 percent in 
August; on a twelve-month basis, core consumer prices were up 2.4 percent 
through August, compared with 2.7 percent in the preceding twelve months. 
The deceleration in the core CPI has been most pronounced for goods prices, 
which fell 0.7 percent in the twelve months ended in August after an increase of 
0.1 percent in the preceding year.  By contrast, prices of non-energy services rose 
3.7 percent in the twelve months ended in August, quite close to the 3.8 percent 
increase one year earlier. 

On the basis of the Board staff’s translation of published price data, we estimate 
that the PCE price index for items other than food and energy rose 1.7 percent 
during the twelve months ended in August, a deceleration from the 2.0 percent 
gain in the previous year.  The slowdown in core PCE inflation was apparent 
both for commodities (which through August slowed 0.2 percentage point 
relative to one year earlier) and for services (which slowed 0.4 percentage point). 
The deceleration in core PCE prices also is evident for the market-based 
components of the index, which rose 1.4 percent in the twelve months ended in 
August versus an increase of 1.7 percent the preceding year, and for the part of 
core PCE for which market-based prices are not available, which is estimated to 
have risen 2.6 percent in the year ended in August and 2.8 percent in the 
previous year. 

The BLS has begun to publish a new index called the chained CPI or C-CPI-U, 
which it constructs with a so-called “superlative” aggregation formula.  This 
new method of summarizing the data on consumer prices for specific items takes 
account of changes in the mix of purchases by consumers in response to changes 
in relative prices.14  According to this measure, prices rose 1.3 percent in the 
twelve months ended in August, compared with an increase of 2.1 percent in the 
preceding year.  Excluding food and energy, the chained CPI increased 
1.7 percent in the twelve months ended in August, down 0.2 percentage point 
from one year earlier.  These increases in the chained core CPI are similar in 
magnitude to the corresponding increases in the core PCE price index, which 
suggests that a substantial part of the difference between the PCE and official 
CPI measures of inflation in recent years may have arisen from the fixed-weight 
character of the latter index.  Although the chained CPI and the PCE price index 

14.  By contrast, the official CPI uses a Laspeyres formula, which tends to overstate 

increases in prices by not factoring in consumers’ moves to lower-cost items when relative prices 
change.  In the official index, the market-basket weights are now scheduled to be updated every 
two years.  The chained CPI is available only after 1999, and it is not seasonally adjusted. 

II-38

II-39


show smaller increases over the past couple of years than does the official CPI, 
all three price measures show similar-sized decelerations. 

Survey measures of expected inflation show less decline than measures of actual 
inflation.  According to the Michigan survey for the first part of September, 
median one-year-ahead inflation expectations were 2.6 percent; this figure puts 
the third-quarter estimate of inflation expectations also at 2.6 percent, which is 
very close to the reading for the third quarter of last year.  Longer-term inflation 
expectations also were little changed through the summer—with median five-to-
ten year expectations holding between 2-3/4 percent and 3 percent, a range that 
has prevailed for several years—but the preliminary reading for September 
ticked down below this range. 

Commodity prices have moved up a little, on balance, since the last Greenbook, 
and prices for most commodities stand well above the lows that were established 
late last year.  An August gain of 0.4 percent in the PPI for intermediate 
materials excluding food and energy brought the twelve-month change to 
0.4 percent, a noticeable pickup relative to the decline of 0.8 percent in the 
preceding twelve-month period.  Prices for core crude materials rose further in 
August; this series now has increased 9.2 percent over the past twelve months 
and has thus reversed the previous year’s decline of more than 9 percent.  Recent 
increases in prices for most metals and crude oil have helped reverse some of the 
July decline in the Journal of Commerce industrial price index.  The CRB 
futures index, which has risen more than 8 percent since early August, has been 
boosted by drought-related increases for many crops.  Crop conditions seem to 
have stabilized because of substantial rainfall in recent weeks in the major 
growing areas, and most forecasters now point to about a 7 percent drop this 
year in the output of corn and a similar decline in soybean production. 

Labor Costs 
Average hourly earnings for production or nonsupervisory workers rose 
0.3 percent in August after a 0.2 percent gain in July.  Higher unemployment and 
lower consumer price inflation have contributed to a sharp deceleration in this 
measure of labor costs; average hourly earnings increased 3.1 percent over the 
twelve months ended in August and 4.1 percent over the preceding twelve-
month period. 

The latest available data on broader measures of compensation are for the 
second quarter.  A second-quarter gain of 3.7 percent (annual rate) for 
compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector boosted the four-quarter 
change to about 2-1/2 percent.  This measure of labor costs has accelerated over 
the past couple of quarters despite the pronounced deceleration in average hourly 
earnings; the difference likely reflects the dissipation of the drag associated with 
the declining exercise of stock options during much of 2001 as equity prices 
slumped.  The 

II-40

II-41

II-42


II-43

recent quarterly readings are roughly in line with those of the employment cost
index, which does not include the exercise of stock options and has decelerated
gradually since 2000. 

On the benefits side, health insurance premiums in the Federal Employees
Health Benefits Program will rise an average 11 percent in 2003, the third
consecutive double-digit increase.  
e Annual Employer Benefits Survey
Th
conducted by the Kaiser Family Foundation and the Health Research and
Educational Trust showed that health insurance premiums for family plans are
increasing 12-3/4 percent in 2002, similar to the increases in health benefit costs
recorded by the ECI so far this year.  
ser survey also indicated that health
The Kai
insurance costs were increasing for both employers and workers, with the share
of premiums paid by covered workers holding steady at 27 percent for 2002,
identical to the survey results for the preceding two years.

Domestic Financial
Developments                         

Domestic Financial Developments

Overview
The uneventful passing of the August 14 deadline to certify financial statements
provided some assurance to investors, and for a time, investor anxieties
appeared to ebb somewhat. However, subsequent news suggesting a softer
economy and heightened tensions with Iraq weighed on stock prices and boosted
demand for Treasury securities. On balance, equity prices declined somewhat
since the August FOMC meeting, while share price volatility remained at
relatively high levels. Yields on Treasuries and investment-grade corporate
securities fell about 35 basis points, while yields on speculative-grade bonds fell
even more. Although market participants marked up the expected path of the
federal funds rate in the near term in response to the wording of the FOMC
announcement and comments by Federal Reserve officials, some odds on easing
by year-end remain.

Nonfinancial businesses evidently paid down debt on net in August but seem to
have resumed borrowing in September, albeit in meager volume. By contrast,
household borrowing appears to have been well maintained recently, getting a
boost from stronger motor vehicle sales and low mortgage rates. Meanwhile,
Treasury and state and local government debt has continued to expand fairly
briskly.

Policy Expectations, Stock Prices, and Interest Rates
The FOMC’s decision at the August meeting--to leave the intended federal
funds rate unchanged and to assess the risks as weighted toward economic
weakness rather than balanced--elicited a noticeable drop in equity prices and
Treasury coupon yields immediately after the announcement. Market
participants evidently viewed the change and accompanying statement as
foretelling a weaker economic outlook. Over the intermeeting period, the
expected near-term path of the federal funds rate ticked higher as statements by
a variety of Federal Reserve officials apparently led financial market
participants to the view that less monetary policy ease likely would be
forthcoming. Rates on federal funds futures contracts indicate that investors
currently see only a slight chance of a policy easing at the upcoming meeting.
In addition, none of the primary dealers surveyed recently expect a change in the
stance of policy at this meeting, although a small minority anticipate significant
easing--in the neighborhood of 1/2 to 3/4 percentage point--by year-end. At
longer horizons, investors saw the softer economic news as implying less policy
tightening was in store, and they marked down the path for the federal funds rate
expected after early next year.

Broad equity indexes fell some on balance from the last FOMC meeting. Early
in the period equity prices rose considerably, boosted in part by the relatively
uneventful passing of the SEC’s August 14 deadline for officers of large
companies to certify corporate financial statements. More recently, however,
equity prices have reversed course on concerns about the pace of economic
growth, the less sanguine outlook for corporate profits, and the possibility of

III-2

III-3

military action against Iraq. The implied volatility of equity prices remains
elevated, indicating that investors continue to perceive significant risks going
forward. The forward earnings-price ratio for the S&P 500 remained just above
6 percent, but its spread over the real Treasury yield has risen to levels not seen
since the early 1990s.

With the outlook for monetary policy a little less accommodative in the near
term, shorter-maturity Treasury yields edged up over the intermeeting period.
In contrast, intermediate- and long-term Treasury yields notably declined as
incoming data were viewed as suggesting a softer outlook for the economy.
Repeating the pattern of the past year or so, Treasury coupon yields largely
moved in the same direction as equity prices, rising on net early in the
intermeeting period before turning down in recent weeks. At the ten-year
maturity, yields on Treasury inflation-indexed debt fell a bit less than yields on
nominal Treasury securities, leaving measures of inflation compensation slightly
lower. Movements in Treasury yields were substantial at times; perhaps the
seasonally thin trading conditions typical of summer’s end exacerbated the
impact of market developments.

Investor sentiment about the corporate bond market seemed to improve after
August 14th. However, the renewed appeal of corporate bonds was evidently
tempered by the perceived weaker tone of economic data. Yields on higher-
rated investment-grade corporate bonds largely tracked those on Treasuries of
comparable maturities, leaving risk spreads on these securities about unchanged
on balance. In contrast, yields on BBB-rated and below-investment-grade bonds
declined by more than those on comparable Treasuries, and for nearly all
industry sectors. Even so, risk spreads on those weaker credits remained
exceptionally wide, in keeping with the anticipation of a continued high level of
defaults and low recovery rates going forward. Risk spreads for commercial
paper were about unchanged over the intermeeting period, remaining around
typical levels.

Business Finance
The major components of net debt financing by businesses--bonds, commercial
paper, and bank loans--contracted further on balance in August. Despite a
resumption of bond issuance by investment-grade nonfinancial corporations
after August 14, issuance remained fairly weak last month, and hefty retirements
held net bond issuance near zero. Moreover, the volume of outstanding
commercial paper contracted once again in August as a number of firms
reportedly used the proceeds from bond issuance to pay down paper. Firms did
not borrow on net from banks either, as C&I loans were about unchanged,
though this is in contrast to the considerable contraction seen over the past
several months. Available data for September suggest that net debt financing
has picked up, but only slightly.

III-4

III-5

III-6

III-7

Gross public equity issuance receded again in August: Seasoned equity
offerings fell to near zero, and there were no IPOs last month--for only the
second time since 1975. Currently only a few IPO deals are in the pipeline for
the remainder of September, as widely publicized investigations into the IPO
allocation process at investment banks likely have damped such activity.
Venture capital investments fell again in the second quarter, and the sluggish
pace of new capital committed suggests a pickup is not around the corner.
Equity retirements are estimated to have risen in July as announcements of share
buyback programs rose after stock prices plummeted. Announcements
remained elevated in August but have fallen back somewhat to date in
September. Meanwhile, cash-financed merger activity has been scant, and few
new deals have been announced recently.

Measures of corporate credit quality deteriorated further in July and August.
Moody’s net downgrades of nonfinancial corporate debt again exceeded
upgrades, though by a considerably narrower margin than in recent quarters.
Downgrades continued to be concentrated in the telecom and energy sectors.
Bond defaults totaled $36 billion in July and August, boosted by the titanic
default of $26 billion of WorldCom debt, and the twelve-month moving average
default rate stands at a record level. Recovery rates on defaulted bonds remain
at historically low levels, particularly in the telecom sector. In addition, banks’
Call Report data for the second quarter show that the delinquency rate on C&I
loans edged up again, although it remains below the levels seen in the early
1990s.

Forward-looking measures of corporate credit quality also worsened a bit. The
quantity of debt on Moody’s Watchlist remained somewhat elevated in August,
suggesting that additional net downgrades are likely in coming months, and
KMV's estimate of expected year-ahead defaults surged in July and then edged
up to a record level in August.

Earnings revisions by analysts since the last FOMC meeting have been scarce,
but warnings are expected to pick up in coming days as the quarter-end
approaches. Judging from the current estimate of growth in S&P 500-based
earnings per share--at 18 percent above last year’s level--equity analysts
apparently still have a very optimistic view of third-quarter earnings.

Commercial Real Estate Finance
Commercial mortgage debt increased 8 percent at an annual rate in the second
quarter, considerably faster than in the first quarter but still below last year’s
torrid pace. In the third quarter, however, growth likely has tapered off in
keeping with the ongoing contraction in outlays on nonresidential structures.
Nonetheless, issuance of commercial-mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) has
been well maintained so far in the third quarter, and CMBS risk spreads remained
in the lower part of their respective ranges over the past couple of years. These

III-8

III-9

indicators do not suggest elevated concern about prospective defaults.
Delinquency rates on commercial mortgages and CMBS also remained stable
over the intermeeting period and well below those seen in the early 1990s.

Household Finance
The dip in home mortgage rates to historical lows during the intermeeting period
prompted a record level of applications for mortgage refinancings and a high
volume of mortgage purchase applications. Consistent with this activity,
preliminary data point to a continued brisk expansion of residential mortgage
debt in the third quarter, though probably a little slower than the 10-3/4 percent
rate posted in the second quarter.

Available data indicate that consumer credit continued to grow strongly in the
third quarter, boosted by motor-vehicle-related borrowing. A sharp drop in
average interest rates on new car loans at auto finance companies in July
reflected the effects of the latest round of zero-percent financing incentives.

Overall household debt expanded at a rapid clip in the second quarter, keeping
the debt-service burden near its historical peak. Both the debt-service burden and
various measures of household credit quality have stayed within the ranges
observed for a while. The delinquency rate on credit card pools edged down
slightly in July but stayed in the neighborhood of recent experience, while the
delinquency rate on auto loans at finance companies remained near historical
lows through July. Call Report data for the second quarter show that the
delinquency rates on credit card and other consumer loans at banks were little
changed from their somewhat elevated levels in the first quarter (not shown).
With regard to mortgage delinquencies, the series published by Mortgage
Bankers Association ticked up in the second quarter owing mainly to the poor
performance of FHA mortgages. In contrast, banks’ mortgage delinquencies
edged down, likely reflecting the relatively small proportion of FHA mortgages
held by banks.

The ratio of household net worth to disposable income, which fell steeply in the
second quarter, was dragged down by the sharp declines in equity prices. With
broad equity indexes having moved down further on balance since the end of
June, this ratio has likely dropped again in the current quarter.

After withdrawing record amounts from equity mutual funds in July, households
made only modest net withdrawals in August, and most of these came before the
passing of the August 14 certification deadline. These withdrawals reflect a
portfolio shift toward safer assets, as bond mutual funds posted substantial net
inflows in both July and August, and these inflows were disproportionately
directed toward government bond funds. Available data for early September
suggest that modest net inflows to equity funds have likely resumed.

III-10

III-11

Treasury and Agency Finance
The Treasury borrowed $56 billion on net in August, up sharply from $36 billion
in July. Most of the step-up occurred in the coupon sector, including sales of
$27 billion in two-year notes that garnered a bid-to-cover ratio at the high end of
the recent range. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac paid down outstanding debt
slightly in July, after raising $17 billion in the second quarter. Even so, spreads
on agencies over comparable Treasuries have narrowed only a bit this year and
were about unchanged over the intermeeting period. Fannie Mae’s share price
has fallen sharply in the past several weeks because of investors’ concerns about
its interest-rate-risk management practices.

State and Local Government Finance
Gross issuance of long-term municipal debt in August and September continued
unabated from the rapid pace of recent months. Strong issuance for both new
capital spending and advance-refunding was spurred by the further decline in
yields on both revenue and general obligation bonds. Short-term issuance, often
used to meet tax revenue shortfalls, also remained strong. The ratio of long-term
municipal bond yields to Treasury yields rose notably over the intermeeting
period, especially for revenue bonds. The rise likely reflects heavy municipal
issuance, although it may also suggest some erosion in credit quality in this
sector.

Money and Bank Credit
M2 growth moderated somewhat in August from July’s torrid pace, and
preliminary data for September indicate further slowing. Growth continued to be
concentrated in liquid deposits, which were boosted by the historically low
opportunity cost of holding such deposits, volatile equity prices, and a high
volume of mortgage refinancing activity. The contraction in small time deposits
probably persisted because of households’ aversion to locking in the low rates
available on these instruments. Retail money market mutual funds recorded
small net outflows, perhaps reflecting an unwinding of July’s safe haven flows.
The unusually slow growth of currency likely indicates a moderation in both
international and domestic demand.

Bank credit increased at a 15-1/2 percent annual rate in August, a pace more than
double that in July. The strong gain partly reflected a surge in holdings of
mortgage-backed securities. Banks also continued to extend large volumes of
credit in the form of home equity loans and residential real estate loans.1 The
Survey of Terms of Business Lending conducted last month indicates that overall
loan pricing conditions still reflect cautious lending by banks: The median
spread of C&I loan rates over market interest rates on instruments of comparable
maturity remained wide, and spreads on higher-risk loans declined only slightly
from their lofty levels.

1. The very rapid expansion of consumer loans on the books of banks in August owed to
the unwinding of several securitizations. Growth in consumer loans in August was 3-3/4 percent
at an annual rate after adjusting for this effect.

III-12

III-13

III-14

III-15

International Developments

 
International Developments

U.S. International Transactions

Trade in Goods and Services
The deficit in U.S. international trade in goods and services was $37.2 billion in
June, $0.7 billion smaller than in May (revised). For the second quarter, the
trade deficit was $445 billion at an annual rate, $65 billion larger than in the first
quarter as a sharp rise in imports exceeded the jump in exports. NIPA real net
exports weakened about $47 billion in the second quarter. The trade deficit for
July, $34.6 billion, was released on Greenbook publication day; details will be
provided in the Greenbook supplement.

Exports of goods and services rose 1.7 percent in June, following a smaller
increase in May. Exported goods jumped 2.0 percent, with the largest increase
in the category of capital goods (especially semiconductors and aircraft).
Exports of services rose only slightly. For the second quarter, the value of
exported goods and services grew 17 percent at an annual rate. The largest
increases were in exported machinery (especially semiconductors and other
machinery), industrial supplies (particularly chemicals), and automotive
products. Service receipts rose moderately, as receipts from foreigners traveling
in the United States remained close to first quarter levels, while receipts from
other private services rose.

Imports of goods and services in June were marginally higher than in May. The
level of imported goods inched up from already high May levels, and service
payments grew 2 percent (largely royalties and license fees). Increases in
imported consumer goods, aircraft and industrial supplies were partly offset by
declines in automotive products and oil (about half from a drop in price). For

IV-2

IV-3

IV-4

IV-5

the second quarter, imports of goods and services surged 35 percent at an annual
rate. Increases were recorded in all major trade categories other than aircraft.
The largest increase was in imports of oil (largely price), while automotive
products, consumer goods, machinery, and industrial supplies also recorded
hefty gains. About one-third of the increase in imported machinery was in high-
tech goods, the second quarterly gain. In addition, imports of basic industrial
and service machinery rose for the first time in over a year. Payments by U.S.
travelers abroad remained close to first quarter levels, while other private
services increased.

Prices of Internationally Traded Goods
Non-oil imports. The price index of imported non-oil goods rose 0.1 percent in
August, following no change in July. The price of core goods was up 0.2
percent; the price of computers was down 0.2 percent and the price of
semiconductors remained unchanged. The component of core goods with the
largest increase in August was the price index for capital goods. Prices in other
major categories were little changed. In July and August, core goods prices rose
1¼ percent (a.r.) above the second-quarter level, following an increase of about
1¾ percent (a.r.) in the second quarter.

Oil. The BLS price of imported oil rose 2.1 percent in August after climbing a
revised 4.3 percent in July. The BLS price of imported oil is up significantly
since the beginning of the year, rising every month except June. The spot price
of West Texas intermediate (WTI) crude oil has also risen on average since the
beginning of the year and is currently around $29 per barrel, up from its average
value near $19 per barrel in December. Factors putting upward pressure on
crude oil prices are low exports from Iraq, the possibility of U.S. military
intervention there, and tighter stock levels in the United States.

Exports. Prices of total U.S. goods exports rose 0.1 percent in August and the
price of core goods rose 0.2 percent. The largest increase in August was in the
price of agricultural exports, which rose 1.9 percent following an increase of 2.6
percent in July. Prices of industrial supplies and materials fell 0.3 percent,
reversing the upward trend it has experienced most of this year, while prices in
other major categories were generally little changed. The price of core goods in
July and August on average was about 3 percent at an annual rate above the
second-quarter level, which was up about 3½ percent from the first quarter.

U.S. Current Account through 2002:Q2
In 2002:Q2, the U.S. current account deficit increased to $520 billion at a
seasonally adjusted annual rate (s.a.a.r.), $70 billion greater than the revised first
quarter deficit. Increases in the deficit on goods and services and the deficit on
income more than offset a decrease in net outflows for transfers.

IV-6

For the second quarter, the deficit on goods and services increased $60.5 billion,
s.a.a.r., with imports increasing faster than exports. Within exports, the
categories with the largest increases were industrial supplies, capital goods, and
automotive products. Within imports, the categories with the largest increases
were petroleum and petroleum products, consumer goods, and automotive parts.
The increase in petroleum and petroleum products was largely owing to higher
prices. The $4.4 billion s.a.a.r increase in the services surplus in the second
quarter was swamped by the $64.9 billion increase in the goods deficit. The
deficit on investment income increased $21.2 billion, s.a.a.r., with direct
investment payments increasing faster than receipts. The rapid growth in direct
investment payments represents a further recovery from the very depressed
levels recorded in the fourth quarter of 2001. The net outflow of other income
and transfers decreased by $11.7 billion, s.a.a.r., reflecting a decrease in U.S.
government grants.

The second-quarter release included revisions to first-quarter data. The current
account deficit was virtually unchanged with a downward revision to the deficit
on investment income offsetting a downward revision to the services surplus and
a slight increase in the net outflow of transfers.

U.S. Current Account
(Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted annual rate)
Investment
income,
net

Other
income and
transfers, net

Goods and
services,
net

Current
account
balance

Period

Annual
2000
2001

Quarterly
2001:Q3
Q4
2002:Q1
Q2

-378.7
-358.3

-319.1
-352.1
-382.0
-442.5

27.7
20.5

9.4
32.4
2.7
-18.5

-59.3
-55.6

-55.6
-60.6
-70.6
-58.9

-410.3
-393.4

-365.3
-380.3
-449.8
-519.8

Change
Q3-Q2
Q4-Q3
Q1-Q4
Q2-Q1

-20.7
31.6
23.0
-15.0
-29.7
-69.5
-70.0
-21.2
Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.

54.2
-33.0
-29.9
-60.5

-1.8
-5.0
-9.9
11.7

IV-7

U.S. International Financial Transactions
Net purchases of U.S. securities by private sector foreigners (line 4 of the
Summary of U.S. International Transactions table) were again quite strong in
July. After a slow start in January and February, the pace of foreign net
purchases has increased substantially and is now approximately equal to last
year's record pace. Net purchases of Treasuries ($30 billion, line 4a) were the
highest in almost five years and well above the levels recorded in recent years,
perhaps due in part to a flight to quality at a time of investor nervousness over
corporate malfeasance. The largest increases were recorded for the United
Kingdom ($11 billion), Japan ($9 billion), and the Cayman Islands ($7 billion).
In contrast, net purchases of both agency (line 4b) and corporate debt securities
(line 4c) were well below average, with purchases of corporate debt securities at
their lowest level in over seven years, coinciding with a sharp reduction in new
corporate debt issuance. Foreign net purchases of equities (line 4d) increased to
$10 billion on unusually high trading volume.

U.S. private investors were substantial net sellers of foreign securities (line 5) in
July. Sales of foreign bonds (line 5a) continued, but at a somewhat higher pace
than in recent months. Net sales of foreign equities (line 5b) were the highest
ever recorded for a single month, altering the recent trend of net purchases.

After rising significantly in June due in large part to Japanese intervention
activity, foreign official reserves held in the United States rose modestly in July
(line 1). Partial data from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York indicate that
total foreign official reserves increased by $4 billion in August. Through July,
foreign official inflows totaled $57 billion–a pace well above any recorded since
1996.

Recently released balance of payments data for the second quarter show that
U.S. direct investment abroad (line 6) remained constant at $29 billion. Foreign
direct investment in the United States (line 7) continued its downward trend and
was only $1 billion in the quarter, reflecting both intercompany debt outflows
and a further slowing of merger and acquisition activity.

The statistical discrepancy was positive $49 billion in the quarter, following a
discrepancy of positive $25 billion in the first quarter. A positive statistical
discrepancy indicates some combination of under-recorded net financial inflows
or over-recorded net imports of goods and services.

IV-8

Summary of U.S. International Transactions
(Billions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted except as noted)

2000

2001

2001
Q3

Official financial flows

39.3

2.0

13.2

1. Change in foreign official assets

in the U.S. (increase, +)
a. G-10 countries

b. OPEC countries
c. All other countries

39.6
12.3

10.7
16.6

6.9
-7.9

-1.9
16.8

16.8
-5.6

-4.8
27.2

Q4

5.3

5.5
9.1

4.2
-7.8

-.3
370.3

-4.9
379.8

-3.6
29.6

-.2
145.3

2002
Q2

June

Q1

8.8

45.6

26.3

8.4
4.7

-6.5
10.2

.4
90.6

47.5
17.9

1.1
28.5

-1.8
34.8

29.1
13.5

1.4
14.2

-2.8
...

July

2.6

2.9
6.1

-0.1
-3.1

-.2
...

-6.7

7.3

-1.7

38.7

-2.3

–17.8

-30.0

-.6

2. Change in U.S. official reserve

assets (decrease, +)

Private financial flows
Banks

3. Change in net foreign positions
of banking offices in the U.S.1

Securities2

4. Foreign net purchases of U.S.

securities (+)
a. Treasury securities
b. Agency bonds
c. Corporate and municipal bonds
d. Corporate stocks3

5. U.S. net acquisitions (-) of

foreign securities
a. Bonds
b. Stock purchases
c. Stock swaps3

Other flows (quarterly data, s.a.)

381.0
-76.4
96.5
165.7
195.1

-126.6
-23.3
-22.9
-80.4

404.4
5.6
86.4
201.7
121.9

-95.1
12.3
-62.7
-44.7

51.2
-14.2
19.4
33.1
12.9

10.0
21.0
-9.3
1.8

128.2
28.3
28.1
38.3
33.5

-26.2
-7.4
-12.4
-6.4

62.4
-7.1
2.8
43.3
23.4

2.0
.6
3.2
-1.8

106.4
1.6
32.4
60.3
12.0

-10.9
9.5
-20.3
.0

6. U.S. direct investment (-) abroad
7. Foreign direct investment in U.S.
8. Foreign holdings of U.S. currency
9. Other (inflow, + )4
U.S. current account (s.a.)

-178.3 -127.8
130.8
307.7
23.8
1.1
36.4
-7.9
-410.3 -393.4

-41.7
14.2
8.2
- 10.5
-91.3

-27.5
21.9
10.5
-.1

-29.4
-29.3
1.0
16.2
7.2
4.5
-21.8
25.3
-95.1 -112.5 -130.0

Capital account balance (s.a.)5

Statistical discrepancy (s.a.)

.8

.0

.8

.2

.2

.2

.2

10.7

48.3

-55.8

24.7

49.4

NOTE: The sum of official and private financial flows, the current account balance, the capital account balance, and the statistical
discrepancy is zero. Details may not sum to totals because of rounding.

1. Changes in dollar-denominated positions of all depository institutions and bank holding companies plus certain transactions

between broker-dealers and unaffiliated foreigners (particularly borrowing and lending under repurchase agreements). Includes
changes in custody liabilities other than U.S. Treasury bills.

2. Includes adjustments BEA makes to account for incomplete coverage, but excludes adjustments for commissions and therefore

does not match exactly the data on U.S. international transactions published by the Department of Commerce.

3. Includes (4d) or represents (5c) stocks acquired through mergers.
4. Transactions by nonbanking concerns and other banking and official transactions not shown elsewhere plus amounts resulting
from adjustments made by the Department of Commerce and revisions in lines 1 through 5 since publication of the quarterly data in
the Survey of Current Business.

5. Consists of transactions in nonproduced nonfinancial assets and capital transfers.

n.a. Not available.

... Not applicable.

39.3
12.6
3.3
19.3
4.0

-1.6
4.5
-6.2
.0

...
...
...
...
...

...

...

44.9
29.6
3.4
2.4
9.5

18.3
6.5
11.8
.0

...
...
...
...
...

...

...

IV-9

Foreign Exchange Markets

Since the August meeting of the FOMC, the trade-weighted exchange value of
the dollar against the major foreign currencies has appreciated about ¾ percent
on balance. Although concerns about the timing and speed of recovery in the
U.S. economy continued to be widespread during the intermeeting period, the
effect of these concerns on the exchange value of the dollar appeared to be offset
by reports showing that recovery in other industrial countries, particularly in
Germany and Japan, would also likely be slow. Against individual currencies,
the dollar was up slightly, on balance, over the period against the euro. The
dollar appreciated about 2½ percent versus the Japanese yen and ¾ percent
against the Canadian dollar but depreciated 1 percent vis-a-vis sterling.

Equity prices in major industrial countries continued to be quite volatile during
the intermeeting period and generally registered substantial losses. While U.S.
equity indexes remained above the levels reached in July, European stock prices
ended the period near the multi-year lows reached at that time. German stocks
were hardest hit, falling 15 percent, with insurance share prices plunging
30 percent. Data casting fresh doubt on Japan’s fledgling recovery pressured
Japanese stock prices down, with the Nikkei index reaching its lowest level
since the early 1980s during the period. This prompted calls by Japanese
politicians for government intervention to support equity prices. On September
18, the Bank of Japan unexpectedly announced that it would consider measures

IV-10

to buy shares directly from banks, leading Japanese banking shares to quickly
rebound on the day.

Equity market volatility, concerns about global growth, and uncertainty about
the situation in Iraq likely contributed to flows out of equity and into sovereign
bonds, and ten-year benchmark bond yields ended the period down substantially
in all major industrial countries. The yield on Japan’s ten-year benchmark
sovereign bond had fallen more than 20 basis points, to its lowest level since
1998, before rebounding after the announcement by the Bank of Japan on share
purchases. Weak Japanese data, the upcoming end of the fiscal half-year, and
unconfirmed reports that the Bank of Japan was considering increasing its
outright purchases of government bonds, all appeared to weigh on the already
low bond yield.

The European Central Bank, the Bank of Japan, and the Bank of England did not
adjust their monetary policy stances during the period, in line with market
expectations. The Bank of Canada had generally been expected to raise its target
for the overnight rate on September 4, but left it at 2.75 percent, citing weaker
prospects for growth in the United States and global financial market volatility.
Three-month interest rates in major industrial countries registered only small net
changes, reflecting the stability in policy rates.

IV-11

In Latin America, the focus continued to be on Brazil and on the potential
impact of a victory by an opposition party candidate in next month’s presidential
election. Although the Brazilian real depreciated 6 percent against the dollar on
net over the period, Brazil’s EMBI+ spread over Treasuries declined 300 basis
points. Brazilian sovereign bond prices continued to react positively to the
financial assistance package which was announced by the IMF on August 7, with
approval on September 6. Although Argentina appeared no closer to finding
solutions to its fiscal and banking crises, the peso, in very restricted trading, was
little changed against the dollar, and Argentina’s EMBI+ spread over Treasuries,
though still extremely high, declined about 600 basis points. The Mexican peso
depreciated over 1 percent against the dollar.

In emerging Asia, equity prices in Taiwan, Singapore, and Malaysia declined
6 to 8 percent over the period, amid concerns about the pace of the recovery in
the technology sector. The New Taiwan dollar depreciated 2½ percent against

IV-12

the dollar. Korean financial markets outperformed the other technology
exporting economies, as stock prices rose a bit and the Korean won appreciated
slightly versus the dollar.

accounts of the System or Treasury.

 . The Desk did not intervene during the period for the

 
   
    
 
     
     
           
 
   
   
 
 
   
      
 
   
 
 
IV-13

Developments in Foreign Industrial Countries

Data on second-quarter GDP for the major foreign industrial countries showed
moderate growth, but the pace and sources of the expansion varied across
countries. Canadian growth remained the most robust and continued to be
supported by strength in consumption and investment. Growth in Japan, the
euro area and the United Kingdom was slower and continued to depend on
strong contributions from net exports, while investment spending declined
further. Data released for the most recent months suggest that the pace of
recovery remains relatively strong in Canada and is picking up in the United
Kingdom but that growth is flattening out at low rates in Japan and the euro area.

Inflation rates generally moved higher, in part owing to higher energy prices.
Twelve-month consumer price inflation rose to about 2 percent in the United
Kingdom and to just above that in the euro area and Canada, whereas consumer
prices continued to fall at nearly a 1 percent pace in Japan. Foreign central
banks have not changed their policy interest rates since August, as financial-
market volatility has contributed to uncertainty about growth prospects.

In Japan, real GDP rose 2.6 percent (s.a.a.r.) during the second quarter. The
figure was based on a new computation method that gives greater weight to
supply-side statistics. The rise was led by strong external demand; net exports
added 1.6 percentage points to growth, with very rapid growth in exports
outpacing a jump in imports. Private consumption edged up modestly, while
residential investment declined. Business fixed investment fell much less than
the roughly double-digit drops registered over the previous five quarters. Public
investment fell 7 percent. Inventories made a slight positive contribution to
growth, following a year of large negative contributions. Using the new
methodology for computing GDP, growth in Q1 was revised down from
5.7 percent to about zero.

Indicators for the third quarter suggest that recovery may be flagging. Industrial
production was about flat in July for the second consecutive month. Household
expenditures were up only modestly in July compared with the second-quarter
average. Recent data for business fixed investment have been mixed; core
machinery orders rose 1.9 percent in July, following a 2.9 percent increase in
June, but nonresidential building starts declined in July. Residential building
starts rose from June to July, but were down 3 percent in July from their second-
quarter average. Real exports rose only moderately in July from the second-
quarter average, while imports jumped, sharply narrowing the trade surplus.

Labor market conditions remain unfavorable, with employment down
1.2 percent in July from year-earlier levels. The unemployment rate was stuck at

IV-14

Japanese Real GDP
(Percent change from previous period, except as noted, s.a.a.r.)

Component

20001

20011

Q3

Q4

Q1

Q2

2001

2002

GDP

Total domestic demand

Consumption

Private investment

Public investment

Government consumption

Inventories2

Exports

Imports

Net exports2

2.3

2.2

.3

11.0

-11.3

4.1

.1

9.7

10.7

.1

-1.5

-1.1

1.6

-6.9

-3.5

3.0

-.7

-11.3

-9.0

-.5

-2.6

-2.4

-.4

-2.8

-3.0

.5

-8.6

-12.0

3.1

2.2

-.8

-12.1

-11.5

-.3

-.7

3.0

-1.2

-6.6

-8.9

.1

-.0

-2.0

1.9

-7.6

-2.9

1.1

-1.5

20.5

-.2

1.9

2.6

1.0

1.1

-1.8

-7.4

2.2

.8

24.9

10.8

1.6

1. Q4/Q4.
2. Percentage point contribution to GDP growth, s.a.a.r.

5.4 percent in July, only a touch below the record-high rate registered in
December. The job-offers-to-applicants ratio, considered a key leading indicator
of employment conditions, edged up in July. Core consumer goods prices in the
Tokyo area (which exclude fresh food but include energy) increased 0.2 percent
in August from the previous month, but were down 0.9 percent (n.s.a.) from a
year earlier. Wholesale prices for domestic goods stayed roughly flat between
February and August, but remained below year-earlier levels. The GDP deflator
in the second quarter was 0.9 percent below its year-earlier level.

The Bank of Japan (BOJ) announced on September 18 that it is considering
directly purchasing equity held by banks. The official statement was short on
details, providing little information on the price, quantity, or timing of any such
purchases. In a news conference held after the announcement, BOJ Governor
Hayami remarked that the purchases would be made to help banks “reduce the
impact of falling stocks” and to improve the stability of the Japanese financial
system. Japanese banks currently own a substantial portion of Japanese equities
and will be required to deduct losses on those holdings from their regulatory
capital at the September 30 close of the fiscal half-year. The BOJ kept the
guidelines for money market operations unchanged, with a goal of maintaining
an outstanding balance of current accounts at the Bank of around ¥10 to

IV-15

¥15 trillion. The BOJ announcement leaves unclear how its stock purchases
would affect banks' current account balances at the BOJ.

Japanese Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period, except as noted, s.a.)

Indicator

Industrial production1

All-industry index

Housing starts

Machinery orders2

Machinery shipments

New car registrations

Unemployment rate3

Job offers ratio4

Business sentiment5

CPI (Core, Tokyo area)6

Wholesale prices6

2001

2002

Q4

Q1

Q2

May

Jun.

Jul.

Aug.

-3.4

-.9

-2.5

-7.5

-4.7

-5.5

5.4

.52

-40

-1.0

-1.4

.6

.6

.8

-7.4

3.6

1.9

5.3

.51

-41

-.9

-1.4

3.8

.3

-.8

7.1

6.6

5.3

5.3

.53

-32

-1.1

-1.1

4.1

1.0

-.2

-.1

11.3

-13.1

.2

8.7

4.9

5.4

.53

...

-1.1

-1.2

2.9

-3.0

-11.2

5.4

.53

...

-1.0

-1.0

.1

n.a.

3.1

1.9

-1.5

1.2

5.4

.54

...

-1.0

-1.2

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

18.2

n.a.

n.a.

...

-.9

-.9

1. Mining and manufacturing.
2. Private sector, excluding ships and electric power.
3. Percent.
4. Level of indicator.
5. Tankan survey, diffusion index.
6. Percent change from year earlier, n.s.a.
n.a. Not available.

... Not applicable.

On September 19 or 20, the government is expected to announce a package of
stimulus measures. Likely components include measures to boost Japanese
stock prices, policies to quicken disposal of banks’ non-performing loans, and
tax cuts in the range of ¥1 trillion to ¥2.5 trillion (0.2 to 0.5 percent of GDP).
Earlier this month, the government announced that any future tax cuts are
expected to be coupled with future tax increases or government spending cuts in
order to maintain the medium-term revenue neutrality of tax reform. On the
spending side, the government aims to keep next fiscal year’s general
expenditures equal to or below this fiscal year’s figure of ¥47.5 trillion.

IV-16

Euro-area real GDP rose 1.4 percent (s.a.a.r.) in the second quarter, the same
pace as in the first quarter. Once again, growth was supported by positive
contributions from net exports and inventory investment, although those
contributions were about half as large as in the first quarter. Investment
spending fell for the sixth consecutive quarter. Private consumption spending,
however, rebounded in the second quarter as spending by German consumers
recovered after having been cut sharply late last year.

Euro-Area Real GDP1
(Percent change from previous period, except as noted, s.a.a.r.)

Component

20002

20012

Q3

Q4

Q1

Q2

2001

2002

GDP

Total domestic demand

Consumption

Investment

Government consumption

Inventories3

Exports

Imports

Net exports3

Memo:

France
Germany
Italy

2.7

2.2

1.8

3.4

2.2

-.0

12.2

11.3

.5

3.8
1.9
2.6

.4

1.9

1.6

-2.5

1.4

-.7

-3.3

-4.9

.5

.2
.1
.6

.7

-1.1

.4

-2.5

1.2

-1.0

-1.3

-6.0

1.7

1.9
-.8
.3

-1.2

-.9

-.1

-3.6

1.5

-.3

-6.6

-6.4

-.3

-2.0
-1.2
-.9

1.4

.2

-.7

-2.3

3.1

.5

.5

-2.9

1.2

2.1
1.1
.5

1.4

.8

1.6

-3.2

1.5

.3

8.0

6.9

.6

2.0
1.1
.9

1. Includes Greece as of 2001 Q1.
2. Q4/Q4.
3. Percentage point contribution to GDP growth, s.a.a.r.

Indicators for the third quarter suggest that growth is stuck at the relatively low
first-half rate. Purchasing managers indexes (PMIs) for both manufacturing and
services declined in July and August to just above the 50 level that is the
threshold for indicating positive growth. In Germany, the largest and recently
the most sluggish of the euro-area economies, industrial production and new
manufacturing orders each declined about 1 percent in July, and retail sales fell
more than 2 percent.

IV-17

The twelve-month rate of euro-area consumer price inflation edged back above
the ECB’s target ceiling of 2 percent in August. Excluding food, energy, alcohol
and tobacco, the twelve-month inflation rate remained at 2.4 percent in August,
just below the six-year peak of 2.5 percent reached in May. Producer prices
remain below year-earlier levels.

Euro-Area Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period except as noted, s.a.)

2001

2002

Indicator

Q4

Q1

Q2

May

Jun.

Jul.

Aug.

Industrial production1

Retail sales volume

Unemployment rate2

-1.8

.5

8.1

Consumer confidence3

-10.7

.8

.2

8.1

-9.7

.1

-.3

8.3

-9.0

.0

.3

8.3

-8.0

.5

-.5

8.3

n.a.

n.a.

8.3

-9.0

-10.0

Industrial confidence4

-17.0

-13.0

-10.0

-9.0

-10.0

-10.0

Mfg. orders, Germany

CPI5

Producer prices5

M35

-.9

2.1

-.8

8.1

1.2

2.6

-.9

7.2

2.4

2.1

-.9

7.1

3.4

2.0

-1.0

7.7

-3.3

1.8

-1.1

7.1

-.9

1.9

-.6

7.1

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

2.1

n.a.

n.a.

1. Excludes construction.
2. Percent. Euro-area standardized to ILO definition. Includes Eurostat estimates in some

cases.

3. Diffusion index based on European Commission surveys in individual countries;
Averages of responses to questions on financial situation, general economic situation,
and purchasing attitudes.

4. Diffusion index based on European Commission surveys in individual countries;

Averages of responses to questions on production expectations, orders, and stocks.

5. Eurostat harmonized definition. Percent change from year earlier.
n.a. Not available.

Slow growth has put pressure on euro-area government balances. The German
government revealed that its deficit for the first half of 2002 was 3.5 percent.
With tax revenues in the second half likely to be depressed by sluggish
economic growth, and with an increase in government spending in response to
the recent floods in eastern Germany, it appears increasingly likely that the
German budget deficit will exceed the 3 percent Maastricht treaty limit this year.
Germany should be able to escape sanctions by citing the exceptional

IV-18

circumstance of the floods and by emphasizing actions the government has taken
to offset the budget impact in the medium term. In particular, the Schroeder
government has proposed that scheduled individual income tax cuts will be
postponed from 2003 to 2004 and corporate tax rates will be raised for one year
in 2003.

In the United Kingdom, second-quarter real GDP rose 2.3 percent (s.a.a.r.) after
two quarters of weak growth. The data were revised down substantially from
preliminary estimates owing to a fall-off in production during the Queen’s
Golden Jubilee celebrations in June. Consumer spending rose briskly following
a moderation of consumption growth in the first quarter. Gross fixed capital
formation declined marginally, and inventories subtracted 1.4 percentage points
from growth. Exports rose more sharply than imports, and net exports added
1.5 percentage points to growth.

U.K. Real GDP
(Percent change from previous period, except as noted, s.a.a.r.)

Component

20001

20011

Q3

Q4

Q1

Q2

2001

2002

GDP

Total domestic demand

Consumption

Investment

Government consumption

Inventories2

Exports

Imports

Net exports2

2.2

3.4

4.8

4.5

1.3

-.8

8.7

10.9

-1.2

1.5

1.7

4.2

1.4

.7

4.3

-6.7

-14.2

3.9

-.5

-4.6

-2.8

-.5

4.8

-.2

-11.4

-10.8

.4

.4

3.0

4.7

-.9

7.9

-1.3

-6.3

1.4

-2.7

.6

3.2

2.0

-5.6

8.1

1.5

-4.0

3.7

-2.8

2.3

1.1

4.7

-.2

-3.6

-1.4

12.5

6.2

1.5

1. Q4/Q4.
2. Percentage point contribution to GDP growth, s.a.a.r.

As expected, industrial production bounced back substantially in July after
plunging in June because of work stoppages related to the Golden Jubilee.
Despite industrial production remaining about 1 percent below May’s level, it is
expected to result in a large “payback” effect to GDP in the third quarter.

IV-19

Other indicators for the third quarter suggest a pick-up in growth in August after
signs of a slowdown over the past several months. The manufacturing PMI
recovered in August, indicating expansion again after July’s contraction.
Business confidence improved smartly in August continuing its climb from
May’s low. July’s trade balance narrowed somewhat from June. Retail sales
grew in July after two months of contraction. However, surveys for August retail
sales are mixed. The services PMI increased in August, continuing to indicate
expansion, whereas preliminary estimates of consumer confidence suggest little
change in August from the month before.

U.K. Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period except as noted, s.a.)

2001

2002

Indicator

Q4

Q1

Q2

May

Jun.

Jul.

Aug.

Industrial production

Retail sales volume

Unemployment rate1

Claims-based

Labor force survey2

Business confidence3

Retail prices4

Producer input prices5
Average earnings5

-2.3

1.3

3.2

5.1

-24.0

2.0

-8.2
3.3

-1.2

1.0

3.1

5.1

-3.3

2.4

-5.6
2.9

.3

1.7

3.2

5.2

8.0

1.9

-5.9
3.9

1.1

-.6

3.2

5.1

4.0

1.8

-6.4
4.0

-4.3

-.4

3.2

5.2

6.0

1.5

-6.9
3.8

3.4

.4

3.1

n.a.

9.0

2.0

-3.8
4.2

n.a.

n.a.

3.1

n.a.

16.0

1.9

-2.2
n.a.

1. Percent.
2. Three-month average centered on month shown.
3. Percentage of firms expecting output to increase in the next four months less percentage

expecting output to decrease.

4. Excluding mortgage interest payments. Percent change from year earlier.
5. Percent change from year earlier.
... Not applicable.
n.a. Not available.

Data on the housing market are mixed, with widespread concern that Britain is
experiencing a housing price bubble. The two leading surveys of housing prices
continued to register twelve-month increases of around 20 percent in August. A
new survey of housing prices (based on offer prices collected by real estate
agents) indicated housing price growth slowed in August. In July, borrowing to
finance the purchase of new homes bounced back to just above May’s record
high after dropping sharply in June.

IV-20

Labor market conditions remain tight. The official claims-based unemployment
rate remained at 3.1 percent in August, near a record low. Even so, the twelve-
month rate of retail price inflation (excluding mortgage interest payments)
remained below the Bank of England’s 2½ percent target in August at
1.9 percent. The twelve-month growth rate of average earnings rose to
4.2 percent in July.

In Canada, real GDP increased 4.3 percent (s.a.a.r.) in the second quarter,
following an upwardly revised 6.2 percent gain in the first quarter. Inventories
contributed strongly to growth, as firms restocked following three quarters of
sizable inventory drawdowns. Net exports subtracted from growth, as imports
surged. Final domestic demand grew steadily at 3.7 percent, supported by
continued strength in the home-building sector and a 20.6 percent surge in
business investment in machinery and equipment. Monthly real GDP data by
industry show some slowing of growth in recent months to 1.4 percent and
1.7 percent (s.a.a.r.) in June and July respectively.

Canadian Real GDP
(Percent change from previous period, except as noted, s.a.a.r.)

Component

20001

20011

Q3

Q4

Q1

Q2

2001

2002

GDP

Total domestic demand

Consumption

Investment

Government consumption

Inventories2

Exports

Imports

Net exports2

3.5

2.6

3.4

3.6

3.4

-.8

4.7

2.2

1.2

.8

-.3

2.2

-1.6

2.1

-1.6

-6.1

-9.2

.9

-.5

-.7

-.3

8.7

1.9

-2.4

-7.0

-7.0

-.3

2.9

-3.8

4.1

-13.9

.9

-3.4

-.6

-16.9

6.6

6.2

6.0

2.8

8.7

1.2

2.2

5.4

4.3

.7

4.3

10.0

3.0

7.8

1.2

5.7

1.8

16.8

-4.9

1. Q4/Q4.
2. Percentage point contribution to GDP growth, s.a.a.r.

Other recent indicators suggest that the Canadian economy is continuing to grow
at a steady rate. Manufacturing shipments jumped 12.6 percent (s.a.a.r) in July,
led by the increased production of motor vehicles. New orders, however, fell
during the month, as did the number of unfilled orders. Housing starts in July

IV-21

and August remain near the 12-year high reached early this year. Auto sales have
also remained robust, with July’s sales only slightly below the record numbers of
late last year.

The unemployment rate decreased to 7.5 percent in August. Employment has
grown 2.6 percent over the first eight months of 2002, the largest eight-month
increase since 1994. Employment growth in the manufacturing and construction
sectors has been particularly robust over the course of the year. The twelve-
month rate of consumer price inflation in July rose to 2.1 percent from
1.3 percent in June, with most of the increase attributable to a rise in energy and
cigarette prices, as well as higher automobile insurance premiums. The twelve-
month rate of core price inflation, excluding food and energy prices, rose to
2.9 percent in July from 2.6 percent in June.

Canadian Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period except as noted, s.a.)

Indicator

GDP by industry

Industrial production

New mfg. orders

Retail sales

Employment

Unemployment rate1

Consumer prices2

2001

2002

Q4

Q1

Q2

May

Jun.

Jul.

Aug.

.4

-1.1

-4.8

2.6

.1

7.7

1.1

1.4

2.4

4.7

2.6

.7

7.8

1.5

1.2

1.7

3.7

.8

.9

7.6

1.3

.1

-.6

-.6

-1.1

.2

7.7

1.0

...

...

.1

-.1

.0

1.8

.4

7.5

1.3

...

...

n.a.

n.a.

-.5

n.a.

.1

7.6

2.1

...

...

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

.4

7.5

n.a.

...

...

Consumer attitudes3

114.7

125.0

125.5

Business confidence3

117.6

141.5

145.2

1. Percent.
2. Percent change from year earlier, n.s.a.
3. Level of index, 1991 = 100.
n.a. Not available.

... Not applicable.

The Bank of Canada left its target for the overnight rate, its key policy rate,
unchanged at 2.75 percent following its September 4 meeting date, citing
concerns over growth prospects in the United States and other countries. The
decision ended a string of rate hikes totaling 75 basis points, the most recent on
July 16, that had reversed part of the cumulative reduction of 375 basis points
that began in 2001. However, the Bank noted that the Canadian economy is

IV-22

approaching its production capacity and further rate hikes are likely to be
necessary going forward.

External Balances
(Billions of U.S. dollars, s.a.a.r.)

2001

2002

Q4

Q1

Q2 May

Jun.

Jul.

45.9
98.5

72.4

86.1
117.5 120.6

86.1
121.5

101.2
133.9

68.5
128.7

91.1
38.4

61.2
39.2

90.9
-5.3

94.6
1.1

122.6
44.7

n.a.
n.a.

91.3
25.5

112.6 107.8
43.7
36.9

113.3
42.8

111.3
46.1

126.4
5.7

.8
4.1

1.1
3.6

1.9
4.0

2.6
5.0

15.3
7.5

5.6
-9.3

9.6
-13.9

13.5
-19.0

1.4
6.7

8.3
-7.6

4.3
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.

-48.4
-37.3

-45.0
32.0

-38.2
n.a.

-27.1
...

-50.2
...

-46.0
...

32.8
11.2

34.9
13.3

35.2
12.6

35.4
...

29.8
...

n.a.
...

Country
and balance

Japan

Trade
Current account

Euro area
Trade1
Current account1

Germany
Trade
Current account

France
Trade
Current account

Italy
Trade
Current account1

United Kingdom
Trade
Current Account

Canada
Trade
Current Account

1. Not seasonally adjusted.
n.a. Not available.

... Not applicable.

IV-23

IV-24

IV-25

Economic Situation in Other Countries

Economic conditions in South America remain extremely fragile. No signs of
recovery have emerged in Argentina and Venezuela. In Brazil, financial markets
have stabilized somewhat over the intermeeting period, but the high level of
uncertainty is taking a toll on economic activity. In contrast, growth in Mexico
turned decidedly positive in the second quarter, led by strong exports. In
emerging Asia, all countries experienced positive growth in the second quarter,
and recent readings from economic indicators suggest that recovery has
continued. With the notable exceptions of Argentina and Venezuela, inflation
has generally remained under control.

In Brazil, real GDP growth in the second quarter slowed to 2.4 percent (s.a.a.r.),
but was supported by strong agricultural output. Indicators for the third quarter
have pointed to a weakening in activity, as the country’s access to credit at home
and abroad remains tightly constrained. Industrial output was flat in July, and
unemployment edged above 8 percent. Twelve-month inflation ticked down in
August to about 7½ percent, running above the 5½ percent upper limit of the
government’s inflation target range for 2002. The trade surplus has been
increasing in recent months in response to the weakening economy, the
depreciation of the real, and the easing of a customs strike.

During August, concerns rose over the lack of foreign credit for the Brazilian
private sector, whose external obligations coming due in the next few months far
exceed those of the government. These concerns prompted Finance Minister
Malan and Central Bank President Fraga to meet with representatives of
16 major international banks in late August, resulting in a statement from the
banks promising to maintain their “general level” of business to Brazil. The
government has continued to shorten the maturity structure of its large domestic
debt in an effort to contain the costs of refinancing that debt.

Observers remain concerned that opposition party presidential candidates, if
elected in October, may not adhere to the conditions of a new $30 billion IMF
loan for Brazil; the loan was approved by the Fund’s executive board on
September 6. About $5-6 billion will be released this year and the remainder
next year, assuming that the new government (which will take office in January)
adheres to fiscal and monetary discipline. Lula of the Workers Party continues
to have a commanding lead in the opinion polls, but Serra, the candidate
preferred by most market participants, has moved up in the polls since early
September. The first round of the election will occur October 6; if no candidate
wins a simple majority of the votes, a second round election between the two top
contenders will be held October 27.

IV-26

Brazilian Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period, s.a., except as noted)

Indicator

2000

2001

2002

Q1

Q2

June

July

Aug.

Real GDP1

Industrial production

Unemployment rate2

Consumer prices3

Trade balance4

Current account5

3.8

6.6

7.1

6.0

-.7

-.6

1.5

6.2

7.7

2.6

3.5

2.7

7.3

7.6

4.6

2.4

1.4

7.9

7.8

1.9

...

.9

7.9

7.7

2.4

-24.6

-23.2

-12.9

-20.4

-15.5

...

.0

8.1

7.6

12.5

-6.6

...

n.a.

n.a.

7.3

23.3

n.a.

1. Annual rate. Annual figures are Q4/Q4.
2. Percent. “Open” unemployment rate.
3. Percent change from year-earlier period, except annual figures, which are Dec./Dec. Price

index is IPC-A.

4. Billions of U.S. dollars, annual rate.
5. Billions of U.S. dollars, n.s.a., annual rate.
n.a. Not available.

... Not applicable.

In Argentina, economic indicators turned down again in July. Industrial
production declined 2.4 percent, leaving output 13 percent below its level a year
earlier and 25 percent below its 1998 peak. Sales and consumer confidence also
declined in July. The extremely weak economy and suppressed utilities prices
helped restrain consumer price inflation. The CPI rose 2.3 percent (s.a.) in
August, bringing the twelve-month increase to over 36 percent, whereas the
wholesale price index was up 108 percent on a twelve-month basis. Economic
weakness and capital controls have led to an increase in the trade surplus; in
July, on a twelve-month basis, exports were down 6 percent, but imports were
down more than 50 percent.

Negotiations between the Argentine government and the IMF on a new
stabilization program have remained at an impasse. The Argentine government
submitted a letter of intent in mid-August, but the Fund voiced concerns about
its inadequate monetary and fiscal framework and about the lack of a plan for
returning the insolvent banking system to financial health. Developments in
Argentina over the second half of August reinforced these concerns. First,
congress approved several banking measures that extended protection for bank
debtors. Second, rulings by the Supreme Court, which has been in conflict with
the Duhalde government for months, continue to undermine efforts by the
government to achieve fiscal balance and stabilize the banking system. Finally,
reports indicate that various provinces will continue to issue their own quasi-
monies to finance their fiscal deficits.

IV-27

Argentine Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period, s.a., except as noted)

Indicator

2000

2001

2002

Q1

Q2

June

July

Aug.

Real GDP1

Industrial production

Unemployment rate2

Consumer prices3

Trade balance4

Current account5

-1.9

-1.8

15.1

-.7

2.6

-8.9

-10.5

-21.8

-5.1

17.4

-1.5

7.5

-4.6

-3.4

...

4.2

16.6

6.0

n.a.

-.8

21.3

23.3

n.a.

n.a.

...

1.5

...

28.4

16.2

...

...

-2.4

...

32.9

16.8

...

...

n.a.

...

36.5

n.a.

...

1. Annual rate. Annual figures are Q4/Q4.
2. Percent, n.s.a. Data are released for May and October only. Figures for Q2 reflect data

for May.

3. Percent change from year-earlier period, except annual figures, which are Dec./Dec.
4. Billions of U.S. dollars, annual rate.
5. Billions of U.S. dollars, n.s.a., annual rate.
n.a. Not available.

... Not applicable.

In Mexico, real GDP rose 4.7 percent (s.a.a.r.) in the second quarter following
six consecutive quarters of output declines. The recovery in large part owes to a
revival of external demand; on a seasonally-adjusted basis Mexican exports rose
about 5 percent (not annualized) in the second quarter and a further 2 percent in
July. The strength of exports also helped to narrow the current account deficit.
However, industrial production was flat in July and this, together with a
significant decline in business confidence in August, suggests that growth may
have softened some from its second-quarter pace. In recent months,
twelve-month CPI inflation has been a bit over the government’s 4½ percent
target for this year, reflecting in part the depreciation of the peso.

IV-28

Mexican Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period, s.a., except as noted)

Indicator

2000

2001

2002

Q1

Q2

June

July Aug.

Real GDP1

Overall economic activity

Industrial production

Unemployment rate2

Consumer prices3

Trade balance4

Imports4

Exports4

4.9

6.5

6.0

2.2

9.0

-1.5

-.2

-3.4

2.5

4.4

-.0

.5

.6

2.7

4.7

4.7

1.4

1.4

2.7

4.8

...

.2

-.3

2.6

4.9

...

n.a.

0.0

2.9

5.5

-8.0

-10.0

-9.1

-8.2

-8.7

-7.4

174.5

168.4

164.2

170.4

170.4

172.4

166.5

158.4

155.1

162.2

161.7

165.1

Current account5

-18.1

-17.9

-15.2

-12.0

...

....

...

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

5.3

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

...

1. Annual rate. Annual figures are Q4/Q4.
2. Percent; counts as unemployed those working one hour a week or less.
3. Percent change from year-earlier period, except annual figures, which are Dec./Dec.
4. Billions of U.S. dollars, annual rate.
5. Billions of U.S. dollars, n.s.a., annual rate.
n.a. Not available.

... Not applicable.

The Venezuelan economy is mired in a deep recession. Output plunged over
22 percent (s.a.a.r.) in the second quarter. Declines were widespread, but
particularly sizable in the oil, auto, and construction sectors. The second-quarter
decline likely reflects the impact of April’s attempted coup, but political tensions
have remained high and there is little evidence of a subsequent pick-up in
activity. The increase in oil prices over the past several months has proved
insufficient to satisfy the government’s hefty financing requirements, which are
estimated by the government to be around 7 percent of GDP in 2002. So far this
year, the government has had significant problems placing and rolling over
domestic debt and has been unable to issue debt internationally. The bolivar has
depreciated 7 percent since the last Greenbook and has fallen 45 percent since
floating in mid-February. Consumer prices have risen 24 percent in the twelve
months ended August.

IV-29

Venezuelan Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period, s.a., except as noted)

Indicator

2000

2001

2002

Q1

Q2

June

July

Aug.

Real GDP1

Unemployment rate2

Consumer prices3

5.7

13.4

13.4

.9

-15.3

-22.1

13.3

12.3

15.5

14.6

Non-oil trade balance4

-10.3

-12.2

-11.1

Trade balance4

Current account5

17.5

13.4

9.4

4.1

7.3

.3

...

16.2

19.6

n.a.

n.a.

...

...

n.a.

...

n.a.

22.0

24.2

n.a.

n.a.

...

n.a.

n.a.

...

15.8

18.9

n.a.

n.a.

6.7

1. Annual rate. Annual figures are Q4/Q4.
2. Percent, n.s.a.
3. Percent change from year-earlier period, except annual figures, which are Dec./Dec.
4. Billions of U.S. dollars, annual rate.
5. Billions of U.S. dollars, n.s.a., annual rate.
n.a. Not available.

... Not applicable.

The Korean expansion, while still robust, showed some signs of moderating
over the intermeeting period. Real GDP grew 5.6 percent (s.a.a.r.) in the second
quarter, down from the faster pace in the first quarter; consumption and export
growth were solid, but investment was weak. Industrial production in July
rebounded only partially from its drop in June. (An election day holiday, labor
strikes, and World Cup fever held down June’s figure.) In August, business
sentiment improved, but remained below levels earlier this year, and consumer
confidence slid for the second month in a row. Strong export growth in July was
more than matched by a rise in imports, leading to a smaller trade surplus and
virtually erasing the current account surplus. The unemployment rate has held
steady at around 3 percent recently, and consumer price inflation through August
remained well within the central bank’s 2 to 4 percent target range.

IV-30

Korean Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period, s.a., except as noted)

Indicator

2000

2001

2002

Q1

Q2

June

July

Aug.

Real GDP1

Industrial production

Unemployment rate2

Consumer prices3

Trade balance4

Current account5

5.1

16.9

4.1

2.8

16.9

12.2

4.4

1.7

3.7

3.2

13.4

8.6

7.8

1.5

3.0

2.5

19.2

7.0

5.6

2.1

3.1

2.7

14.4

7.3

...

-3.6

3.0

2.6

17.1

9.9

...

1.9

3.0

2.1

8.2

.3

...

n.a.

3.1

2.4

n.a.

n.a.

1. Annual rate. Annual figures are Q4/Q4.
2. Percent.
3. Percent change from year earlier, except annual changes, which are Dec./Dec.
4. Billions of U.S. dollars, annual rate.
5. Billions of U.S. dollars, n.s.a., annual rate.
n.a. Not available.

... Not applicable.

Since the last Greenbook, data from the ASEAN region show a further pick-up
in growth. Both Singapore and Indonesia registered double-digit second-quarter
growth rates, and the pace of expansion stepped up sharply in Malaysia and the
Philippines as well. Some one-time factors, such as surges in agricultural output
in Indonesia and the Philippines and a significant boost from government
spending in Singapore, were at least partly responsible for the very strong
performance.

Recent industrial production numbers have been encouraging, and the trade
balances of the most export-dependent countries, Singapore and Malaysia, have
been supported by rising exports. Trade performance has been mixed in the rest
of the region, with rising imports roughly offsetting rising exports in Indonesia
and the Philippines, and a surge in imports leading to a trade deficit for Thailand
in July. Inflation has remained subdued in most of the region. Indonesia
remains the outlier, with twelve-month inflation above 10 percent, but this is
down from rates earlier this year.

IV-31

ASEAN Economic Indicators: Growth
(Percent change from previous period, s.a., except as noted)

Indicator and country

2000

2001

2002

Q1

Q2

May

June

July

Real GDP1
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Singapore
Thailand

Industrial production2
Indonesia3
Malaysia
Philippines
Singapore
Thailand

7.3
6.2
3.7
11.4
3.4

11.6
19.1
2.4
15.3
3.3

1.2
-.6
3.9
-6.4
2.0

.7
-4.1
-6.6
-11.6
1.3

4.1
4.3
-.2
8.1
6.6

.4
2.1
5.3
6.8
2.0

10.0
7.0
9.7
13.6
6.1

-2.0
2.4
5.4
10.7
3.2

...
...
...
...
...

-1.3
.1
-3.2
2.7
.4

...
...
...
...
...

1.0
-1.7
-3.1
-2.2
-1.8

...
...
...
...
...

n.a.
4.1
n.a.
0.0
3.1

1. Annual rate. Annual figures are Q4/Q4.
2. Annual figures are annual averages.
3. Staff estimate.
n.a. Not available.

... Not applicable.

ASEAN Economic Indicators: Trade Balance
(Billions of U.S. dollars, s.a.a.r.)

Country

2000

2001

Q1

Q2

Indonesia

Malaysia

Philippines

Singapore

Thailand

n.a. Not available.

28.6

16.1

6.7

3.3

5.5

25.4

14.3

2.6

5.8

2.5

26.7

14.9

4.9

6.2

3.6

28.3

12.1

.8

5.8

3.3

2002

June

28.9

14.3

.5

4.8

6.0

July

Aug.

26.2

14.9

n.a.

13.2

-3.5

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

11.8

n.a.

IV-32

ASEAN Economic Indicators: CPI Inflation
(Percent change from year earlier, except as noted)

Country

20001

20011

2002

Q1

Q2

June

July

Aug.

Indonesia

Malaysia

Philippines

Singapore

Thailand

9.3

1.3

6.7

2.1

1.4

12.5

14.5

12.6

11.5

10.0

10.6

1.2

4.1

-.6

.8

1.4

3.6

-.8

.6

1.9

3.4

-.4

.2

2.1

3.0

.2

.2

2.1

2.6

-.4

.1

n.a.

2.9

n.a.

.3

1. December/December.
n.a. Not available.

The Chinese economy has continued to grow at a rapid pace. The strong
performance of the economy so far this year appears to have resulted mainly
from surging investment and robust export growth. Nominal fixed investment
rose 25 percent in the first half of the year over the same period a year earlier,
reflecting strong public sector spending and inflows of foreign direct investment.
Consumption, as measured by retail sales data, also appears to be holding up
well. China continues to experience deflation, however, with consumer prices
down nearly 1 percent from year-ago levels.

Chinese Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period, s.a., except as noted)

Indicator

2000

2001

2002

Q1

Q2

June

July

Aug.

Real GDP1

Industrial production2

Consumer prices2

Trade balance3

8.0

11.4

1.5

24.1

7.5

8.9

-.3

8.5

8.2

-.6

23.1

40.3

9.3

12.5

-1.1

29.9

...

...

...

12.4

12.8

12.7

-.8

-.9

45.4

12.6

n.a.

3.9

1. Annual rate. Quarterly data estimated by staff from reported four-quarter growth rates.

Annual figures are Q4/Q4.

2. Percent change from year earlier. Annual figures are year over year.
3. Billions of U.S. dollars, annual rate. Imports are c.i.f.
n.a. Not available.

... Not applicable.

IV-33

In Hong Kong, growth of real GDP edged up to 1.6 percent (s.a.a.r.) in the
second quarter, but economic conditions remain weak. Consumption declined
nearly 4 percent in the second quarter. Stagnant retail sales and weak consumer
confidence in July suggest that a rebound in consumption is not imminent.
Consumer prices continued to fall through July, and unemployment remained
high through August. Hong Kong’s trade deficit has widened in recent months,
owing mainly to increased imports, many of which are destined for re-export.
Hong Kong remains highly dependent on the external sector, though its role as
an entrepot is being increasingly challenged by China’s continuing integration
into the world economy.

Hong Kong Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period, s.a., except as noted)

Indicator

2000

2001

Q1

Q2

Real GDP1

Unemployment rate2

Consumer prices3

Trade balance4

7.0

5.1

-2.1

-1.4

4.9

-3.5

-11.0

-11.4

0.8

7.0

-2.6

-4.5

1.6

7.7

-3.2

-7.8

2002

June

...

7.7

-3.4

July

Aug.

...

7.8

-3.5

...

7.6

n.a.

n.a.

-10.6

-10.3

1. Annual rate. Annual figures are Q4/Q4.
2. Percent. Monthly numbers are averages of the current and previous two months.
3. Percent change from year-earlier period, except annual figures, which are Dec./Dec.
4. Billions of U.S. dollars, annual rate. Imports are c.i.f.
n.a. Not available.

... Not applicable.

Real economic activity in Taiwan increased only slightly in the second quarter,
but the low rate of growth owed mainly to a negative arithmetic contribution
from a surge in imports. Final domestic demand advanced 4 percent in the
second quarter. Indicators for July have been mixed; exports moved down, but
industrial production and foreign investment rose. Exports weakened a bit
further in August, but a larger drop in imports led to a widening of the trade
balance. Consumer prices in August retraced much of July’s increase, as
weather-related effects on food prices abated.

IV-34

Taiwan Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period, s.a., except as noted)

Indicator

2000

2001

2002

Q1

Q2

June

July

Aug.

Real GDP1

Unemployment rate2

Industrial production

Consumer prices3

Trade balance4

Current account5

3.9

3.0

7.4

1.7

8.3

8.9

-1.6

4.6

-7.3

-1.7

15.6

18.9

6.2

5.3

3.8

-.1

22.9

29.1

.3

5.2

6.0

.0

16.3

24.3

...

5.2

-5.4

.1

...

5.0

2.6

.4

...

n.a.

n.a.

-.3

17.2

11.5

18.1

...

...

...

1. Annual rate. Annual figures are Q4/Q4.
2. Percent.
3. Percent change from year-earlier period, except annual figures, which are Dec./Dec.
4. Billions of U.S. dollars, annual rate. Imports are c.i.f.
5. Billions of U.S. dollars, n.s.a., annual rate.
n.a. Not available.

... Not applicable.

