Prefatory Note 

The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   

Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 

Content last modified 05/27/2010. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Confidential (FR)   Class III FOMC

Part 2                                                                                     April 28, 2004

CURRENT ECONOMIC
AND FINANCIAL CONDITIONS

Recent Developments

Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
by the staff of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

Confidential (FR)   Class III FOMC

                                                                                                        April 28, 2004

Recent Developments                         

Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
by the staff of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

                
Domestic Nonfinancial
Developments                         

Domestic Nonfinancial Developments

Overview
The economy appears to have expanded robustly again in the first quarter. 
Available data are consistent with another quarter of solid growth in consumer
spending, and activity in the housing sector has remained high.  Outlays for
equipment and software have continued to increase at a vigorous pace even as
spending on nonresidential structures have continued to fall.  Output in the
industrial sector expanded solidly in the first quarter.  In the labor market, the
overall employment picture brightened somewhat in March.  Core consumer
prices rose 0.4 percent in March; the twelve-month change in the core CPI was
1.6 percent, about the same rate of change as a year earlier.

Labor Market Developments 
The labor market has shown additional signs of recovery since the last
Greenbook.  Private payroll employment climbed 277,000 in March, with gains
spread widely across industries.  Construction employment rose smartly, retail
trade employment increased beyond the effect of the end of the supermarket
strikes in California, and employment in both business and nonbusiness services
expanded briskly.  For the first quarter as a whole, the average monthly gain in
private payrolls was 161,000, well above the fourth-quarter average of 58,000. 
However, the average workweek of production or nonsupervisory workers
slipped 0.1 hour in March to 33.7 hours, the level that has persisted on average
since early 2003.  Thus, despite the pickup in payroll employment, aggregate
hours increased at an annual rate of just 1-1/2 percent in the first quarter,
slightly below the 2 percent pace in the fourth quarter.

The unemployment rate was 5.7 percent in March, more than 1/2 percentage
point below its peak in June 2003.  However, the decline in the unemployment
rate since last summer likely overstates the reduction in labor market slack
because the labor force participation rate has also fallen to the unexpectedly low
level of 65.9 percent.  The employment-population ratio combines movements
in the unemployment rate and the labor force participation rate; at 62.1 percent,
this ratio remains below its level for most of 2003.  In addition, the fraction of
persons working part-time for economic reasons in March was close to the
recent high from the middle of last year.

The sluggishness of the labor market’s recovery through the beginning of this
year appears to have been attributable to anemic hiring rather than to continued
high rates of separations.  Although initial claims for unemployment insurance
changed little in the past two months, they had fallen substantially since the
spring of last year, suggesting that discharges had declined.  This assessment is
supported by data from the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS),
which show that the rate of separations moved down considerably between late 

II-2

II-3

II-4

2001 and February of this year.1  Meanwhile, both the hiring rate and the rate of
job openings, as measured by JOLTS, remained near their cyclical lows in
February.  And although insured unemployment is down, recipients still appear
to be exhausting their benefits in large numbers rather than entering
employment more quickly.

However, the sizable gain in payroll employment in March suggests that the
hiring rate may now be picking up.  Other labor market indicators also point to
near-term improvement in hiring conditions.  Manpower Inc.’s survey of firms’
hiring plans for the second quarter reached its highest level since 2000; the
National Federation of Independent Businesses has reported a net improvement
in hiring plans over the past year; and hiring plans in the National Association of
Business Economists (NABE) survey, which had stepped up in the second half
of last year, improved further in the most recent surveys.  In addition,
households’ perceptions of current employment conditions, as measured by the
Conference Board, improved in April to the highest level since mid-2002. 
Nevertheless, households are less optimistic now about the future of the labor
market than they were at the end of last year.  Both the Michigan survey and the
Conference Board reported that, in April, households’ expectations of labor
market conditions remained below their year-end levels.

Industrial Production
Although a weather-related decline in utilities production helped push total
industrial production down 0.2 percent in March, the pace of expansion
quickened for the first quarter as a whole.2  Total IP rose at an annual rate of
6.6 percent in the first quarter, 1 percentage point faster than in the fourth
quarter of 2003.

Manufacturing output climbed 5.9 percent last quarter, with gains again spread
widely across both industry and market groups.  The factory operating rate
edged up to 75 percent in the first quarter—a level that remains 5 percentage
points below its 1972–2003 average.  Motor vehicle assemblies were
12.2 million units (annual rate) in March, about 1/2 million units slower than in
February but still enough to leave first-quarter assemblies about 200,000 units
above the fourth-quarter pace.  Excluding motor vehicles, manufacturing IP rose
at an annual rate of 5.6 percent last quarter.

1. The Bureau of Labor Statistics seasonally adjusted the JOLTS data for the first time
earlier this month.  These data cover the period December 2000 to February 2003.  Separations
include quits, layoffs and discharges, retirements, and transfers to other locations.

2. Utilities production, which accounts for about 10 percent of total IP, declined 2.3 percent

in March as a result of unseasonably warm weather—heating degree days in March were
2.1 standard deviations below normal.

II-5

II-6

Production of Domestic Autos and Trucks
(Millions of units at an annual rate except as noted; FRB seasonals)

Item 

2003

2003

2004

2004

Q3

Q4

Q1

Jan.

Feb. Mar.

U.S. production

Autos
Trucks 
Days’ supply1
Inventories2

12.1
4.5
7.6
70
3.04

12.3
4.6
7.7
63
2.88

12.2
4.4
7.8
68
3.04

12.4
4.4
8.0
74
3.16

12.3
4.3
8.0
71
3.01

12.7
4.5
8.1
72
3.06

12.2
4.4
7.8
73
3.16

Note. Components may not sum to totals because of rounding.
1. Quarterly and annual values are calculated with end-of-period stocks

and average reported sales; excludes medium and heavy trucks.
2. End-of-period stocks; excludes medium and heavy trucks.

Production in the high-tech sector of manufacturing rose at an annual rate of
30 percent in the first quarter.  Semiconductor production chalked up a gain of
48 percent, and computer production rose 29 percent; in contrast, IP for
communications equipment barely edged up in the first quarter and was little
changed from year-ago levels.

Outside of energy, motor vehicles and parts, and high-tech, production at all
stages of processing rose in the first quarter.  The output of finished products,
led by a surge in the production of business equipment, moved up at an annual
rate of 3-1/2 percent.  Production at the earlier stages of processing—primary
and semifinished—rose 4-1/2 percent, continuing a trend that began in the
middle of last year.  Indexes for both durable and nondurable materials moved
up smartly again, as did those for business and construction supplies.

Available weekly physical product data are up slightly, on balance, thus far in
April.  Motor vehicle assemblies are scheduled to edge up in April to an annual
rate of 12.4 million units, and production through the first half of the month is
running a bit above schedules.  Electricity generation has also edged up. 
However, output in other manufacturing industries for which we have weekly
physical product data—principally, crude oil and refinery products, iron and
steel, appliances, meat products, and lumber and plywood—has slipped a bit so
far this month.

The forward-looking indicators of near-term production point to continued
expansion in the industrial sector in the coming months.  The Institute for
Supply Management’s (ISM) diffusion index of new orders remained high in
March, and the index for new export orders rose significantly.  More recently,
the Philadelphia Fed’s new orders index ticked up in April and continued to
indicate expansion, and the ISM Semiannual Forecast reported that prospects for 

II-7

II-8

II-9

manufacturing in the remainder of 2004 are bright.  The staff’s series for real
adjusted durable goods orders increased 3.3 percent in March, and its first-
quarter average moved up 6-1/2 percent.  In addition, estimates from the Board
staff’s flow-of-goods system indicate that IP inventories are low in the majority
of industries.  Given continued strong demand, the current low level of
inventories could provide further impetus to near-term production.

New Orders for Durable Goods 
(Percent change from preceding period except as noted; seasonally adjusted)

Component

Proportion,
2003: H2
(percent)

2003 2004

2004

Q4

Q1

Jan.

Feb. Mar.

Annual rate

Monthly rate

Total orders

100.0

18.4

5.3

-2.6

Adjusted orders1
Computers
Communication equipment
Other capital goods
Other2

Memo:
Real adjusted orders

Excluding high tech

19.1

75.0
8.9
4.7 -13.3
5.0
4.0 -56.0 -56.4
27.7  11.4 
23.0
7.2
26.0
43.0

-1.4
-8.7 
 70.6
-4.5
-2.1

    . . . 
   . . .

18.0
22.9

6.4 
4.7

-1.6
-3.5

3.8

2.8
2.4
9.1
2.0
2.8

2.5
2.0

3.4

3.8
.0 
-8.2
4.4
4.8

3.3
4.4

1. Orders excluding defense capital goods, nondefense aircraft, and motor vehicle parts.
2. Primary metals; most fabricated metals; most stone, clay, and glass products;

household appliances; scientific instruments; and miscellaneous durable goods.

. . .  Not applicable.

In the high-tech sector, orders and shipments of equipment for manufacturing
semiconductors remained high in March, suggesting that chipmakers are
expanding productive capacity.  In addition, Intel’s revenue guidance for the
second quarter of 2004 points to another respectable increase in semiconductor
production.3  For computers and communications equipment, server sales were
especially strong in the first quarter, and CIO Magazine diffusion indexes for
planned spending on computer hardware and data-networking equipment were
up.  Furthermore, a majority of respondents in the NABE Industry Survey for
April expect their firms to increase spending for these types of equipment over
the coming year.

3. Intel’s first-quarter revenues were a touch below market expectations.  The shortfall was

likely due to heightened competition from AMD, which reported stronger-than-expected first-
quarter revenues. AMD’s successful 64-bit Opteron chip for high-end servers continues to gain
market share, and the company’s strong sales of flash-memory have outpaced Intel’s.

II-10

II-11

Motor Vehicles
Sales of light vehicles firmed in March after some softening in the first two
months of the year, and our industry contacts expect sales in April to improve a
bit further.  Thus far, the pickup has not been driven by rising sales incentives: 
The average value of incentives that consumers received ticked down in early
April.4  Nonetheless, attitudes toward car-buying continue to be favorable,
according to the Michigan Survey of Consumer Sentiment.  

Sales of domestically produced light trucks and automobiles slowed in the first
quarter.  With the pace of assemblies up and sales down, days’ supply of light
trucks ended the quarter at an uncomfortably high level.  Accordingly,
manufacturers have scheduled fewer assemblies of light trucks for the second
quarter than in the first quarter.  In contrast, stocks of automobiles ended the
quarter in line with historical norms.

Consumer Spending
Real consumer spending appears to have increased in the first quarter at a pace
similar to the gain in the second half of last year.  Spending is being supported
by expanding wealth, rising wages and salaries, and the continuing effects of
last year’s tax cut.

Nominal spending in the retail control category of goods—which excludes auto
dealers and building material and supply stores—is now estimated to have
increased 0.6 percent in February and March after having moved up 1.6 percent
in January.5  After accounting for price changes, we estimate that real spending
in the retail control category rose at an annual rate of 6.8 percent in the first
quarter.  Although, as noted above, spending on motor vehicles dropped back in
the first quarter, spending on other goods remained robust.  Real expenditures
on services rose 0.5 percent in January largely on the strength of brokerage and
energy services, and they rose 0.3 percent in February (the latest available data)
on broad-based gains.  Thus, services appear on track for a solid increase for the
quarter as a whole.

The major determinants of consumption look fairly strong.  Equity values and
prices of owner-occupied real estate have increased significantly over the past
year, lifting the ratio of household net worth to disposable income.  Nominal 

4. We re-estimated seasonal factors for these series after receiving some additional data
from J.D. Power and Associates.  The picture has changed a bit from what we had previously
shown.  Seasonally adjusted, incentives now appear to have been relatively flat, rather than
falling, since the fourth quarter.

5. Nominal sales at building material and supply stores, boosted by unusually favorable
weather and a large increase in prices for building materials, also moved up sharply in March. 
However, sales at these stores are not used in the BEA’s estimates of total personal consumption
expenditures.

II-12

II-13

II-14

disposable income was boosted in February by an increase in tax refunds and a
decline in final tax payments as well as by solid gains in wages and salaries. 
Real disposable personal income was 1.0 percent (not an annual rate) higher in
February than the fourth-quarter average despite a run-up in energy prices.   The
personal saving rate in February, at 1.9 percent, was a bit below its average level
in 2003.6

Consumer confidence was roughly stable in March and April.  Both the
Michigan Survey Research Center’s index of consumer sentiment and the
Conference Board’s index of consumer confidence remained well above their
lows in early 2003, in keeping with improved fundamentals.

Housing Markets
Housing construction rebounded in March after having slowed in January and
February; some of this swing appears to reflect atypical weather patterns. 
Unusually wet weather in February slowed single-family starts to an annual rate
of 1.52 million units, but unseasonably warm and dry weather last month helped 
boost starts to a rate of 1.60 million units.  Issuance of new permits (adjusted for
activity in areas where permits are not required) is less sensitive to unusual
weather and was between 1.54 million and 1.56 million units in each month of
the first quarter, indicating that the underlying pace of single-family
construction has remained consistently high.  In the multifamily sector, starts
ran up to an annual rate of 408,000 units in March and averaged 383,000 units
for the first quarter as a whole.  Starts were elevated relative to permits in
March, and the vacancy rate for multifamily units reached a record high
11.4 percent in the first quarter, suggesting that the recent pace of construction
in this sector probably will not be sustained.

Sales of new homes jumped nearly 9 percent in March to a record 1.23 million
units and were up 4 percent for the first quarter as a whole.  Sales of existing
homes bounced back 5-3/4 percent in March to the second highest figure on
record, but were nevertheless down 1-1/2 percent for the quarter.  Housing
market indicators suggest that the demand for housing will continue to hold up
well in the near term. The average rate for thirty-year fixed-rate mortgages in
the first three weeks of April was 5.87 percent, 40 basis points above the near-
record low in March; over the same period, the average rate for adjustable-rate
mortgages rose about 1/4 percentage point.  Still, the levels of mortgage rates 

6. In its final report on fourth-quarter GDP, the BEA revised up its estimate of the saving
rate in the second half of last year by 0.1 percentage point, as upward revisions to compensation
in the third and fourth quarters more than offset upward revisions to consumption.  The annual
revision to retail sales, which will be reflected in the quarterly GDP estimates when the BEA
publishes its annual revision to the national accounts this summer, lowered the level of retail
sales in the fourth quarter by $8 billion.  We estimate that the revised sales data, by themselves,
would add another 0.1 percentage point to the fourth-quarter saving rate, all else equal.

II-15

II-16

II-17

II-18

remain low.  The four-week moving average of purchase applications from the
Mortgage Bankers Association moved to a new high in early April, and attitudes
toward homebuying, as measured in the preliminary Michigan survey, were near
the upper end of their range over the past year. 

Home prices continued to rise rapidly.  In the first quarter, the median price for
new homes was 9.8 percent higher than the year-ago level, and the constant-
quality price index for new homes—which controls for changes in geographic
composition, home size, and other amenities—increased 5.8 percent over the
same period, which is toward the upper end of the distribution of price increases
over the past several years.  In the much larger market for existing homes, the
median price in the first quarter was 6.5 percent higher than a year earlier.

Business Fixed Investment

Equipment and software.  Real outlays for equipment and software appear to
have expanded at a vigorous clip in the first quarter, with the exception of
spending on transportation equipment.  The fundamentals underlying business
investment remain favorable:  Business output is rising briskly, corporate cash
flows are showing sizable gains, and the user cost of capital remains low, in part
because of the partial-expensing tax incentive.  In addition, according to
anecdotal reports from industry contacts and surveys of business persons,
confidence in the durability of the economic expansion is growing.

Nominal shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft rose at an
annual rate of 12.3 percent in the first quarter after a similar increase in the
fourth quarter.  In the high-tech sector, shipments of computers and peripherals
fell 3.9 percent in the first quarter, while shipments of communications
equipment moved up 9.8 percent.  Outside the high-tech categories, shipments
were up 16.2 percent, continuing the impressive growth seen in this category
since the middle of last year.  Revenue reports from Microsoft and other major
software vendors indicate that business purchases of software increased at a
moderate pace in the first quarter.

The average level of new orders for communications equipment over the past
twelve months exceeded the average level of shipments, suggesting that demand
has firmed somewhat in this beleaguered category.  Outside of high-tech, new
orders for capital equipment surged 4.4 percent (not at an annual rate) in March,
pushing the level of orders significantly above the level of shipments.  

Business spending on transportation equipment seems to have declined, on
balance, in the first quarter after an outsized jump in the fourth quarter.  A drop
in spending on light vehicles more than offset strong demand for medium and
heavy trucks, which sold at an annual rate of a little over 400,000 units for the
fourth straight month.  Truck orders also have remained robust, and backlogs 

II-19

II-20

II-21

have continued to climb from a low point reached in early 2003.  Truck demand
is reportedly being supported by investment tax incentives as well as by
generally greater demand for trucking services.  In addition, industry contacts
indicate that replacement demand has been strong.  Nominal shipments of
aircraft moved up in the first two months of the year, and real investment in
aircraft appears to have firmed since its low last summer.

Nonresidential construction.  Real business investment in structures
appears to have weakened further in the first quarter.  Nominal spending
on commercial and health care structures—a large sector that includes
offices and other commercial buildings—was 3-1/2 percent (not an annual
rate) lower in February than its fourth-quarter average.  Nominal outlays
for manufacturing facilities were 5 percent lower in February than in the
fourth quarter, and investment in other types of nonresidential structures
was down 2-1/2 percent.7  On a more positive note, nominal expenditures
for power and communication structures were 9-1/2 percent higher in
February than the fourth-quarter average, and spending in the drilling and
mining category has likely increased in the past few months because of a
rise in the number of natural gas rigs in operation.

Other indicators of market conditions for nonresidential structures remain
weak.  The vacancy rate for industrial buildings set another new high in
the first quarter, while the vacancy rate for office properties remained quite
elevated.  According to the latest available data, rents for retail properties
edged up in the fourth quarter, but warehouse rents were flat, and rents for
office space continued to decline.

Business Inventories
Book-value inventory investment has moved up since the start of the year. 
Excluding motor vehicles and parts, the manufacturing and trade sector added
inventories at an annual rate of $18 billion in January and $72 billion in
February.  However, the sharp rise in the prices of materials in these months
suggests that the pickup in book-value stocks likely overstates the accumulation
of real inventories.8  Moreover, because of strong growth in sales and
shipments, inventory-sales ratios remain near historical lows in most industries. 

In March, days’ supply in the Board staff’s flow-of-goods system ticked up,
reversing February’s decline, but nevertheless remained low by historical
standards.  Excluding motor vehicles and parts, the inventory-consumption ratio
has, on balance, continued to trend down since the end of 2001.  The only 

7. The “other structures” category includes buildings for a wide variety of uses (including

religious, educational, lodging, amusement, recreation, and transportation purposes).

8. Data on real inventories that incorporate the recent revision to retail inventories have not

yet been published.

II-22

II-23

II-24

II-25

industries with elevated days’ supply levels are paper and communications
equipment.

Government Sector

Federal.  Incoming budget data remain consistent with a substantial widening
of the federal deficit this year.  Although tax collections have firmed somewhat
in February and March, this increase in revenues has been more than matched
by a pickup in spending.  

Federal unified budget outlays rose 8 percent in February and March relative to
a year earlier, about 1 percentage point faster than the twelve-month changes
recorded in 2003.  The acceleration reflects the waning effects of lower interest
rates on the rise in debt-service costs and a pickup in the pace of spending on
Medicaid and Medicare.  Medicaid payments are being elevated by the
temporary increase in the federal match rate that was enacted last year, and
Medicare outlays are being lifted, in part, by last year’s legislation that
increased payment rates to certain health care providers.  Budget outlays are
also being boosted by continued rapid increases in defense spending.  Indeed,
the incoming data indicate that real defense expenditures in the NIPA accounts
rose at an annual rate of 15 percent in the first quarter.

Receipts in February and March came in 7-1/2 percent above a year earlier, as
gains in both corporate and personal taxable income apparently more than offset
the effects of last year’s tax cut legislation.  Nevertheless, last year’s legislation
has led to a noticeable step-up in refunds and a reduction in final settlements. 
Data through mid-April show refunds running 9 percent above year-ago levels. 
In addition, daily data for April on nonwithheld income taxes and social
insurance collections, which are largely final settlements, suggest that payments
are running roughly 8 percent below last year. 

State and local governments.  Indicators of state and local spending in the first
quarter have been mixed.  Employment jumped 32,000 in March after little
change, on balance, over the first two months of the quarter.  In contrast,
construction spending has moved down for five consecutive months, and the
February level stood nearly 6 percent below the high recorded last September.

With the economy expanding and revenues strengthening, the states, as a group,
appear to be facing fewer budgetary difficulties than in recent years.  According
to the National Conference of State Legislatures, states expect that ending
balances for the current fiscal year as a percentage of general fund expenditures
will rise for the first time since 2000; both rainy day funds and cash on hand are
projected to increase.  Reflecting this improvement, credit rating agencies have
raised state ratings:  For example, Standard & Poor’s has assigned 41 states a
stable outlook, compared with 34 last year; and 7 states have a negative outlook, 

II-26

II-27

II-28

compared with 13 last year.  With the end of fiscal 2004 just a little more than
two months away, most states are working to nail down their 2005 general fund
budgets.  Despite the recent fiscal strengthening, budgetary pressures still
prevail in some states, where legislators are negotiating another round of
provisions, including further spending reductions, tax hikes, and funds transfers,
to cover prospective shortfalls.  

Prices
A surge in energy prices helped push up consumer price inflation in the first
quarter.  Still, the cumulative increase in the consumer price index during the
twelve months ending in March, at 1.7 percent, was more than 1 percentage
point lower than in the preceding year.  Excluding food and energy, inflation
also moved up in the early part of this year after very low readings in late 2003;
over the twelve months ending in March, the core CPI rose 1.6 percent, similar
to the increase a year earlier. 

The run-up in consumer energy prices since the beginning of the year has been
driven by rising crude oil costs and strong demand for gasoline.  The energy
component of the CPI rose 1.9 percent in March, as another sharp increase in
gasoline prices was only partially offset by declines in prices of natural gas and
electricity.  Survey data for April point to a modest further increase in retail
gasoline prices, not seasonally adjusted, although less than the seasonal norm. 
Moreover, the upward pressures on wholesale prices seem to have eased: 
Inventories of gasoline have risen, on balance, from their trough in mid-March,
and wholesale margins have fallen noticeably in recent weeks.  The March drop
in residential natural gas prices is not likely to be repeated in April:  Demand for
gas from electric utilities has pushed up spot gas prices despite a small recovery
in natural gas inventories.

Consumer prices for food rose 0.2 percent in March, matching February’s
increase.  Although retail prices for beef fell again last month, trade reports note
a strong rebound in wholesale prices for beef, suggesting that consumer demand
for beef has held up much better than some observers had feared in the wake of
the mad cow disease incident.  Price increases for a variety of other food items
stepped up in the first quarter, most notably fats and oils and cereal and bakery
products—likely reflecting robust global demand for crops and poor harvests in
the Southern Hemisphere—and food away from home.  Over the twelve months
ending in March, food prices rose 3.2 percent, a pickup of nearly 2 percentage
points from the preceding year.

Excluding food and energy, the CPI rose 0.4 percent in March.  This jump,
which was the largest monthly increase in more than two years, likely overstates
the trend in inflation.  Some of the noteworthy price increases in March
followed unusually low readings in the same categories in previous months and
probably will not be repeated; examples include a jump of 3.8 percent in the 

 
II-29

II-30

II-31

volatile category of lodging away from home and a sharp upturn of 0.9 percent
in prices for apparel after four consecutive months of decline.  Nevertheless,
prices for a wide range of goods and services—including autos and medical
services—have recently risen faster than in 2003, bringing the twelve-month
change in the core CPI back up from the very low readings seen late last year.  

Translation of the available price data into an estimate of core PCE prices points
to an increase of about 0.2 percent in March, which would put the twelve-month
change in core PCE prices in March at 1.4 percent, the same rate of increase as
over the preceding year.

Prices for capital equipment as measured in the producer price index rose 
0.3 percent in March after having been flat in February.  These prices have
fluctuated in recent months, largely mirroring monthly swings in prices for new
cars and trucks.  For the twelve months ending in March, prices for capital
equipment rose 0.9 percent, a pickup of a little more than 1/2 percentage point
from the preceding year.

Industrial commodity prices as measured by the Journal of Commerce index are
up almost 12 percent (not at an annual rate) so far this year after a surge of more
than 20 percent in 2003.  The 18 percent decline in prices for scrap steel since
the last Greenbook reversed only one-third of the run-up earlier in the year. 
Moreover, demand for other commodities appears to have remained robust, with
further increases in prices for forest products, some metals, and most
agricultural commodities.  At later stages of production, price increases have
been more modest.  In the first three months of the year, producer prices for
intermediate materials excluding food and energy rose at an annual rate of
8.9 percent, while producer prices for core finished goods rose 2.1 percent.

Median year-ahead expected inflation as measured by the Michigan Survey rose
to 3.0 percent in early April, likely reflecting the run-up in energy prices.  In
contrast, the preliminary report on median expectations over a five- to ten-year
horizon dropped to 2.5 percent, well below the readings over the past couple of
years.

II-32

II-33

II-34

Domestic Financial
Developments                         

III-T-1
Selected Financial Market Quotations
(One-day quotes in percent except as noted)

2003

2004

June 24

Dec. 31

Mar. 15

Apr. 27

Change to Apr. 27 from
selected dates (percentage points)

2003
June 24

2003
Dec. 31

2004
Mar. 15

Instrument

Short-term
FOMC intended federal funds rate
Treasury bills 1
     3-month
     6-month
Commercial paper (A1/P1 rates)2
     1-month
     3-month
Large negotiable CDs 1
     1-month
     3-month
     6-month
Eurodollar deposits 3
     1-month
     3-month

Bank prime rate

Intermediate- and long-term
U.S. Treasury4
      2-year
     10-year
     30-year

U.S. Treasury 10-year indexed note

Municipal revenue (Bond Buyer) 5

Private instruments
     10-year swap
     10-year FNMA6
     10-year AA 7
     10-year BBB 7
     5-year high yield 7
Home mortgages (FHLMC survey rate) 8
     30-year fixed
     1-year adjustable

1.25

0.81
0.82

0.95
0.91

0.96
0.93
0.92

0.94
0.91

4.25

1.14
3.46
4.53

1.70

4.89

3.67
3.84
4.13
5.16
8.95

5.21
3.51

1.00

0.93
1.00

1.00
1.05

1.06
1.09
1.16

1.04
1.07

4.00

1.83
4.40
5.22

2.00

5.04

4.66
4.72
5.05
5.74
7.94

5.81
3.73

1.00

0.95
1.00

1.01
1.02

1.03
1.04
1.08

1.02
1.04

4.00

1.55
3.91
4.83

1.49

4.75

4.11
4.24
4.56
5.21
7.76

5.41
3.41

1.00

0.97
1.15

1.03
1.08

1.05
1.10
1.28

1.03
1.09

4.00

2.25
4.59
5.35

2.00

5.20

4.89
4.89
5.23
5.81
7.92

5.94
3.69

Record high

2003

2004

Stock exchange index

Dow-Jones Industrial
S&P 500 Composite
Nasdaq
Russell 2000
Wilshire 5000

Level

11,723
1,527
5,049
606
14,752

Date

Dec. 31

Mar. 15

Apr. 27

1-14-00
3-24-00
3-10-00
4-5-04
3-24-00

10,454
1,112
2,003
557
10,800

10,103
1,104
1,939
567
10,799

10,478
1,138
2,033
591
11,129

       1.  Secondary market.
       2.  Financial commercial paper.
       3.  Bid rates for eurodollar deposits collected around 9:30 a.m. Eastern time.
       4.  Derived from a smoothed Treasury yield curve estimated using off-the-run securities.
       5.  Most recent Thursday quote.
       6.  Constant maturity yields estimated from Fannie Mae domestic noncallable coupon securities.
       7.  Derived from smoothed corporate yield curves estimated using Merrill Lynch bond data.
       8.  For week ending Friday previous to date shown.
       _______________________________________________________________________

       NOTES:

         June 24, 2003, is the last day before the most recent policy easing.
         March 15, 2004, is the day before the most recent FOMC meeting.
       ___________________________________________________________________

-.25

.16
.33

.08
.17

.09
.17
.36

.09
.18

-.25

1.11
1.13
.82

.30

.31

1.22
1.05
1.10
.65
-1.03

.73
.18

.00

.04
.15

.03
.03

-.01
.01
.12

-.01
.02

.00

.42
.19
.13

.00

.16

.23
.17
.18
.07
-.02

.13
-.04

.00

.02
.15

.02
.06

.02
.06
.20

.01
.05

.00

.70
.68
.52

.51

.45

.78
.65
.67
.60
.16

.53
.28

Change to Apr. 27 
from selected dates (percent)

Record
high

-10.62
-25.49
-59.74
-2.58
-24.56

2003
Dec. 31

2004
Mar. 15

.23
2.36
1.46
6.08
3.05

3.71
3.04
4.81
4.20
3.06

 
 
  
 
 
 
   
Policy Expectations and Treasury Yields

March 2005 Eurodollar Futures Contract Rate*

FOMC
announcement

Nonfarm
payrolls

Retail
sales CPI

Chairman’s
testimony

Percent

Mar. 16

Mar. 22

Mar. 26

Apr. 1

Apr. 6

Apr. 9

Apr. 15

Apr. 21

Apr. 27

*5-minute intervals.

2.8

2.6

2.4

2.2

2.0

1.8

1.6

Expected Federal Funds Rate*

Percent

April 27, 2004

March 15, 2004

Implied Distribution of Federal Funds Rate
About 6 Months Ahead*

Percent

03/15/2004  (FOMC meeting)

04/27/2004 

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

Apr.

Aug. Dec.
2004

Apr.

Aug. Dec.

2005

Aug.

Apr.
2006

*Estimates from federal funds and Eurodollar futures.

0.50

0.75

1.00

1.25

1.50

1.75

2.00

2.25

2.50

*Based on the distribution of the 3-month eurodollar rate 5 
 months ahead (adjusted for a risk premium), as implied by options 
 on Eurodollar futures contracts.

Treasury Yield Curve*

Percent

Inflation Compensation*

Percent

April 27, 2004

March 15, 2004

6

5

4

3

2

1

Daily

FOMC
meeting

5 to 10 years ahead

Apr.
27

5-year

1 3 5 7

10

20

30

Maturity in years
*Smoothed yield curve estimated from off-the-run Treasury securities.

Jan.

Feb.

Mar.

Apr.

2004
*Estimates based upon smoothed nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury 
  yield curves.

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

3.4

3.2

3.0

2.8

2.6

2.4

2.2

2.0

 
Domestic Financial Developments

Overview
Data on economic activity and prices received over the intermeeting period were
generally stronger than expected, leading investors to anticipate a tighter stance
of monetary policy.  Treasury coupon yields climbed as much as 80 basis points,
reflecting mainly an increase in real interest rates. Yields on investment-grade
corporate bonds rose about in line with those on Treasuries, while yields on
speculative-grade bonds increased more modestly, narrowing their risk spreads. 
Despite the rise in interest rates, broad equity-market indexes moved higher, as
reported and expected earnings continued to strengthen.  Business borrowing
picked up in the first quarter, but it appears to have slackened somewhat in
recent weeks in response to the rise in rates.  Household borrowing is estimated
to have remained robust in the first quarter.

Policy Expectations and Treasury Yields
Stronger-than-expected macroeconomic data released during the intermeeting
period, particularly the employment report in early April, led market participants
to expect that policy tightening will begin sooner than previously anticipated. 
Quotes on federal funds futures indicate that investors have now fully priced in a
rate hike of 25 basis points by the August FOMC meeting and place significant
odds on rates rising a total of 50 basis points or more by November.  Similarly,
recent surveys indicate that a significant fraction of the primary dealers
anticipate a rate hike at the August meeting and expect the federal funds rate to
be 50 to 100 basis points higher by year-end.  These surveys also suggest that
market participants generally expect the Committee will view inflation risks as
balanced at the upcoming meeting and will drop or modify its reference to
“patience” in removing policy accommodation.

In addition to the expectation of an earlier tightening move, the trajectory of
futures rates through the middle of 2006 has steepened, implying that investors
anticipate that policy tightening will proceed at a faster pace once it commences. 
The upward revisions to the expected policy path since the last FOMC meeting
showed through to Treasury yields, which rose, on balance, 70 to 80 basis points
across the two- to ten-year curve.  Yields on inflation-indexed Treasury
securities climbed slightly less—about 50 to 60 basis points—pointing to a
small increase in inflation compensation.

Stock Prices and Corporate Risk Spreads
Broad equity-price indexes rose about 3 percent, on net, over the intermeeting
period in response to strong earnings reports and positive economic news.  The
stock market rise was tempered somewhat by the upward shift in interest rates,
which caused stock prices in some interest-sensitive sectors—such as banks and
brokerage firms, utilities, and REITs—to fall.  

III-2

III-3

The forward earnings-price ratio for the S&P 500 was virtually unchanged over
the intermeeting period, and its spread over a long-run Treasury yield—a rough
measure of the equity premium—narrowed a little.  Implied volatility of both the
S&P 500 and Nasdaq 100 declined slightly, leaving both measures at their
lowest levels since the late 1990s.

While risk spreads on investment-grade corporate bonds were nearly unchanged,
spreads on speculative-grade bonds declined about 65 basis points, reversing the
run-up that had occurred over the previous intermeeting period.  Risk spreads on
commercial paper remained quite low.

Corporate Earnings and Credit Quality
With nearly 300 of the S&P 500 firms having reported for the first quarter,
earnings per share for the S&P 500 appears to have increased almost 25 percent
from its year-ago level.  Market analysts continue to revise up their
twelve-month forward-earnings forecasts, with the revisions index rising to a
very high level in April.  Expectations for long-term earnings growth inched up
further in March and April, continuing the turnaround that began in late 2003
and ending the three-year slide in analysts’ views on long-term prospects.

Corporate credit quality continued to improve over the intermeeting period. 
Bond downgrades, measured as the share of the par value of outstanding bonds,
declined further in the first quarter and were almost matched by bond upgrades. 
With no defaults registered in February and defaults in March low, the
six-month moving average of the realized bond default rate dropped further. 
The KMV expected year-ahead default rate based on firm-specific measures
declined a shade in both February and March.

Business Finance
Gross issuance of investment-grade bonds by nonfinancial corporations spiked
in March, as firms apparently responded to the lower yields that followed the
employment report released on March 5th.  With the recent backup in yields,
offerings by these firms have slowed considerably in April.  In contrast,
speculative-grade issuance has remained robust in March and April, with the
proceeds largely being used to repay other debt.  Outstanding commercial paper
and C&I loans fell in March; however, over the first few weeks of April, both
have registered small increases.  The recent uptick in C&I loans is consistent
with reports from the April Senior Loan Officer Survey that banks have eased
C&I loan standards on net and that demand for these loans has picked up. 
Overall, net debt financing was about zero in March but appears to have
increased thus far in April.

III-4

III-5

III-6

III-7

Gross public equity issuance by nonfinancial firms moved up in March on the
strength of a couple of large seasoned equity offerings that were reportedly
related to acquisitions and capital expenditures.  So far in April, gross issuance
has waned, reflecting a slowdown in seasoned offerings and a continued
sluggish pace of initial public offerings.  Total equity issuance by nonfinancial
firms continues to be outweighed by equity retirements.  Many firms are
maintaining their use of share repurchases as a way to distribute strong earnings
to shareholders.  Although equity retirements from cash mergers remain
subdued, they are expected to increase given the pickup in announcements of
new M&A deals so far this year.

Commercial Real Estate
Commercial mortgage debt growth moved up in the first quarter to an estimated
10 percent pace, as both CMBS issuance and real estate lending by banks were
strong.  Delinquency rates on commercial mortgages at banks and insurers
remained low through the end of 2003, and CMBS delinquencies—which had
moved higher through late last year—have flattened over the past several
months.  CMBS yields rose over the intermeeting period, with spreads little
changed.  However, REIT equity prices have tumbled about 12 percent since the
March FOMC meeting, in response to recent increases in interest rates and
perhaps to concerns expressed by some investors that commercial real estate
may be overvalued.  

Household Finance
Interest rates on thirty-year fixed-rate mortgages climbed about 50 basis points
over the intermeeting period.  Refinancing applications have declined in April as
rates have increased, although refinancing originations, which lag applications,
have not yet fallen off.  Originations for home purchases have continued to rise. 
Home mortgage debt is estimated to have grown at a rapid pace of
10-3/4 percent in the first quarter.

Consumer credit expanded at an estimated 4-1/2 percent rate in the first quarter,
a little above the previous quarter’s pace.  On the whole, indicators of consumer
credit quality have shown some improvement this year.  Delinquencies on credit
cards in securitized pools have declined, household bankruptcy filings have
moved down to slightly below their year-ago levels, and delinquencies on auto
loans at captive finance companies have remained low.

Although data on household assets in the first quarter are still incomplete, the
modest rise in stock prices together with a larger estimated increase in
disposable income suggest that the ratio of household assets to income most

 
III-8

III-9

III-10

III-11

likely ticked down but remained above the year-ago level.1  Through April,
incoming mutual fund data indicate that households have continued to invest
heavily in equity mutual funds.

State and Local Government Finance
Gross municipal bond issuance bounced back in March, as states and
municipalities ramped up their borrowing for transportation projects and health
care facilities.  In addition, the volume of advance refunding issues posted a
particularly large gain in March, in response to the dip in yields.  Gross issuance
has been lower in April, with new capital issuance weakening a little and
advance refunding issues falling off noticeably.

Yields on longer-term general obligation municipal bonds rose in line with
comparable Treasuries over the intermeeting period, leaving the
muni-to-Treasury yield ratio unchanged on net.  The risk spread between
AAA-rated and BBB-rated revenue bonds remained volatile over the period but
posted little net change and remained well below the high of last year.  In a
reversal of a two-year trend, upgrades of municipal bonds have outpaced
downgrades since early February.  As a result, municipal bond upgrades and
downgrades are nearly balanced thus far this year.

Treasury Finance
Net issuance of marketable debt by the Treasury surged to $146 billion in the
first quarter—the largest quarterly total on record.  Moreover, incoming tax
receipts in April have been somewhat lighter than the Treasury expected,
pushing up the government’s anticipated financing needs in the second quarter. 
Over the intermeeting period, the Treasury conducted auctions of two- and
five-year nominal notes and a ten-year inflation-indexed note.  Investor demand
at the auctions was mixed.

Investors continued to focus on the participation of foreign official institutions
in the Treasury market.  Indirect bidding at Treasury auctions, which includes
bidding by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York on behalf of foreign
institutions, remained strong.  However, in light of the sharp fall-off in Japanese
currency intervention, market chatter centered on whether the pace of foreign
official purchases would decline going forward.

Agency Finance
Net borrowing by the housing GSEs continued to be quite light.  For the most
part, investors seemed unmoved by the ongoing debate over regulatory reform

1. At this point, the key piece of missing data for first quarter is the OFHEO repeat-

transactions house price index, which will not be released until early June.

III-12

III-13

and the questions raised about Fannie Mae’s accounting practices.  Yield
spreads on most Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac debt securities narrowed a touch,
on balance, over the intermeeting period, but equity prices for the two GSEs
moved down.

The Senate Banking Committee approved a bill that would create a new
regulator for the housing GSEs that would have the ability to place those entities
into receivership if they were to become financially distressed.  However, the
current bill would require that the Congress not object to such an action.  The
current version of the bill is unlikely to be enacted, in part because the
Administration opposes this provision.

Money and Bank Credit
M2 continued to recover from its extraordinary weakness in late 2003, growing
about 9 percent in March and April. Mortgage refinancing appears to have
boosted M2 growth in both months. Liquid deposits have again driven most of
the advance in M2, although growth in currency has moved closer to its
long-term trend in April after a weak first quarter.

Bank loans increased smartly in March and April; the growth was led primarily
by increases in residential and commercial real estate lending.  The April Senior
Loan Officer Opinion Survey reported a noticeable pickup in demand for
commercial real estate loans compared with three months earlier but indicated
that demand for residential loans had weakened a little. 

First-quarter earnings reports by several large bank holding companies show
continued strong profitability.  In particular, loss provisions shrank with
improvements in credit quality, while non-interest income expanded, reflecting
in part increased fees from trading and asset management.

III-14

III-15

Appendix

April 2004 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey

The April 2004 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices
addressed changes in the supply of, and demand for, bank loans to businesses and
households over the past three months.  In addition, the survey contained a series of
questions on residential real estate loans and a question on changes in banks’ pricing
and investment behavior in light of declining net interest margins.  Responses were
received from fifty-two domestic and nineteen foreign banking institutions.

Both domestic banks and U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks indicated that
they had eased lending standards and terms for C&I loans over the past three months. 
Domestic banks also eased lending standards on commercial real estate loans over the
same period, while standards at foreign institutions were little changed.  The share of
domestic banks reporting stronger demand for C&I loans in the April survey was
notably larger than in the January survey.  Demand for commercial real estate loans at
domestic banks also strengthened on net.  By contrast, foreign institutions reported
weaker C&I loan demand, on net, and indicated that demand for commercial real estate
loans had not changed.

In the April survey, a small net fraction of domestic banks reported having eased
lending standards on residential real estate loans, but standards and terms for consumer
loans were generally unchanged.  On net, demand for residential real estate loans was
little changed, while demand for consumer loans had strengthened.

Lending to Businesses
Both domestic and foreign banks reported having eased lending standards on C&I loans
over the past three months.  About 20 percent of domestic banks, on net, indicated that
they had eased standards for large and middle-market firms, the largest share doing so
since the beginning of the 1990s, and a similar fraction noted having eased standards
for small firms.  The net share of U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks that
reported having eased lending standards for C&I loans jumped to 32 percent in the
April survey, up from 10 percent in the January survey.

Both domestic and foreign institutions also indicated that they had eased many terms on
C&I loans over the past three months.  On net, almost 40 percent of domestic banks
reported having narrowed spreads of loan rates over their cost of funds for large and
middle-market borrowers in April, up from 27 percent in the previous survey, and
26 percent had done so for small firms.  About 37 percent of foreign institutions
indicated that they had reduced spreads on their C&I loans, up notably from 14 percent
in January.  Survey respondents, on net, continued to report having eased terms on
credit lines, both by increasing the maximum size of these lines and by reducing their
cost.  Furthermore, about one-fourth of both domestic and foreign banks said that they
had eased loan covenants over the past three months.  

More than 80 percent of the banks that reported having eased standards and terms on
C&I loans in the April survey cited more aggressive competition from other banks or
nonbank lenders as the most important reason for having done so, roughly the same
percentage as in the previous survey.  Domestic banks that had eased standards and

III-A-2

terms also pointed to a more favorable economic outlook and improvements in
industry-specific problems, as well as an increased tolerance for risk.  The few domestic
banks that had tightened standards or terms generally cited a less favorable economic
outlook or a reduced tolerance for risk.

C&I loan demand.  On net, 29 percent of domestic banks reported in the April survey
that the demand for C&I loans from large and middle-market borrowers had increased,
the largest share doing so since 1998.  About 40 percent reported stronger demand from
small firms.  Furthermore, about half of domestic respondents noted increased inquiries
from potential business borrowers.  Domestic banks that had experienced an increase in
demand pointed to greater customer financing needs for inventories and accounts
receivable as well as for investment in plant and equipment.  By contrast, foreign banks,
on net, reported decreased demand for C&I loans and indicated that customer
borrowing had shifted to other banks or nonbank lenders and that customers’ internally
generated funds had increased. 

Commercial real estate lending.  In the April survey, 10 percent of domestic banks,
on net, said that they had eased lending standards on commercial real estate loans, up a
bit from the previous survey.  The percentage of domestic banks reporting increased
demand for these loans also increased in the current survey, rising to 23 percent, up
from 16 percent in January.  At foreign institutions, both commercial real estate lending
standards and loan demand were reportedly unchanged on net.  

Lending to Households
In the April survey, demand for residential real estate loans was little changed on net.
Lending standards for residential real estate loans had been eased over the past three
months by about 10 percent of respondents, on net, up somewhat from the previous
survey.  

The April survey asked banks about house price appreciation over the past year in the
markets they served.  The responses were fairly diverse: About one-fourth of the
respondents indicated that the average rate of increase had been less than 5 percent,
around half of them reported that the growth rate had been between 5 percent and
10 percent, and the rest pointed to home price appreciation of more than 10 percent. 
Regarding the future, the banks expected price increases to moderate: About 60 percent
of the banks expected home prices to grow less than 5 percent over the next year in the
markets they serve, and almost all the rest expected appreciation of 5 percent to
10 percent.

The April survey also contained several questions about loan-to-value ratios for
residential mortgage loans.  Banks reported that about 85 percent of the first-lien
mortgages that they originated over the past year had loan-to-value ratios below
90 percent, and only 2 percent had ratios of 100 percent or more.  About 80 percent of
the volume of second-lien mortgages and home equity loans that respondents had
originated over the past year were to customers with a ratio of total mortgage debt to
home value below 90 percent.  Only 5 percent were to customers with indebtedness
ratios of 100 percent or more.  Banks that had originated loans in areas where home
prices had been rising relatively quickly tended to have originated more loans,

III-A-3

especially second-lien and home equity loans, with lower loan-to-value ratios than
banks that operated in markets with slower appreciation.  Indeed, at banks serving
markets in which home prices rose 5 percent or less, 8 percent of second-lien mortgage
and home equity loan originations were to borrowers with ratios of total mortgage debt
to home value of 100 percent or more and 74 percent of originations were to borrowers
with ratios of 90 percent or less.  By comparison, at banks originating loans in areas
where homes had appreciated between 10 percent and 20 percent, these shares were
1 percent and 88 percent respectively. 

In April, banks continued to indicate, on net, that they had become more willing to
make consumer installment loans, although they reported that lending standards and
most lending terms for consumer loans were basically unchanged.  Banks did, however,
report having reduced the extent to which consumer loans other than credit card loans
were granted to customers who did not meet credit-scoring thresholds.  Of the
respondents, 22 percent reported that demand for consumer loans of all types had
strengthened over the past three months.  By contrast, in the January survey, 13 percent
of respondents, on net, indicated that demand had weakened.

Net Interest Margins
Special questions in the April survey asked banks how they had changed their
investment and pricing behavior in response to the historically low level of short-term
interest rates and to resulting pressure on their net interest margins.  On net, domestic
banks indicated that these factors had not led them to change their desired levels of
either credit risk or interest rate risk.  However, 21 percent of domestic banks, on net,
indicated that they had increased fees charged to borrowers and depositors.  About
20 percent of foreign banks, on net, reported that they had taken on more credit risk.

III-A-4

III-A-5

International Developments

 
International Developments

U.S. International Transactions

Trade in Goods and Services
The U.S. international trade deficit in February narrowed from January's record
high to $42.1 billion, its lowest level since November of last year. 

The value of exports of goods and services increased 4 percent in February, as
services receipts rose 1.4 percent and exports of goods rose 5.1 percent from
January levels.  The rise in exported goods was widespread across major
categories of goods, with the largest increases in industrial supplies, aircraft, and
other capital goods.  At an annual rate, the average for January and February of
the value of exported goods and services was about 4 percent above the average
for the fourth quarter of last year.  The increase was concentrated in industrial
supplies and other capital goods, although exports of automotive products and
consumer goods also rose.  Exports of agricultural goods, in contrast, fell,
reflecting declines in exports of meats, partly owing to foreign bans on the
import of U.S. beef, and soybeans.

The value of imports of goods and services rose 1.6 percent in February. 
Services payments rose 1.3 percent, and imports of goods increased 1.7 percent
from January levels.  Within goods, imports of industrial supplies rose sharply;
imports of automotive products also contributed to the overall increase.  Imports
of aircraft, computers, and consumer goods, however, fell.  Oil imports rose   
3.8 percent, with increases in both volume and price.  At an annual rate, the
average for January and February of the value of imported goods and services
was about 9 percent above the average for the fourth quarter of last year, a much
slower pace than the 17 percent fourth-quarter rise.  The increase was driven

IV-2

IV-3

IV-4

IV-5

largely by increases in imports of oil, industrial supplies, and other capital
goods.  Imports of aircraft, automotive products, and consumer goods fell.

Prices of Internationally Traded Goods
Non-oil imports.  In March, the prices of U.S. imports of non-oil goods and of
core goods rose 0.2 and 0.3 percent, respectively.  After a 1.7 percent increase in
February, the price index for industrial supplies excluding oil rose another      
1.1 percent in March, reflecting further price increases for building materials
and unfinished metals.  Prices for foods, feeds and beverages rose 0.8 percent in
March, largely because of higher prices for imported seafood.  Prices of capital
goods (excluding computers and semiconductors) and automotive products both
edged up 0.1 percent.  Prices for consumer goods were unchanged.  Prices for
computers and semiconductors fell 0.4 and 0.1 percent, respectively.  The
average level of imported core goods prices in the first quarter was about        
7¼ percent at an annual rate above the fourth-quarter level of last year; this is
the largest percentage increase on a quarterly basis since the fourth quarter of
1988.  Much of this increase was concentrated in the commodity-intensive
categories of industrial supplies and foods, feeds and beverages. 

Oil.  The BLS price of imported oil rose 6.1 percent in March, similar to the
increase in the spot price of West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude oil, which
averaged $36.75 per barrel.  After falling to less than $35 per barrel at the
beginning of April, the spot price of WTI rebounded and has averaged about
$36.60 per barrel so far this month.  Oil prices remained elevated because of
strong oil demand, fueled by the recovery in world economic activity, OPEC’s
decision to cut its production target by 1 million barrels per day, and
geopolitical concerns regarding Iraq and Venezuela.

Exports.  In March, the prices of U.S. exports of total goods and of core goods
both increased 0.9 percent.  The price index for agricultural products rose       
3.3 percent, reflecting higher prices for soybeans and corn.  Higher prices for
exported metals and chemicals contributed to the 1.7 percent increase in
nonagricultural industrial supplies.  The price indexes for all other categories of
core goods were basically unchanged.  Prices of exported computers and
semiconductors rose 0.8 and 0.6 percent, respectively.  The average level of
exported core goods prices in the first quarter was about 8½ percent at an annual
rate above the fourth-quarter level of last year, the highest pace of increase since
the first quarter of 1995.  Nearly all of the increase reflected higher prices for
agricultural products and industrial supplies. 

U.S. International Financial Transactions
Private foreign net purchases of U.S. securities (line 4 of the Summary of U.S.
International Transactions table) continued at a strong pace in February. 
Inflows into Treasury securities (line 4a) and corporate bonds (4c) accelerated

IV-6

from already strong flows in January.  Foreign demand for agency securities
(line 4b) appears to have recovered from last year’s dip: private net purchases
totaled about $30 billion in the first two months of 2004, compared with net
sales of $48 billion last year.  Foreign purchases of equities (line 4d) slowed
somewhat from January’s vigorous pace to $5 billion.  A little over half of the
inflow into equities in February reflected a merger-related stock swap.  These
swaps are not directly captured in the monthly TIC data and are often
overlooked in press reports.  

Net foreign official inflows (line 1) were $30 billion in February, a bit of an
easing from the remarkable $48 billion recorded in January, but well above the
average monthly inflow in 2003.   Net foreign official inflows are on track to
register a record increase in the first quarter, as partial data from the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York indicate that foreign official reserves in custody
there increased by another $18 billion during March.  The majority of foreign
official inflows continue to come from Japan.  FRBNY custody data indicate
that Japanese inflows, which were especially large in the first half of March,
remained strong through mid-April.  Foreign official demand for agency
securities also appears to have recovered this year, as official net purchases of
agencies totaled $10 billion in January and February, compared with $25 billion
for all of 2003.     

U.S. investors made modest net purchases of foreign securities in February (line
5), following sizable purchases in January.  As in January, net purchases of
foreign equities (line 5b) more than offset net sales of foreign debt (line 5a).  In
both months U.S. residents’ equity purchases were concentrated in Japan.

The highly volatile banking sector (line 3) saw a net outflow in February,
reversing much of the inflow recorded in January.  As is typical for the banking
data, much of the monthly swing reflected a shifting of inter-bank funding
positions, primarily against affiliated offices in Caribbean banking centers.

IV-7

Foreign Financial Markets

IV-8

The exchange value of the dollar, as measured by the major currencies index,
rose 1¾ percent on net over the intermeeting period.  The index declined in the
first two weeks following the March FOMC meeting but rose in early April. 
Market participants attributed the dollar’s gain in April to releases of
stronger-than-expected U.S. economic data, particularly the March employment
report, and to speculation that the FOMC may tighten policy sooner than had
previously been anticipated.  

The dollar appreciated 3 percent on net against the euro and 2½ percent against
the Canadian dollar over the intermeeting period.  In contrast, the dollar
depreciated almost 1 percent against the yen in highly volatile trading.  The
dollar depreciated 6 percent against the yen in the first two weeks following the
March FOMC meeting.  The dollar’s movement against the yen appeared to
coincide with a Nikkei news report that the Bank of Japan was “weighing an
exit strategy for its yen-weakening market interventions.”  The Japanese
monetary authorities have, in fact, not intervened in the currency market since
March 16.  Since early April, the dollar has almost fully rebounded from its
earlier decline against the yen.

IV-9

Long-term benchmark yields moved up 23 to 51 basis points in major foreign
industrial countries, less than the 63-basis-point rise in the ten-year Treasury
yield.  Much of the change occurred in early April following the March U.S.
employment report.  Interest rates at the three-month tenor moved little over the
intermeeting period in the major industrial countries, except in Canada and the
United Kingdom.  The Bank of Canada cut its policy rate 25 basis points on
April 13.  Although the policy decision had been anticipated, market
participants interpreted the accompanying statement as being more bullish than
had been expected, and medium- and long-term Canadian interest rates rose
following the decision.  The Bank of England left its monetary policy stance
unchanged, surprising some market participants who were expecting a 25-basis-
point tightening.  Market participants are currently pricing in a 25-basis-point
increase at the next meeting of the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy
Committee on May 6.  As had been widely expected, the European Central Bank
and the Bank of Japan left their respective monetary policy stances unchanged
during the intermeeting period.

IV-10

Since the March FOMC meeting, broad share price indexes in most major
industrial economies have risen 1 to 7 percent, with the Japanese market
registering the largest gain.  Better-than-expected Japanese economic data were
cited as factors supporting the gain in the Japanese equity market.

Over the intermeeting period, the dollar gained ½ percent on a trade-weighted
basis against the currencies of our other important trading partners.  The
Mexican peso depreciated 3 percent against the dollar; Mexican share prices
rose 8¼ percent.  The central bank of Mexico unexpectedly tightened its policy
stance on April 27, citing declines in the 28-day Cetes rate after the bank left
policy unchanged at its previous biweekly policy-setting meeting on April 23. 
The bank noted that a decrease in rates was incompatible with its stated goals
for inflation.  The Brazilian central bank cut its policy rate 25 basis points twice
over the intermeeting period.  Brazil’s EMBI+ spread over Treasuries rose
about 80 basis points, in part on concerns about the Brazilian government’s

IV-11

ability to achieve fiscal austerity.  The Brazilian real was little changed on net
against the dollar.  The exchange value of the dollar against the currencies of the
emerging Asian economies has changed little on net since the March FOMC
meeting.

 .  The Desk did not intervene during the period for the accounts of the

System or the Treasury.

 
 
 
Developments in Foreign Industrial Countries

IV-12

Indicators for the first quarter suggest continued growth in the industrial
countries, but at a more moderate rate than that of late last year.  In Japan, strong
exports and a marked increase in business sentiment point toward continued
growth, although recent readings on several other indicators have been
somewhat less buoyant.  In Canada, growth appears to have slowed from the
brisk inventory-led pace of the fourth quarter, notwithstanding some firming in
consumer expenditures, while evidence points to still sluggish growth in the
euro area.  In the United Kingdom, the preliminary GDP release for the first
quarter showed growth softening a bit from its rapid fourth-quarter pace, but
housing prices have continued to move up.  

Consumer price inflation remained low.  Twelve-month headline inflation in
Canada fell under the 1 percent lower bound of the Bank of Canada’s inflation
target band in February and March.  Inflation in the euro area remained below
the ECB’s 2 percent ceiling in March, while in the United Kingdom inflation
slipped further below the Bank of England’s 2 percent inflation target.  Slight
CPI deflation persisted in Japan. 

In early April, the Bank of Canada eased monetary policy for the third time this
year, citing the need to support aggregate demand. 

In Japan, indicators suggest that the economy continued to expand in the first
quarter, albeit at a more moderate pace than last year.  Real exports rose 2.2
percent for the quarter, while real imports increased slightly.  Household
expenditures posted solid gains in January and February on average, and new
car registrations jumped during the first quarter.  Industrial production edged up
in March, bringing average production for the first quarter 0.3 percent above the
fourth-quarter level.  The broader all-industries index of output was flat in
January and February on average compared with the fourth-quarter, as services
sector output edged down.  Core machinery orders, a leading indicator of
business fixed investment, declined sharply in January and rebounded only
moderately in February following hefty increases late last year

Recent readings on labor market conditions have been mixed.  In February, the
unemployment rate remained at 5 percent.  The job-offers-to-applicants ratio, a
leading indicator of employment, was unchanged, but remained at a ten-year
high.  Core consumer goods prices in the Tokyo area (which exclude fresh food
but include energy) rose 0.1 percent in March from the previous month but were
down 0.1 percent from a year earlier.  Wholesale prices were up 0.2 percent in
March compared with the same month a year ago, the first increase on a
twelve-month basis since July 2000.  Average nationwide land prices were

IV-13

down 5.6 percent in January from a year ago, though prices in parts of Tokyo
have stopped falling. 

The Bank of Japan's Tankan index of business conditions rose in March, with
the level of the aggregate diffusion index for business sentiment among firms of
all sizes and across all industries increasing to -5 from -11 in December.  The
closely-watched index for large manufacturers improved to 12 from 7 in
December.  The strengthening in the aggregate index in March was broadly
based, with increases for both manufacturers and non-manufacturers across all
firm sizes, suggesting that economic recovery is gradually spreading from
export-related industries to other sectors.

Japanese Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period, except as noted, s.a.)

Indicator

Industrial production1

All-industries index

Housing starts

Machinery orders2

Machinery shipments3

New car registrations 

Unemployment rate4

Job offers ratio5

2003

2004

2003

2004

Q3

Q4

Q1

Dec.

Jan.

Feb.

Mar.

1.0

.0

-6.5

-2.9

2.5

2.5

5.2

.65

3.9

1.7

4.9

11.3

7.6

-2.2

5.1

.73

.3

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

13.5

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

-.2

.0

-.6

.1

8.3

8.1

2.2

2.1

4.9

.77

...

-.1

-.2

2.9

2.3

2.7

-12.2

2.6

18.7

5.0

.77

...

-.3

-.1

-3.8

-3.8

-6.4

4.9

-6.4

-5.5

5.0

.77

...

-.2

.0

.1

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

1.1

n.a.

n.a.

...

-.1

.2

Business sentiment6

-21.0

-15.0

CPI (Core, Tokyo area)7

Wholesale prices7

-.3

-.7

-.1

-.4

1. Mining and manufacturing.

      2. Private sector, excluding ships and electric power.

3. Excluding ships and railway vehicles.
4. Percent.
5. Level of indicator.
6. Tankan survey, diffusion index.
7. Percent change from year earlier, n.s.a.
n.a.  Not available.  ...  Not applicable.

In the euro area, economic indicators for the first quarter were mixed,
indicative of continued sluggish growth.  Industrial production in January and
February was on average slightly below the fourth-quarter level.  German

IV-14

industrial production unexpectedly posted its first drop in five months in
February, whereas French industrial production rose 0.8 percent after falling
0.5 percent the previous month.  The volume of retail trade in the euro area fell
by 0.8 percent in February, partially reversing a sharp increase in January.  The
purchasing manager’s index (PMI) for the euro-area manufacturing sector rose
in March, while the PMI for services fell.

Survey measures for April point towards increased optimism in the second
quarter.  The German IFO business climate index rose in April, reversing most
of its March decline. The Belgian business confidence index rose in both
months. An evaluation of the IFO responses received before and after the
March 11 terrorist attack in Madrid did not reveal any differences.  Italian
consumer confidence had declined in the days of polling that took place
immediately after the Madrid bombing, but in April the index rebounded to
levels close to those prior to the attack.

Twelve-month consumer price inflation rose slightly in March to 1.7 percent,
remaining below the ECB’s 2 percent target ceiling.  Core inflation, excluding
energy, food, alcohol, and tobacco was 1.8 percent in March.

IV-15

Euro-Area Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period except as noted, s.a.)

Indicator

Industrial production1

Retail sales volume2

Unemployment rate3

2003

2004

2003

2004

Q3

Q4

Q1

Dec.

Jan.

Feb. Mar.

.6

-.1

8.8

.9

-.2

8.8

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

.1

.2

8.8

-.3

2.3

8.8

.1

-.8

8.8

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Consumer confidence4

-17.3

-16.0

-14.3

-16.0

-15.0

-14.0

-14.0

Industrial confidence4

-11.0

-7.3

-6.7

-8.0

Mfg. orders, Germany

CPI5

Producer prices5

M35

1.1

2.0

1.2

7.6

3.7

2.0

1.1

7.0

n.a.

1.7

n.a.

n.a.

1.9

2.0

1.0

7.0

-6.0

-1.2

1.9

.3

6.5

-7

.5

1.6

.0

6.3

-7

n.a.

1.7

n.a.

n.a.

1. Excludes construction.
2. Excludes motor vehicles.
3. Percent. Euro area standardized to ILO definition.  Includes Eurostat estimates in some

cases.

4. Diffusion index based on European Commission surveys in individual countries.
5. Eurostat harmonized definition.  Percent change from year earlier.
n.a.  Not available.

Real GDP in the United Kingdom expanded 2.6 percent in the first quarter
according to the preliminary estimate, with a wide divergence in performance
across sectors.  Industrial production is estimated to have fallen around
2 percent, with only energy output rising slightly.  However, service sector
output climbed more than 3 percent.  In particular, output of the retail services
and the hotels and restaurants sectors grew strongly.  April's industrial survey,
suggests expansion in the manufacturing sector, though the survey and actual
data have diverged in recent months.  Business confidence fell in April, but
remained relatively high.

According to the two leading private surveys, housing price inflation has picked
up in recent months, with the average twelve-month rise at around 18 percent in
March.  Household net mortgage and consumer borrowing in February
remained elevated.

IV-16

U.K. Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period except as noted, s.a.)

2003

2004

Indicator

Q3

Q4

Q1

Jan.

Feb. Mar.

Apr.

Real GDP*
Industrial production

Retail sales volume1

Unemployment rate2

      Claims-based

      Labor force survey3

Business confidence4

Consumer confidence5

Consumer prices6

Producer input prices7
Average earnings7

*   s.a.a.r.

      1. Excludes motor vehicles. 

3.4
.0

1.2

3.1

5.0

-3.3

-5.0

1.4

1.2
3.6

3.7
-.1

1.7

3.0

4.9

-.3

-3.3

1.3

2.9
3.5

2.6
n.a.

2.0

2.9

n.a.

16.7

-2.3

1.3

-.3
n.a.

...
-.1

1.2

2.9

4.8

21.0

-3.0

1.4

-.3
7.4

...
-.6

.0

2.9

n.a.

14.0

-2.0

1.3

-1.6
4.0

...
n.a.

.6

2.9

n.a.

15.0

-2.0

1.1

.9
n.a.

...
n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

12.0

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.
n.a.

2. Percent.
3. Three-month average centered on month shown.
4. Percentage of firms expecting output to increase in the next four months less percentage 

expecting output to decrease.

5. Average of the percentage balance from consumers’ expectations of their financial 
situation, general economic situation, unemployment, and savings over the next 12 months.

6. Consumer prices index (CPI). Percent change from year earlier.
7. Percent change from year earlier.
n.a.  Not available.
      ...    Not applicable.

The labor market continued to be tight, as both the official-claims-based and the
labor-force-survey measures of the unemployment rate remained near their
lowest points since 1975.  The twelve-month CPI inflation rate slipped further
to 1.1 percent in March and is well below the Bank of England’s 2 percent
target.

The government released a new budget plan on March 17, leaving unchanged
the projection for Public Sector Net Borrowing (PSNB) for 2003-04 at £37½
billion (almost 3½ percent of GDP) and revising up slightly the projection for
2004-05 and 2005-06 to £33 billion and £31 billion (2.8 and 2.5 percent of
GDP, respectively).  The government reaffirmed its expectation that real GDP
will expand 3 to 3½ percent in both 2004 and 2005.

IV-17

In Canada, a sharp gain in retail sales in January and February indicates that
domestic demand firmed in the first quarter.  However, a corresponding decline
in February wholesale trade implies that retailers are running down the
substantial inventories accumulated at the end of last year, suggesting that
inventories are likely to make a negative contribution to growth.   

Other indicators for the first quarter were mixed.  Housing starts decreased
3 percent in the first quarter, as colder-than-usual weather depressed
construction in January and February; however, starts bounced back to their
second-highest level in 16 years in March.  Employment fell in both February
and March, leading to a small increase in the unemployment rate.  While both
exports and imports increased in February, following declines in January. 

In March, the twelve-month rate of headline CPI inflation remained at
0.7 percent, as energy base effects had a substantial negative impact.  Twelve-
month core inflation, excluding food, energy, and indirect taxes, edged up to
1.1 percent.

On April 13, the Bank of Canada lowered the targeted overnight rate (its key
policy rate) and the Bank Rate 25 basis points each, to 2 percent and 2¼
percent, respectively.  The Bank stated that it expected output to return to its
potential level by the third quarter of 2005 and inflation to reach the 2 percent
mid-point of the Bank's 1 to 3 percent target band by the end of 2005.

The government released a new budget on March 23, outlining a small increase
in spending, primarily directed towards increased transfers to provinces and
municipalities, but maintaining projected budget surpluses over the next three
years.

IV-18

Canadian Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period except as noted, s.a.)

Indicator

GDP by industry

Industrial production

New mfg. orders

Retail sales

Employment

Unemployment rate1

Consumer prices2

Core Consumer Prices2,3

Consumer attitudes4

Business confidence4

2003

2004

2003

2004

Q3

Q4

Q1

Dec.

Jan.

Feb. Mar.

.5

.3

1.2

1.0

.2

7.9

2.1

1.7

122.0

127.2

1.0

1.6

-.1

-1.2

.9

7.5

1.7

1.7

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

.3

7.4

.9

1.2

n.a.

n.a.

.5

1.2

2.4

-1.4

.3

7.4

2.0

1.5

...

...

-.1

-.4

2.5

1.7

.1

7.4

1.2

1.4

...

...

n.a.

n.a.

-.8

2.3

-.1

7.4

.7

1.0

...

...

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

-.1

7.5

.7

1.1

...

...

1. Percent.
2. Percent change from year earlier, n.s.a.
3. Excluding food, energy, and indirect taxes.
4. Level of index, 1991 = 100.
n.a.  Not available.  ...  Not applicable.

IV-19

External Balances
(Billions of U.S. dollars, s.a.a.r.)

Country
and balance

2003

2004

Q3

Q4

Q1

Jan.

Feb. Mar.

Japan

Trade
Current account

Euro area
Trade1
Current account1

Germany
Trade
Current account1

France
Trade
Current account

Italy
Trade
Current account1

United Kingdom
Trade
Current Account

Canada
Trade
Current Account

87.2
145.3

114.1
156.4

120.7
n.a.

117.2
190.3

133.0
189.6

111.8
n.a.

133.3
51.9

98.6
88.4

172.8
44.6

155.8
92.9

.7
1.3

1.7
6.5

.7
-.3

3.0
-22.2

n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.

27.9
-67.2

82.4
87.3

213.1
-10.0

181.0
76.7

1.7
-.9

-.2
3.2

-10.8
-43.1

-3.7
-15.0

-76.2
-40.4

-85.9
-35.7

n.a.
n.a.

-119.0
...

-95.2
...

44.7
22.7

45.4
20.2

n.a.
n.a.

46.8
...

51.2
...

n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
...

n.a.
...

1. Not seasonally adjusted.
n.a.  Not available.  ...  Not applicable.

IV-20

IV-21

Economic Situation in Other Countries

IV-22

Economic activity across the developing countries continues to be boosted by
strong export performance, reflecting rising global high-tech demand, strength
in the United States and China, and–in some cases–higher commodity prices.  In
Asia, output has soared as a result of booming exports, although domestic
demand continues to lag outside of China.  In Latin America, economic
conditions have been mixed.  While, in Mexico, recovery appears to be taking
hold, the economic situation is more tenuous in Brazil, and political tensions
still afflict Venezuela.  For both regions, inflation remains generally modest.

Chinese real GDP surged more than 15 percent at an annual rate in the first
quarter, according to staff estimates, with domestic investment increasing over
40 percent.  This strong performance has fueled concerns there may be
excessive investment in some sectors, and the government has raised bank
reserve requirements twice since mid-March.  Growth in lending has hovered
around 20 percent on a twelve-month basis, down slightly from the peak
reached late last summer when the first reserve requirement increase was
implemented.  Exports have also steamed ahead, up 34 percent in the first
quarter (four-quarter change), while imports rose more than 40 percent over the
same period.  The trade balance showed a small surplus on a seasonally adjusted
basis, but an $8 billion deficit on a non-seasonally adjusted basis.  The latter
figure has been used by Chinese authorities to bolster their case against any
near-term changes to the country’s exchange rate regime.

Some analysts fear that the Chinese authorities are losing control of the money
supply and inflation, in part because of difficulties in sterilizing massive foreign
exchange inflows that have averaged more than $10 billion a month for well
over a year.  In addition, some indices of raw materials prices have registered
significant increases.  Consumer prices in the first quarter, however, rose a
relatively modest 2.8 percent on a twelve-month basis; non-food prices
remained flat, while food prices were up about 8 percent.  Overall producer
price increases have also been mild.  In mid-April, Chinese authorities reported
that there were several suspected cases of SARS in China.  So far, this outbreak
appears minor and to be under control.

IV-23

Chinese Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period, s.a., except as noted)

Indicator

2002

2003

Real GDP1

Industrial production2

Consumer prices2

Trade balance3

8.0

14.2

-.4

30.4

9.9

18.2

3.2

25.5

2003

Q4

7.9

17.7

2.7

38.2

2004

Q1

15.5

14.9

2.8

1.6

Jan.

Feb. Mar.

...

12.2

3.2

.4

...

13.2

2.1

-15.7

...

19.4

3.0

20.0

1. Annual rate.  Quarterly data estimated by staff from reported four-quarter growth rates. 

Annual figures are Q4/Q4.

2. Percent change from year-earlier, except annual figures, which are Dec./Dec.
3. Billions of U.S. dollars, annual rate.  Imports are c.i.f.
...  Not applicable.

Recent data from Hong Kong indicate continuing strong growth.  Booming
tourism has boosted retail sales considerably and improved consumer
confidence.  In addition, after falling for most of the last five years, property
prices have now risen for six consecutive months.  Exports and imports are up,
supported by trade with China.  The unemployment rate declined to 7.2 percent
and is now below the rate that prevailed before the SARS epidemic.  Consumer
prices have risen on average over the last two quarters, although twelve-month
changes have continued to show deflation.

Hong Kong Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period, s.a., except as noted)

Indicator

2002

2003

2003

2004

Q4

Q1

Jan.

Feb. Mar.

Real GDP1

Unemployment rate2

Consumer prices3

Trade balance4

5.1

7.2

-1.6

-7.7

4.9

7.9

-1.8

-8.5

6.1

7.3

-2.3

n.a.

7.2

-1.9

...

7.3

...

7.2

-1.7

-1.9

...

7.2

-2.1

-14.1

-13.0

-15.3

-12.7

-11.1

1. Annual rate.  Annual figures are Q4/Q4.
2. Percent.  Monthly numbers are averages of the current and previous two months.
3. Percent change from year-earlier period, except annual figures, which are Dec./Dec.
4. Billions of U.S. dollars, annual rate.  Imports are c.i.f.
n.a.  Not available.   ...  Not applicable.

IV-24

Taiwan’s economy is growing rapidly.  Recent data show that industrial
production picked up again in February and March after falling in January. 
High-tech production has surged in recent months, despite gyrations in other
sectors.  Driven by demand from China and the strong global market for
high-tech goods, trade has been booming; exports, new orders for exports, and
imports reached new highs in March.  The unemployment rate fell to 4½ percent
in March, its lowest level since the end of the previous high-tech boom in
mid-2001.  Consumer prices have turned positive with twelve-month inflation
close to 1 percent in March.  The contested mid-March re-election of President
Chen appears to be having little economic effect.

Taiwan Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period, s.a., except as noted)

Indicator

2002

2003

2003

2004

Q4

Q1

Jan.

Feb. Mar.

Real GDP1

Unemployment rate2

Industrial production

Consumer prices3

Trade balance4

Current account5

4.3

5.2

7.9

.8

18.1

25.6

5.0

5.0

7.2

-.1

16.9

28.6

5.6

4.7

4.7

-.2

12.6

31.2

n.a.

4.6

.7

.5

9.8

n.a.

...

4.7

-3.9

.0

14.4

...

...

4.6

1.4

.6

7.5

...

...

4.5

.8

.9

7.4

...

1. Annual rate.  Annual figures are Q4/Q4.
2. Percent.
3. Percent change from year-earlier period, except annual figures, which are Dec./Dec.
4. Billions of U.S. dollars, annual rate.  Imports are c.i.f.
5. Billions of U.S. dollars, n.s.a., annual rate.
n.a.  Not available.    ...  Not applicable.

Data for Korea since the last Greenbook have been generally strong.  Output
surged 11.3 percent in the fourth quarter, and previous quarters were revised up. 
Fourth-quarter performance across sectors was unbalanced, however, with
exports soaring while private consumption fell almost 2 percent.  This uneven
growth has continued into the first quarter.  The trade surplus was $40 billion at
an annual rate in the first quarter, almost double the 2003 average, spurred by
recovery in the high-tech sector and trade with China.  Exports helped boost
average industrial production in January and February to 3.8 percent above the
previous quarter.  On the other hand, retail sales and confidence indicators
remained well off their mid-2002 peaks.  In March, the unemployment rate
ticked up to 3.4 percent, and twelve-month inflation edged down to 3.1 percent. 

On March 12, Korea’s parliament impeached President Roh for allegedly
violating electoral laws by making statements in support of the Uri Party, made

IV-25

up of his core supporters.  He was then automatically suspended from office for
up to six months pending a ruling by Korea’s Constitutional Court.  Backlash
against the impeachment resulted in a strong victory for the Uri Party in Korea’s
April 15 parliamentary elections.  This victory is expected by some to speed the
court’s decision on the validity of the impeachment and, should the ruling be in
his favor, to help remove congressional obstacles to the reform agenda of
President Roh.

Korean Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period, s.a., except as noted)

Indicator

2002

2003

Real GDP1

Industrial production

Unemployment rate2

Consumer prices3

Trade balance4

Current account5

7.7

8.3

3.1

3.8

14.8

5.4

4.1

5.0

3.4

3.4

22.2

12.3

2003

Q4

11.3

5.4

3.6

3.5

33.2

30.6

2004

Q1

Jan.

Feb.

Mar.

n.a.

n.a.

3.3

3.3

40.3

24.8

...

1.1

3.3

3.4

41.2

28.1

...

2.9

3.3

3.3

46.5

34.7

...

n.a.

3.4

3.1

33.1

11.7

1. Annual rate.  Annual figures are Q4/Q4.
2. Percent.
3. Percent change from year earlier, except annual changes, which are Dec./Dec.
4. Billions of U.S. dollars, annual rate.
5. Billions of U.S. dollars, n.s.a., annual rate.
n.a.  Not available.    ...  Not applicable.

The ASEAN economies have continued to grow strongly.  Despite recent
monthly declines in some countries, industrial production has posted significant
gains across the region, largely driven by buoyant global high-tech demand.  In
Malaysia, where production declined in February, the January-February average
was up about 5 percent over the fourth-quarter average.  Similarly, in Singapore,
despite a sharp decline in March, production was up more than 7 percent on
average in the first quarter.  Export growth generally remains robust in these
countries.  Imports have been increasing sharply as well, resulting in roughly
stable trade balances in Indonesia, Malaysia, and the Philippines, and declining
balances most recently in Singapore and Thailand.  Inflation has picked up
slightly in across most of the region, but remains well-contained.

IV-26

ASEAN Economic Indicators:  Growth
(Percent change from previous period, s.a., except as noted)

Indicator and country

2002

2003

2003

2004

Q4

Q1

Jan.

Feb. Mar.

Real GDP1
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Singapore
Thailand

Industrial production2 
Indonesia3
Malaysia
Philippines
Singapore
Thailand

3.6
5.3
5.8
2.8
6.0

-1.1
4.6
-6.1
8.4
8.5

4.3
6.4
4.4
4.9
7.8

-1.1
9.3
.0
3.1
12.3

-2.2
6.8
6.6
11.0
11.0

-2.7
3.9
-8.3
4.2
4.2

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
7.2
n.a.

...
...
...
...
...

8.2
2.3
9.2
18.1
-.9

...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...

n.a.
-1.3
-1.8
1.3
3.1

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
-16.1
n.a.

1. Annual rate.  Annual figures are Q4/Q4.
2. Annual figures are annual averages.
3. Staff estimate.
n.a.  Not available.    ...  Not applicable.

ASEAN Economic Indicators:  Trade Balance
(Billions of U.S. dollars, s.a.a.r.)

Country

2002

2003

Indonesia

Malaysia

Philippines

Singapore

Thailand

n.a.  Not available.

25.9

13.5

-.2

8.7

2.7

28.6

21.4

-1.6

16.2

4.2

2003

Q4

29.6

19.8

-3.5

17.2

1.4

2004

Q1

Jan.

Feb.

Mar.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

14.2

n.a.

29.4

19.2

-2.3

12.1

7.5

27.5

19.7

-2.7

21.2

3.1

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

9.1

n.a.

IV-27

ASEAN Economic Indicators:  CPI Inflation
(Percent change from year earlier, except as noted)

Country

20021

20031

Indonesia

Malaysia

Philippines

Singapore

Thailand

9.9

1.7

2.6

.4

1.6

5.2

1.2

3.0

.8

1.8

1. December/December.

2003

Q4

5.7

1.2

3.0

.7

1.6

2004

Q1

Jan.

Feb.

Mar.

4.8

.9

3.4

1.4

1.9

4.8

1.0

3.2

1.3

1.2

4.6

.9

3.2

1.6

2.2

5.1

1.0

3.8

1.3

2.3

In Mexico, recent data suggest that economic growth may be moderating
somewhat after a robust fourth quarter.  Overall economic activity, a monthly
proxy for real GDP, declined in both January and February, although other
indicators show more strength.  Industrial production slipped a bit in February
but remained above the fourth-quarter average.  Exports increased rapidly in the
first quarter, indicating that demand from the United States continues to buoy
the Mexican economy.  Mexican consumer spending has begun to be a source of
strength as well; retail sales rose in January and February to an average level
1.4 percent above the fourth-quarter average.  In addition, although the
unemployment rate remains elevated, manufacturing employment has stabilized
after more than three years of declines and consumer sentiment turned up in
March.

The Bank of Mexico raised the Corto on April 27, after market interest rates fell
more than desired by the central bank following its April 23 decision to leave
policy unchanged.  On net, three-month interest rates have declined 50 basis
points since mid-March, to about 6 percent, reflecting reduced market
expectations about the pace of future monetary tightening.  Mexican twelve-
month consumer price inflation eased to 4.2 percent in March, as food prices
fell back after surging in previous months.

IV-28

Mexican Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period, s.a., except as noted)

Indicator

2002

2003

2003

2004

Q4

Q1

Jan.

Feb. Mar.

Real GDP1

Overall economic activity

Industrial production 

Unemployment rate2

Consumer prices3 

Trade balance4

Imports4

Exports4

1.8

.7

-.3

2.7

5.7

2.0

1.4

-.7

3.3

4.0

4.9

1.3

1.5

3.6

4.0

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

3.7

4.3

...

-.9

.2

3.7

4.2

...

-.9

-.6

3.8

4.6

...

n.a.

n.a.

3.8

4.2

-7.9

-5.7

-4.6

-4.9

-1.5

-6.4

-7.0

168.7

170.6

176.5

182.7

176.9

184.8

186.3

160.8

164.9

171.9

177.7

175.5

178.4

179.3

Current account5

-14.0

-9.2

-13.1

n.a.

...

...

...

1. Annual rate.  Annual figures are Q4/Q4.
2. Percent; counts as unemployed those working one hour a week or less. 
3. Percent change from year-earlier period, except annual figures, which are Dec./Dec.
4. Billions of U.S. dollars, annual rate.
5. Billions of U.S. dollars, n.s.a., annual rate.
n.a.  Not available.    ...  Not applicable.

In Brazil, recent indicators–including a major revision to the industrial
production series–suggest that growth slowed in the first quarter.  A bright spot,
however, has been the continued good performance in the external sector,
supported by higher world commodity prices and the competitive level of the
exchange rate.  Inflation declined in March to under 6 percent on a twelve-
month basis, within this year’s target range of 5½ percent, plus or minus 2½
percent.

Doubts regarding the government’s commitment to fiscal and other economic
reforms have grown in the face of political pressures to raise the minimum wage
substantially and dissent within President Lula’s party.  The Brazilian central
bank reduced its policy rate 25 basis points at each of its mid-March and
mid-April meetings. The Selic is now at 16 percent. 

IV-29

Brazilian Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period, s.a., except as noted)

Indicator

2002

2003

2003

2004

Q4

Q1

Jan.

Feb. Mar.

Real GDP1

Industrial production

Unemployment rate2

Consumer prices3

Trade balance4

Current account5

3.7

2.4

12.5

12.5

13.1

-7.7

-.2

.3

12.4

9.3

24.8

4.0

6.1

5.5

13.2

11.4

28.2

1.2

n.a.

n.a.

11.6

6.8

29.4

6.7

...

-.6

11.6

7.7

25.4

8.0

...

-1.8

11.5

6.7

28.1

2.3

...

n.a.

11.8

5.9

34.5

9.8

1. Annual rate.  Annual figures are Q4/Q4.
2. Percent.  Break in October 2001 as a result of change in methodology.
3. Percent change from year-earlier period, except annual figures, which are Dec./Dec.  Price

index is IPC-A.

4. Billions of U.S. dollars, annual rate.
5. Billions of U.S. dollars, n.s.a., annual rate.
n.a.  Not available.    ...  Not applicable.

Recent data indicate continuing economic recovery in Argentina.  Real GDP
jumped over 10 percent at an annual rate in the fourth quarter, supported by
strong exports and rising consumer demand.  Industrial production rose
1.3 percent in March and was up over 15 percent from its year-earlier level, on
the back of large gains in the printing, automobile, and mineral product
industries.  However, the country is now facing electricity shortages--utility
price controls, as well as general economic disruption, over the past few years
have limited investment in the energy sector.  Argentina has continued to run
sizable trade surpluses, reflecting rapid growth of agricultural exports.  Twelve-
month consumer price inflation remained low in March, at 2.3 percent. 

After last-minute negotiations, Argentina made a $3 billion debt payment to the
IMF in early March.  Subsequently, on March 22, the IMF Board unanimously
approved the second performance review of Argentina’s three-year standby
program.  The Argentine authorities now appear to be somewhat more
committed to making progress on debt restructuring.  In particular, the
government has appointed six investment banks as advisors to assist in the
restructuring and recently met with creditor groups.

IV-30

Argentine Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period, s.a., except as noted)

Indicator

2002

2003

2003

2004

Q4

Q1

Jan.

Feb. Mar.

Real GDP1 

Industrial production 

Unemployment rate2

Consumer prices3 

Trade balance4

Current account5

-3.3

-10.7

22.4

41.4

16.7

9.6

10.9

16.1

17.3

3.8

15.6

7.9

10.4

4.1

14.5

3.8

11.9

4.1

n.a.

5.5

n.a.

2.5

n.a.

n.a.

...

3.5

...

2.8

...

1.0

...

2.3

11.0

15.0

...

...

...

1.3

...

2.3

n.a.

...

1. Annual rate.  Annual figures are Q4/Q4.
2. Percent, n.s.a.
3. Percent change from year-earlier period, except annual figures, which are Dec./Dec.
4. Billions of U.S. dollars, annual rate.
5. Billions of U.S. dollars, n.s.a., annual rate.
n.a.  Not available.    ...  Not applicable.

In Venezuela, the little economic news available since the last Greenbook
suggests activity remains depressed, following last year’s rebound from
devastating strikes.  Oil production is still believed to be about 15 percent below
pre-strike levels.  Furthermore, observers are concerned about the ability of the
government-owned oil company (stripped by Chavez of much of its professional
workforce) to sustain current production levels.  Political stalemate continues
between President Chavez and the opposition.  In particular, the dispute
continues over whether the opposition has enough valid signatures to initiate a
recall referendum.  Political interference by Chavez in this process has made
analysts skeptical that a referendum will be held this year.

IV-31

Venezuelan Economic Indicators
(Percent change from previous period, s.a., except as noted)

Indicator

2002

2003

2003

2004

Q4

Q1

Jan.

Feb. Mar.

Real GDP1 

Unemployment rate2

Consumer prices3

Non-oil trade balance4

Trade balance4

Current account5

-16.7

16.0

31.2

-8.5

13.0

7.4

9.0

n.a.

27.1

-5.8

15.0

9.6

17.4

n.a.

26.3

19.4

46.0

10.8

n.a.

n.a.

...

n.a.

...

n.a.

...

n.a.

24.0

26.6

21.9

23.5

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

...

n.a.

n.a.

...

n.a.

n.a.

...

1. Annual rate.  Annual figures are Q4/Q4.
2. Percent.
3. Percent change from year-earlier period, except annual figures, which are Dec./Dec.
4. Billions of U.S. dollars, annual rate.
5. Billions of U.S. dollars, n.s.a., annual rate.
n.a.  Not available.    ...  Not applicable.

