Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy 
As amended effective on January 29, 2013 

The  Federal  Open  Market  Committee 
(FOMC)  is  firmly  committed  to  fulfilling  its 
statutory  mandate  from  the  Congress  of  pro-
moting  maximum  employment,  stable  prices, 
and  moderate  long-term  interest  rates.    The 
Committee seeks to explain its monetary poli-
cy decisions to the public as clearly as possi-
ble.    Such  clarity  facilitates  well-informed 
decisionmaking  by  households  and  business-
es, reduces economic and financial uncertain-
ty,  increases  the  effectiveness  of  monetary 
policy,  and  enhances  transparency  and  ac-
countability,  which  are  essential  in  a  demo-
cratic society.  

Inflation, employment, and long-term inter-
est  rates  fluctuate  over  time  in  response  to 
economic  and  financial  disturbances.    More-
over,  monetary  policy  actions  tend  to  influ-
ence  economic  activity  and prices  with  a  lag. 
Therefore,  the  Committee’s  policy  decisions 
reflect  its  longer-run  goals,  its  medium-term 
outlook, and its assessments of the balance of 
risks,  including  risks  to  the  financial  system 
that could impede the attainment of the Com-
mittee’s goals.  

The  inflation  rate  over  the  longer  run  is 
primarily determined by monetary policy, and 
hence the Committee has the ability to specify 
a longer-run goal for inflation.  The Commit-
tee  judges  that  inflation  at  the  rate  of  2  per-
cent, as measured by the annual change in the 
price index for personal consumption expendi-
tures,  is  most  consistent  over  the  longer  run 
with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. 
Communicating  this  inflation  goal  clearly  to 
the  public  helps  keep  longer-term  inflation 
expectations  firmly  anchored,  thereby  foster-
ing  price  stability  and  moderate  long-term 
interest  rates  and  enhancing  the  Committee’s 
ability  to  promote  maximum  employment  in 
the face of significant economic disturbances.  
The  maximum  level  of  employment  is 

largely  determined  by  nonmonetary  factors 
that  affect  the  structure  and  dynamics  of  the 
labor market.  These factors may change over 
time  and  may  not  be  directly  measurable. 
Consequently,  it  would  not  be  appropriate  to 
specify  a  fixed  goal  for  employment;  rather, 
the  Committee’s  policy  decisions  must  be 
informed  by  assessments  of  the  maximum 
level  of  employment,  recognizing  that  such 
assessments are necessarily uncertain and sub-
ject  to  revision.    The  Committee  considers  a 
wide  range  of  indicators  in  making  these  as-
sessments. 
  Information  about  Committee 
participants’  estimates  of  the  longer-run  nor-
mal rates of output growth and unemployment 
is  published  four  times  per  year  in  the 
FOMC’s  Summary  of  Economic  Projections. 
For  example,  in  the  most  recent  projections, 
FOMC  participants’  estimates  of  the  longer-
run    normal rate of unemployment had a cen-
tral  tendency  of  5.2  percent  to  6.0  percent, 
unchanged from one year ago but substantially 
higher than the corresponding interval several 
years earlier.  

In  setting  monetary  policy,  the  Committee 
seeks  to  mitigate  deviations  of  inflation  from 
its  longer-run goal  and deviations of  employ-
ment from the Committee’s assessments of its 
maximum level.  These objectives are general-
ly  complementary.    However,  under  circum-
stances  in  which  the  Committee  judges  that 
the  objectives  are  not  complementary,  it  fol-
lows a balanced approach in promoting them, 
taking into account the magnitude of the devi-
ations  and  the  potentially  different  time  hori-
zons over which employment and inflation are 
projected to return to levels judged consistent 
with its mandate. 

The  Committee  intends  to  reaffirm  these 
principles  and  to  make  adjustments  as  appro-
priate  at  its  annual  organizational  meeting 
each January. 

1